9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/554
City of Forest Hill
Code of Ordinances
Current through Ordinance 2019-25 adopted 9/17/19
HOME RULE CHARTER
PREAMBLE*
We, the people of the City of Forest Hill, Tarrant County, Texas, in order to establish a Home Rule Municipal
Government, provide for the welfare and progress of our city, and obtain more fully for the citizens of [the city]
the benefits of local self-government, do hereby adopt this Home Rule Charter.
ARTICLE I. CORPORATE NAME AND MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES
Section 1.01. Corporate Name.
The inhabitants of the City of Forest Hill, County of Tarrant, Texas with boundaries as herein established, or as
hereafter established in the manner provided in this Charter, shall continue to be and are hereby constituted to
be a body politic, incorporated and to be know [known] by the name of “City of Forest Hill.”
Section 1.02. Municipal Boundaries.
The boundaries of the City of Forest Hill are defined and described in full by the metes and bounds description,
and are shown on the official city map on file in the office of the city secretary. These boundaries may be
changed in the manner provided for in Article II, section 2.01, without requiring a formal amendment to this
Charter. The official city map is available for inspection by the public during regular business hours of the city
offices.
ARTICLE II. POWERS OF THE CITY*
Section 2.01. General.
The city shall have all the powers and rights of self-government and home rule that exist now or may be
granted to municipalities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. These powers and rights, whether
expressed or implied, shall be exercised, administered and enforced in the interest and welfare of individuals
and corporations residing in or owning property within the boundaries of the city as prescribed by this Charter,
or in such manner as may be provided by ordinance of [or] resolution of the city council.
As provided by the state statutes, the city shall have the power:
(a) To fix its boundaries, to acquire and own property within or without its corporate boundaries
and to exercise the right of eminent domain when necessary to carry out powers conferred upon it
by this Charter,
(b) To annex, by ordinance, territory lying adjacent to the city, with or without the consent of the
owners or inhabitants thereof. Before any city-initiated annexation proceeding is begun, the owner of
the property so affected shall be notified at the address on the county tax roll by registered or
certified mail and shall be given a public hearing, not subject to fee, to state why he feels his
property should or should not be annexed. If his pleading is successful, his property will or will not be
annexed, but if the city council fails to agree with his pleading, the annexation may proceed as
originally proposed subject to such procedural rules as may be prescribed by the Texas Municipal
Annexation Act;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/554
(c) To cooperate with the government of the United States or any agency thereof, the government
of Texas or any agency thereof, or with any government of any county, city or political subdivision for
any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interests, safety, convenience, and welfare of its
inhabitants;
(d) To contract and be contracted with, to sue and be sued, to buy, sell, lease, mortgage, hold,
manage, and control such property as its interests require; [and]
(e) To lay out, open, establish, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, supervise, maintain, and
improve streets, alleyways, sidewalks, parks, squares, public places, water mains, waterways,
bridges and regulate the use thereof, and require removal of all obstructions or encroachments of
every nature and character upon said public streets, sidewalks or other public property.
Section 2.02. Special Provision for Damage Suit.
Before the City of Forest Hill shall become liable for damages for the death or personal injuries of any person or
for damages to or destruction of property of any kind, which does not constitute a taking or damaging of
property under Article I, Section 17, Constitution of the State of Texas, the person injured, if living, or
representatives of such person, if dead, or the owner of the property damaged or destroyed, shall give to the
City Secretary notice in writing of such death, injury, damage or destruction, duly verified by affidavit, within one
hundred twenty (120) days after the same has been sustained; stating in such written notice when, where and
how the injury or destruction occurred, the apparent extent thereof, the amount of damages sustained, the
amount for which the claimant will settle; the actual residence of the claimant by street and number, the date
the claim is presented, and the names and addresses of all witnesses upon [whom he] relied on to establish the
claim. No suit shall be maintainable on any of the causes of action herein set out for a period of one hundred
twenty (120) days after the date of the event giving rise to the claim, in compliance with this Section in order to
enable investigation of the merits of said claim.
ARTICLE III. THE CITY COUNCIL
Section 3.01. Number, Selection, Term.
The governing and policy making body of the City of Forest Hill shall consist of the mayor and six (6) council
members designated as places one (1 through six (6), elected at large for three-year terms, and shall be known
as the City Council of the City of Forest Hill.
At the regular municipal election to be held in May of 2019 Council members for places 4, 5 and 6 and for the
office of mayor shall be elected for a term of three (3) years and in May of every third year thereafter shall be
elected for a term of three years.
At the regular municipal election to be held in May of 2020 Council members for places 1, 2 and 3 shall be
elected for a term of three (3) years and in May of every third year thereafter shall be elected for a term of three
years.
(Ordinance 2018-02-19, prop. 1, adopted 2/6/18)
Section 3.02. Eligibility.
Each member of the City Council shall be a qualified voter of the city who has been a resident of the city for at
least one year immediately prior to the election and shall continue to be a resident for the term of his office.
Each member of the City Council shall be at least 21 years of age at the time of election to such office.
A council member who has been removed from office in a recall election shall not be eligible to run for city office
or sit in an appointed city position for two calendar years from the date of the recall election. (2012)
Section 3.03. Reimbursement.
Members of the City Council shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to reimbursement of actual
out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties when approved by the City Council.
Section 3.04. Vacancy.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/554
Any vacancy or vacancies occurring on the City Council, including the Mayor, shall be filled by majority vote of
the qualified voters at a special election called for such purpose at the next available uniform election date
provided by law, except that for a vacancy occurring for an unexpired term of 12 months or less, a majority of
the remaining members of the City Council may appoint a person who shall serve the remainder of the
unexpired term. (Ordinance 2018-02-19, prop. 1, adopted 2/6/18)
Section 3.05. The Mayor.
The mayor shall preside at meetings of the City Council, and shall be recognized as head of city government for
all ceremonial purposes, and by the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular
administrative duties. He shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings.
Section 3.06. Mayor Pro Tempore; Deputy Mayor Pro Tempore.
The City Council shall annually, at the first meeting in June, or as soon as practicable, elect from among its
members a Mayor Pro Tempore who shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor;
additionally, the City Council shall annually, at the first meeting in June, or as soon as practicable, elect from
among its members a Deputy Mayor Pro Tempore who shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of
the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tempore. (2012)
Section 3.07. Powers.
The City Council shall have all powers necessary and incident to the proper discharge of the duties imposed
upon it and is hereby invested with all power necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this Charter; it
being intended that the City Council shall have and exercise all powers enumerated in this Charter or implied
thereby, except those powers specifically conferred on some other officer by this Charter, and all powers that
are now, or hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the constitution or laws of the State of Texas.
Section 3.08. Council Meetings.
(1) Regular meetings. The City Council shall hold at least one regular meeting each month, definite time and
place to be established by ordinance or resolution, and may continue and reconvene any regular meeting to a
date and hour which shall be specified in the order of continuance; provided, however, that no meeting may be
re-convened more than twenty-four hours later than the time of the order.
(2) Special meetings. Special meetings shall be called by the City Secretary upon written request of the
mayor, or three (3) council members. Any such request shall state the subject to be considered at the special
meeting.
(3) Publication of notice of meetings. Notices of regular and special meetings shall be posted and provided
as required by law.
(4) Voting. Voting, except on procedural motions, shall be by roll call and the ayes and nays shall be
recorded in the journal. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from
time to time and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and subject to the penalties
prescribed by the rules of the City Council. No action of the City Council, except as otherwise provided in the
preceding sentence shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of four (4) or more council
members.
Section 3.09. Prohibitions and Ethics.
(1) Holding other office. No council member shall hold any other elective office during the term for which
he/she was elected to the City Council. Should a Council member hold any other elective office during the term
for which he/she was elected to the City Council that member shall be considered to have immediately forfeited
and resigned his/her position on the City Council. No Council member shall hold other city office or employment
during the term for which he/she was elected to the City Council. No former Council member shall hold any
compensated appointive city office or employment until one year after the expiration of the term for which
he/she was elected to the City Council.
(2) Appointments and removals. Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate
the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the City Manager or any of
his subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the City Council may express its views and fully and freely
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/554
discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to the appointment and removal of such officers and
employees.
(3) Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 3.12
of this article, the City Council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the
direction and supervision of the City Manager solely through the City Manager.
(Ordinance 2018-02-19, prop. 2, adopted 2/6/18)
Section 3.10. Vacancies; Forfeiture of Office.
(1) Vacancies. The office of a council member shall become vacant upon his death, resignation, removal
from office by recall, or forfeiture of his office.
(2) Forfeiture of office. A council member shall forfeit his or her office if, after the council member has
received notice and has been afforded a fair and reasonable opportunity to present his or her explanation,
defense and argument that he or she:
(a) lacked at any time during his or her term of office, any qualification for the office prescribed by
this Charter or by law;
(b) has been convicted of a felony, a crime involving malfeasance in office, or a crime involving
moral turpitude; or
(c) failed to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the City Council without being
excused by the remaining council members by majority vote of the council at the regular meeting
occurring immediately before or immediately after such absence.
(3) Recall election order on Council's motion. A council member shall be subject to a recall election ordered
by majority vote of the other members of the city council without a petition from the voters if, after the council
member has received notice and has been afforded a fair and reasonable opportunity to present his or her
explanation, defense and argument, it is found that he or she:
(a) Knowingly and intentionally violated an expressed provision of this Charter;
(b) Knowingly and intentionally violated a provision of the City's code of ethics; or
(c) Was the subject of a majority, but not unanimous, vote for removal from office by the other
members of the council for a ground stated in subsection (2) above.
In lieu of forfeiture of office or order of a recall election, the Council shall have the authority to issue a public
reprimand or censure, or to suspend the member from office for a specific period of time. The Council may
adopt an ordinance or resolution further specifying the procedure for investigation, notice, hearing, public
reprimand, censure and suspension of a council member, and for excuse of absences, as provided herein.
Section 3.11. Council to be the Judge of Qualification of its Members.
The City Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its members and for grounds of the
forfeiture or suspension of their office[s] and for that purpose shall have the power to subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths and require the production of evidence. A council member charged with conduct constituting
grounds for forfeiture or suspension of his office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of
such hearing shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city at least one week
in advance of the hearing. Decisions made by the City Council under this section shall be subject to review by
the courts. (2012)
Section 3.12. Investigations.
The City Council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any city department,
office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require
the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of
these powers by the City Council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not to exceed
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/554
Five hundred dollars ($500.00), as provided by ordinance. Each day of refusal shall constitute a separate
offense.
ARTICLE IV. THE CITY MANAGER
Section 4.01. Appointment and Qualifications.
The City Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the
City and shall be responsible to the City Council for the administration of all the affairs of the City.
The City Manager shall be chosen by the City Council solely on the basis of executive and administrative
training, experience and ability. No member of the City Council shall, during the time for which he or she is
elected and one (1) year thereafter, be appointed City Manager. (2012)
Section 4.02. Term and Salary.
The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term and may be removed at the will and pleasure of the
City Council voting in an open meeting. The action of the City Council in suspending or removing the City
Manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix responsibility for such
suspension or removal in the City Council. In the event of the removal of the City Manager by the City Council,
the City Council shall be authorized to grant him or her not in excess of sixty (60) days terminal pay. In case of
the absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Council may designate some qualified person other than
an elected officer of the City, to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. The City
Manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the City Council.
Section 4.03. Acting City Manager.
By letter filed with the City Secretary, the City Manager may designate, subject to the approval of the city
council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during
his or her temporary absence or disability. During such absence, disability or suspension, the City Council may
revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the City Manager shall
return or his or her disability shall cease.
Section 4.04. Powers and Duties of the City Manager.
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He or she shall be responsible to the City
Council for administration of all city affairs placed in his or her charge by or under this Charter. He or she shall
have the following powers and duties:
(a) He or she shall appoint and, when he or she deems it necessary for the good of the service,
suspend or remove all city employees and appoint the administrative officers provided for, by or
under this Charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this Charter or personnel rules adopted
pursuant to this Charter. He or she may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his or
her direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's
department, office or agency. Appointments to City positions shall be made on the basis of
qualifications. If qualifications are equal, preference shall be given City residents.
(b) He or she shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and
agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law.
(c) He or she shall attend all council meetings, unless excused by the mayor, and shall have the
right to take part in discussion, but may not vote.
(d) He or she shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the City Council, subject
to enforcement by he or she or by officers subject to his or her direction and supervision, are
faithfully executed.
(e) He or she shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the City Council
by July 31st of each year. (Ordinance 2018-02-19, prop. 5, adopted 2/6/18)
(f) He or she shall submit to the City Council and make available to the public a complete report
on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/554
(g) He or she shall prepare and submit to the City Council within forty-five (45) days of the closing
of each fiscal quarter, and income and expenditure statement by summary budget category with an
explanatory message stating any variances from the annual budget. This summary shall be on file in
the office of the City Secretary and open to public inspection during regular business hours of the
city offices.
(h) He or she shall make such other reports as the City Council may require concerning the
operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to his or her direction and supervision.
(i) He or she shall keep the City Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future
needs of the city and make recommendations to the City Council concerning the affairs of the city.
(Ordinance 2018-02-19, prop. 6, adopted 2/6/18)
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
Section 5.01. Creation of Departments or Offices.
The City Council may create, change and abolish offices, departments or agencies, other than the offices,
departments and agencies established by this Charter.
Section 5.02. Municipal Court.
There shall be a court known as the municipal court of the City of Forest Hill, with such jurisdiction, powers and
duties as are given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas. The municipal court shall be presided over
by a magistrate who shall be known as the judge of the municipal court, who shall be appointed by and serve at
the pleasure of the City Council. The judge, or anyone acting in his place, shall receive such compensation as
may be set by the City Council. The City Council shall appoint an associate judge to act in the absence of the
judge of the municipal court, and shall have the power to appoint more than one judge of the municipal court,
each of whom shall be a magistrate. All judges shall be attorneys qualified and licensed to practice in the State
of Texas.
Section 5.03. City Attorney.
(A) Appointment and Qualification. The City Council, in consultation with the City Manager, shall appoint a
competent, duly qualified, licensed and practicing attorney in the State of Texas who shall serve as the City
Attorney. In no event shall a City Attorney be terminated within ninety (90) days after a general election, except
for misconduct, malfeasance or misfeasance.
(B) Removal. The City Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and as such, shall have no
property right to continued employment.
(C) Duties. The City Attorney shall be required to:
(1) Serve as a legal advisor to the City Council and City Manager.
(2) Represent the City in litigation and legal proceedings as directed by the City Council.
(3) Review and provide opinions as requested by the City Council and/or City Manager on
contracts, legal instruments and ordinances of the City.
(D) Compensation. The City Attorney shall receive compensation as may be determined by the City Council.
(E) Additional Attorneys. The City Attorney, with approval of the City Council, may select additional Attorneys
to act for the City Attorney and the City in its representation and litigation.
(F) Firm may designate individual to serve as City Attorney. The City Council may contract with an Attorney
or with a firm of Attorneys who may designate one (1) member of said firm to serve as City Attorney. (2012)
Section 5.04. Boards and Commissions.
The City Council shall have the power to appoint and remove the members of each and every board and
commission as constituted by state law, or ordinances now in effect or hereinafter adopted.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/554
Section 5.05. City Secretary.
The City Manager shall appoint the City Secretary and the City Secretary shall report to the City Manager.
(2012)
Section 5.06. Local Control of Public Safety.
The City of Forest Hill shall maintain and staff a Police Department and a Fire Department by employing an
adequate number of employees for each department. (2010)
Section 5.07. Finance Director.
The City Council shall appoint the City Finance Director and the City Finance Director shall report to the city
manager. (2012; Ordinance 2018-02-19, prop. 4, adopted 2/6/18)
ARTICLE VI. FINANCIAL PROCEDURES
Section 6.01. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of the following
September.
Section 6.02. Submission of Budget and Budget Message.
On or before the 31st day of July of each year the City Manager shall submit to the City Council a budget for
the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message. (Ordinance 2018-02-19, prop. 5, adopted 2/6/18)
Section 6.03. Budget and Budget Message.
Budget message. The City Manager's message shall explain the budget in both fiscal terms and in terms of
work programs submitted with the budget. It shall outline the proposed financial programs of the city for the
ensuing fiscal year and the capital programs of the city for five (5) fiscal years. It shall describe the important
features of the budget, [and] indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies,
expenditures and revenues and the reasons for such changes. It shall also summarize the city's debt position
and contain such other material as the City Manager deems desirable.
Budget. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal
year using the most practical and acceptable municipal accounting procedures.
It shall begin with a clear general summary of its contents; shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating
the property tax levy, [and] all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year and
shall show comparative figures for estimated income and expenditures of the current fiscal year and actual
income and expenditures of the preceding two (2) fiscal years.
It shall indicate in separate sections:
(a) Proposed expenditures for current operations during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed by
offices, departments and agencies in terms of their respective work programs, and the method of
financing such expenditures;
(b) Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year by offices, departments and
agencies, and the proposed method of financing such capital expenditures; and
(c) Anticipated net surplus or deficit for the ensuing fiscal year of all utilities owned or operated by
the city and the proposed method of its disposition; subsidiary budgets for all such utilities, giving
detailed income and expenditure information, shall be attached at [as] appendices to the budget.
The total proposed budget expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated income and available funds.
Section 6.04. Capital Program.
The City Manager shall submit a five-year capital program. The capital program shall include the proposed
program by the planning and zoning commission and comments by the City Manager. The program as
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/554
submitted shall include:
(a) A clear general summary of its contents;
(b) A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five (5) fiscal
years succeeding the budget year, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for
such improvements;
(c) Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such
improvement; and
(d) The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or
acquired.
The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still
pending or in process of construction or acquisition.
Section 6.05. City Council Action on Budget.
At the time that the budget and budget message are submitted to the City Council, the City Manager shall
determine the place and time of the public hearing on the budget and cause to be published in the officially
designated newspaper of the City of Forest Hill, a notice of the place and time, which shall not be less than
three (3) days nor more than fourteen (14) days after the date of publication.
After the public hearing, the City Council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the
budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any program or amounts
except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit, provided that no
amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total
estimated income and available funds.
The City Council shall adopt the budget on or before the last day of the last month of the fiscal year currently
ending.
Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from
funds indicated.
Taxes shall be established by an ordinance separate from the budget adoption as required by law.
Section 6.06. Budget a Public Record.
The budget, budget message, capital program and all supporting schedules as adopted, shall be a public
record in the office of the city secretary and open to public inspection by anyone during regular business hours
of the city offices.
Section 6.07. Amendment and Supplemental Budgets.
In the case of public necessity, emergency expenditures to meet unusual and unforeseen conditions which
could not, by reasonable diligent thought and attention, have been included in the original budget may from
time to time be authorized upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the City Council, as
amendments or supplements to the original budget, including interdepartmental transfers. Such amendments,
supplements and transfers shall be approved in an ordinance and shall be filed with the original budget.
Section 6.08. Defect Shall Not Invalidate Tax Levy.
Defects in the form or preparation of the budget or the failure to perform any procedural requirement shall not
invalidate any tax levy or the tax roll.
Section 6.09. Competitive Bids.
The City shall comply with state law requirements for notice and bids for public purchases and contracts.
Section 6.10. Independent Annual Audit.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/554
Not less than thirty (30) and no more than sixty (60) days prior to the end of each fiscal year, the City Council
shall designate a certified public accountant who, at the end of the fiscal year, shall make an independent audit
of accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the city government and shall submit his written
report to the City Council. He may make additional audits as required by the City Council. Notice shall be given
by publication in some newspaper of general circulation in the city that the annual audit is on file at the City Hall
for inspection. Such accountant shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city
government during the time he is retained by the City of Forest Hill. He shall not maintain any accounts or
record of the city business, but, within specifications approved by the City Council, shall post-audit the books
and records of the City of Forest Hill. The city council may not employ the same certified public accountant to
make such independent audit for more than six consecutive years.
ARTICLE VII. TAXATION
Section 7.01. Power to Tax.
The City Council shall have the power under the provisions of state law to levy, assess and collect an annual
tax upon taxable property within the City, the tax not to exceed the rate as provided for by state law governing
cities with population in excess of five thousand inhabitants.
ARTICLE VIII. EVIDENCES OF INDEBTEDNESS
Section 8.01. Power of Issue.
In keeping with the constitution of the State of Texas, and not contrary thereto, the City of Forest Hill shall have
the right to issue all tax bonds, funding and refunding bonds, certificates of obligations, time warrants and other
evidences of indebtedness, as now authorized or as may hereafter by [be] authorized to be issued by home
rule cities by the laws of the State of Texas. Where provided by law, all tax and revenue bonds shall be
submitted to the voters for approval.
Section 8.02. Manner of Issuance.
Bonds, certificates of obligations and time warrants of the City of Forest Hill shall be issued in the manner
provided by the laws of the State of Texas applicable to home rule cities.
ARTICLE IX. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Section 9.01. Establishment; Applicability of State Law.
The City Council shall, by ordinance, establish a planning and zoning commission which shall function as
provided by state law.
ARTICLE X. ELECTIONS
Section 10.01. Elections.
The regular City Election shall be held annually on the uniform election date occurring in or about the month of
May, at which time officers will be elected to fill those offices the terms of which expire that year or which have
otherwise become vacant, as provided in Section 3.04 of this Charter. The City Council may, by resolution,
order a special election, fix the date and place for holding same and provide all means for holding such special
election. The special election shall be held on the uniform election date occurring in or about the month of May.
[Section 10.02. Reserved.]
Section 10.03. Filing for Office.
Any qualified person may have his or her name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for the office of
Mayor or Council member by filing with the City Secretary within the time required by law, a sworn application in
substantially the following form:
I, _______________, do hereby declare that I am a candidate for the office of _______________, and request
that my name be printed upon the official ballot for that particular office in the next City election. I am ____
years of age, a qualified voter of the City of Forest Hill, a citizen of the United States, and by the date of the
election for the office I seek, I will have been a resident of the City of Forest Hill for at least one (1) year. My
voter registration number is __________. I am aware of the Texas nepotism law.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/554
At the time of filing for the office I seek, I am (check one):
__________ NOT IN ARREARS in the payment of any taxes or other liabilities due the City of Forest Hill
__________ IN ARREARS in the payment of any truces or other liabilities due the City of Forest Hill.
[Signature]
Such information shall be verified before an officer qualified to administer oaths. The City Secretary shall check
the voter registration number against county records and shall not place the person's name on the ballot if the
information contained therein shows that registration number is incorrect or shows such person to have a
residence other than Forest Hill for the requisite time. (2012)
Section 10.04. Laws Governing City Elections.
All City Elections shall be governed by the laws of the State of Texas governing general and municipal
elections.
Section 10.05. Conducting and Canvassing Elections, Runoffs.
The election judges and other necessary election officials for conducting all such elections shall be appointed
by the City Council. The election judges shall conduct the elections, determine, record and report the results as
provided by the laws of the State of Texas. The City Council shall meet, open the returns, canvass and officially
declare the results of the election as to questions and candidates at the time and in the manner provided by
state law. The Mayor shall issue certificates of election to candidates elected as herein before provided.
In the event no candidate for a given office has received a simple majority of all votes cast for any given place,
the Mayor shall, on the first day following the completion of the official canvass, call a runoff election to be held
at the time and in the manner provided by state law. At the runoff election, the ballot shall list the names of the
two candidates receiving at the first election the first and second highest number of votes for a given office, in
that order. Should one of such candidates withdraw, die or become ineligible, a second election shall not be
held, and the other candidate shall be declared elected to office. Any tie shall be decided by lot.
Section 10.06. Oath of Office.
Every officer of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to the oath of
office as prescribed by the Constitution of the State of Texas.
ARTICLE XI. RECALL OF OFFICERS
Section 11.01. Scope of Recall.
Any elected City Official, whether elected to office by the voters of the City or appointed by City Council to fill a
vacancy, shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the registered voters of the City after the council
member has received notice and has been afforded a fair and reasonable opportunity to present his or her
explanation, defense and argument. Grounds for such recall and removal shall be the following:
(a) knowingly and intentionally violating a specific provision of this Charter;
(b) official misconduct, which shall be defined as intentional unlawful behavior relating to official
duties, including corrupt failure, refusal, or neglect to perform a duty imposed by law;
(c) incompetency, which shall be defined as gross ignorance of official duties; gross carelessness
in the discharge of official duties; or inability or unfitness to promptly and properly discharge official
duties because of a serious mental or physical defect that did not exist at the time of the officer's
elections;
(d) intoxication while performing the duties of office by consuming alcoholic beverages or other
chemical substances that cause intoxication.
The Council may adopt an ordinance or resolution further specifying the procedure for the acceptance of the
recall petition; notice to the council person and public hearing.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/554
Section 11.02. Petitions for Recall.
Before the question of recall of such officer shall be submitted to the registered voters of the City, a petition
demanding such question to be so submitted shall first be filed with the City Secretary; which petition shall be
signed by registered voters of the City equal in number to at least thirty percent (30%) of the number of votes
cast at the last regular municipal election of the City, but in no event less than one hundred fifty (150) such
petitioners.
Each signer of such recall petition shall personally sign in ink or indelible pencil. For a petition signature to be
valid, it must comply with the requirements of state law, which require in addition to the signature:
(a) the signer's printed name,
(b) the signer's date of birth or voter registration number,
(c) the signer's residence address,
(d) the date of signing, and comply with any other applicable requirements prescribed by law.
Section 11.03. Form of Recall Petition.
The recall petition must be addressed to the City Council, City of Forest Hill, shall state that it is a petition for
the recall of a single officer named in such petition, shall state the specific acts of that officer that are grounds
for the officer's removal, and shall include each voter's signature. For a petition signature to be valid, it must
comply with the requirements of state law, which require in addition to the signature:
a. the signer's printed name,
b. the signer's date of birth or voter registration number,
c. the signer's residence address,
d. the date of signing, and comply with any other applicable requirements prescribed by law.
The signature on each separate copy of the petition, or subscription list, shall be verified by oath by the
petitioner or petitioners who circulated such copy in the following manner:
“STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF TARRANT
I, ______________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that each signature appearing thereto was
made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same
is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be.
_______________ Signature of Verifier
SWORN AND SUBSCRIBED TO BEFORE ME this _____ day of _______________, 19____.
_______________ Notary Public, State of Texas”
Section 11.04. Various Papers Constituting Petition.
The petition may consist of one or more copies, or subscription lists, circulated separately, and the signatures
thereto may be upon the paper or papers containing the form of petition, or upon other papers attached thereto.
Verifications provided for in the next preceding section of this Article may be made by one or more petitioners,
and the several parts of copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons; but no
signatures to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which were placed thereon more than forty-five
(45) days prior to the filing of such petition or petitions with the City Secretary.
All papers comprising a recall petition shall be filed with the City Secretary on the same day, and the said
Secretary shall immediately notify, in writing, the officer so sought to be removed, by mailing such notice to his
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/554
Forest Hill address.
Section 11.05. Certification by Secretary.
The City Secretary shall count the signatures and compare residence addresses with those in county records
for the voter registration numbers on the petition. The City Secretary shall count only those signatures which
are of registered voters residing in the City of Forest Hill at the latest date for which county voter registration
records are available. The City Secretary shall not count signatures which lack the date of signature or which
are unverified or which were obtained more than 45 days prior to the filing date. Within ten days after such
petition was filed, the City Secretary shall notify the filer in writing as to whether sufficient signatures were on
such petition and, if there were sufficient signatures, certify such to the City Council at the next City Council
meeting for which there is sufficient time to post an agenda item under the Open Meetings law for the Council's
action thereon.
Section 11.06. Election to be Called.
At the meeting at which the City Secretary certifies that a sufficient number of signatures are contained in such
petition, if the officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall become the duty of the City Council
to order an election to be held on the next available uniform election date.
Section 11.07. Ballots in Recall Election.
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: “Shall
(name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall?”
(b) Immediately below each such question, there shall be printed the following words, one above
the other, in the order indicated:
“Yes”
“No”
Section 11.08. Result of Recall Election.
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be “No,” that is against the recall of the person named on
the ballot, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a
majority off [of] the votes cast at such an election be “Yes,” that is for the recall of the person named on the
ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office, and
the vacancy be filled as vacancies in the City Council are filled, as heretofore provided in this Charter. A Council
person thus removed shall not be a candidate to succeed himself/herself in an election to fill the vacancy
thereby created.
Section 11.09. Recall, Restrictions Thereon.
No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the City of Forest Hill within six (6) months after his
election, nor within six (6) months after an election for such officer's recall. No Council person shall be subject
to more than 2 recall elections during a term of office.
Section 11.10. Failure of City Council to Call an Election.
In case all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the City Council shall fail or refuse to
receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed upon said City
Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then a court of proper jurisdiction of
Tarrant County, Texas shall discharge any of such duties herein provided to be discharged by the City Secretary
or by the City Council. (2012)
The failure of a Council member to vote affirmatively to place on the ballot a petition for recall that meets all
requirements of law shall be guilty of malfeasance in office and subject to the penalties contained in Section
13.06, entitled “Violation of Charter Provisions or Laws of the State of Texas, of the Charter of the City of Forest
Hill.” (2012)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/554
ARTICLE XII. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 12.01. Power of Initiative.
The people of the City of Forest Hill reserve the power of direct legislation by initiative, and in the exercise of
such power, may propose any ordinance not in conflict with this Charter, the State Constitution or the State
laws, except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes or an ordinance repealing an
ordinance appropriating money or levying taxes.
Any initiated ordinance may be submitted to the City Council by a petition signed by registered voters of the
City of Forest Hill equal in number to at least thirty percent (30%) of the number of votes cast at the last regular
municipal election of the City, or such petition must be signed by one hundred-fifty (150) registered voters,
whichever is greater.
Section 12.02. Power of Referendum.
The people reserve the power to approve or reject at the polls any legislation enacted by the City Council which
is subject to the initiative process under this Charter, except an ordinance which is enacted for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health or safety which contains a statement of its urgency and which is
adopted by the favorable votes of the requisite number of members of the City Council required by this Charter
to enact emergency legislation.
Prior to the effective date of any ordinance which is subject to referendum, a petition signed by registered
voters of the City, equal in number to at least thirty percent (30%) of the number of votes cast at the last regular
municipal election of the City, or signed by one hundred fifty (150) registered voters, whichever is greater, may
be filed with the City Secretary, requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of
the people. When such a petition has been certified as sufficient by the City Secretary, the ordinance specified
in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into
effect, until and unless it is approved by the voters as herein provided.
Section 12.03. Form of Petition.
Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed legislation in the form of an ordinance,
including a descriptive caption. The signatures to the initiative or referendum petition need not be all appended
to one paper, but each signer shall sign in ink or indelible pencil and date such signature. For a petition
signature to be valid, it must comply with the requirements of state law, which require in addition to the
signature:
a. the signer's printed name,
b. the signer's date of birth or voter registration number,
c. the signer's residence address,
d. the date of signing, and
e. comply with any other applicable requirements prescribed by law.
Each such petition shall contain a statement verified by a notary public that each signature appended thereto
was made in the presence of the person verifying and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it
purports to be, and further that no signature shall have been placed thereon more than forty-five (45) days prior
to the filing of such petition.
Section 12.04. Filing, Examination and Certification of Petition.
Within ten (10) days after an initiative or referendum petition is filed, the City Secretary shall determine whether
the same is signed by the requisite number of registered resident voters. The City Secretary shall declare void
any petition paper which does not have an affidavit appended thereto as required by Section 12.03 of this
Article. In examining the petitions, the City Secretary shall write the letter “D.V.” in red ink opposite the names of
ineligible signers.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/554
After completing examination of the petition, the City Secretary shall certify the results thereof to the City
Council at is [its] next regular meeting, stating number of persons found on the petition who are registered
resident voters. If the certificate of the City Secretary shall show an initiative or referendum petition to be
insufficient, the City Secretary shall notify the person filing the petition, and it may be amended within ten (10)
days from the date of such notice by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as
provided for in the original petition.
Within ten (10) days after such amendment is filed, the City Secretary shall examine the amended petition and
certify as to its sufficiency. If the amended petition is found to be insufficient, the City Secretary shall return the
petition to the person filing same, without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same purpose;
provided, however, that upon finding the amended petition to be insufficient, no new petition covering the same
subject matter shall be filed until six (6) months shall have elapsed from the date of filing of the original petition.
Section 12.05. Council Consideration and Submissions to Voters.
When the City Council receives an authorized initiative petition certified by the City Secretary to be sufficient,
the City Council shall either:
(a) Pass the initiated ordinance without amendment within thirty (30) days after the date of the
certification to the City Council; or
(b) Submit said initiated ordinance without amendment to a vote of the qualified voters of the city
at a regular or special election to be held on the next available uniform election date; or
(c) At such election, submit to a vote of the qualified voters of the city said initiative ordinance
without amendment, and an alternate ordinance on the same subject proposed by the City Council.
When the City Council receives an authorized referendum petition certified by the City Secretary to be
sufficient, the Council shall reconsider the referred ordinance, and if upon such reconsideration such ordinance
is not repealed, it shall be submitted to the voters at a regular or special election to be held on the next
available uniform election date. Special elections on initiated or referred ordinances shall not be held more
frequently than once each six (6) months, and no ordinance on the same subject as an initiated ordinance, by
the voters, within two (2) years from the date of such election.
Section 12.06. Ballot Form and Results of Election.
The ballot used in voting upon an initiated or referred ordinance shall state the caption of the ordinance and
below the caption shall set forth on separate lines the words:
“For the Ordinance”
“Against the Ordinance”
An initiated ordinance and an alternative ordinance proposed by the City Council which are submitted at the
same election shall be appropriately identified as the initiated or referred ordinance and as the ordinance
proposed by the City Council.
Any number or ordinances may be voted upon at the same election in accordance with the provisions of this
Article. An ordinance submitted and receiving an affirmative majority of the votes cast, shall thereupon be
effective as an ordinance of the City. An ordinance so adopted may be repealed or amended at any time after
the expiration of two (2) years by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council. A referred ordinance which is not
approved by a majority of the votes cast shall be deemed thereupon repealed.
ARTICLE XIII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 13.01. City Exempt from Appeal Bonds.
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City of Forest Hill is a part, for any bond,
undertaking or security to be executed in behalf of said City, but all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings
shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given, and said City
shall be liable as if such obligation had been given and executed
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/554
Section 13.02. Not Subject to Garnishment
No fund of the City or within custody of the city or any of its officials in any official capacity shall be subject to
garnishment and the city shall never be required to answer in any garnishment proceedings.
Section 13.03. Separability Clause.
If any section or part of section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so
held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably
connected in meaning and effect with the section or part to which such holding shall directly apply.
Section 13.04. Nepotism.
The employment of relatives of City Council members and of the City Manager shall be prohibited as provided
by state Jaw.
Section 13.05. Judicial Notice.
This Charter shall be held a public act, and shall have the force and effect of a general law, [and] may be read
in evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice thereof shall be taken in all courts and places without
further proof.
Section 13.06. Violation of Charter Provision or Laws of the State of Texas.
Any willful violation of the provisions of this Charter or of the laws of the State of Texas relating to home rule
cities shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee of the city guilty thereof shall
immediately forfeit his office or position, and said office or position shall be deemed vacant.
Section 13.07. Conflicts of Interest.
No officer or employee of the City should personally benefit from any public decision in which such person
participates, except as all other persons may likewise benefit. To this extent, state law requirements restricting
personal benefit, requiring reporting potential conflicts and abstaining from participating in any decisions shall
govern, including criminal penalties therefor.
Section 13.08. Ethics Ordinance.
The City Council shall provide an ordinance to establish a code of ethics for all city officials and employees of
the City of Forest Hill; to provide standards of conduct; to require the filing of financial activity statements as
required by state law; and to provide penalties.
Section 13.09. Reserved.
Editor's note–Section 13.09, which detailed prohibited activities, was repealed at referendum on May 6, 1995.
Section 13.10. Personnel Policies.
The City Manager shall establish personnel policies subject to approval by the City Council which shall provide
for nondiscriminatory practices, merit increases for employees and any other provision deemed necessary.
Section 13.11. Reserved.
Editor's note–Section 13.11, which pertained to Charter amendments, was repealed at referendum on May 6, 1995.
Section 13.12. Construction of the Charter.
This Charter shall not be construed as a mere grant of enumerated powers but shall be construed as a general
grant of power and as a limitation of power on the government of the City of Forest Hill, Texas, in the same
manner as the Constitution of Texas is construed as a limitation on the powers of the legislature. Except where
expressly prohibited by this Charter, each and every power under the Constitution of Texas which it would be
competent for the people of the City of Forest Hill to grant expressly to the City shall be construed to be granted
to the City by this Charter.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/554
Section 13.13. Reserved.
Editor's note–Section 13.13, which pertained to an interim municipal government, was repealed at referendum on May 6,
1995.
Section 13.14. Publication of Ordinances.
A full text of all ordinances involving penalties shall be published at least twice in the officially designated
newspaper of the City, or in lieu thereof a descriptive caption or title stating in summary the purpose of the
ordinance and penalty for violation thereof shall be published. All other ordinance, except those ordinances
specifically required by the provisions of this Charter, or by the laws of the State of Texas, to be published, are
not required to be published in the officially designated newspaper of the city or in any other publication, and
such ordinances shall become effective as of the date stated therein, and in the event no particular date is
stated, said ordinances shall become effective from and after passage and adoption by the City Council.
Section 13.15. Ordinances Now in Effect.
All ordinances of the City of Forest Hill now in existence and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter,
shall remain in full force and effect until altered, amended or repealed by the City Council. If parts of ordinances
now in existence are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, then such parts are hereby repealed, but
the remaining parts of such ordinances shall remain in full force and effect until altered, amended or repealed
by the City Council.
Section 13.16. Correction of Errors in Charter.
In the event that a typographical, grammatical, numerical, or other nonsubstantive error, including failure of
provisions to be gender neutral, is found to exist in the Charter, the correction of which will not change the legal
intent or purpose of any part of the Charter, the city council may correct such error by unanimous vote of the
entire council.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the
“Code of Ordinances, City of Forest Hill, Texas” and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the
“Forest Hill City Code.” (1976 Code, sec. 1-1; 1998 Code, sec. 1-1)
State law reference–Authority to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, Texas Local Government Code sec.
53.001.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and for all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules of construction and definitions shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the city council:
Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally
construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the
interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any
provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another more general provision
imposed by the Code or other law, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be
controlling.
Charter. The term “Charter” means the Charter of the City of Forest Hill as printed in part I of this volume.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/554
City. The term “the city” or “this city” means the City of Forest Hill in the County of Tarrant and State of Texas.
City manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief
of police” or other city officers or departments means the city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such
other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Forest Hill, Texas.
Code. The term “Code” means the “Code of Ordinances, City of Forest Hill, Texas,” the “Forest Hill City Code,”
or the “City Code.”
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted.
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Government Code sec. 311.014.
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items,
conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction “and,” “or” or “either... or,” the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases the terms “or” and “and” are interchangeable:
(1) “And” indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply.
(2) “Or” indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any
combination.
(3) “Either... or” indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly
but not in combination.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “this council” or “the council” or “the city council” is used in this Code, it
means the City Council of the City of Forest Hill, Texas.
County. The term “county” or “this county” means the County of Tarrant, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the
city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to
designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision
specifically provide otherwise.
Easement. The term “easement” means a right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which the owner of
one parcel of land may have in the lands of another; or a right in the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of
such ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general property right in
the owner.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as, to males.
Highway. The term “highway” includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge,
viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed
as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Government Code sec. 312.004.
Month. The term “month” means a calendar month.
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Government Code sec. 312.011(7).
Must. The term “must” is to be construed as being mandatory.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/554
Oath. The term “oath” includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for
an oath, and in such cases the terms “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the terms “affirm” and
“affirmed.”
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Government Code sec. 312.011(8).
Officers, departments, boards, committees, commissions, employees. The terms “officers,” “departments,”
“boards” “commissions” and “employees” referred to in this Code mean officers, departments, boards,
committees, commissions and employees of the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they mean standard time or daylight saving
time as may be in current use in the city.
Owner. The term “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The term “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and
bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Government Code sec. 311.005(2).
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Government Code sec. 312.011(11).
Shall, may. The term “shall” is mandatory, and the term “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Government Code sec. 311.016(1), (2).
Sidewalk. The term “sidewalk” means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the
roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. The term “signature” or “subscription” includes a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Government Code sec. 312.011(14).
State. The term “the state” or “this state” means the State of Texas.
Street. The term “street” includes any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct,
underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Transportation Code sec. 541.301(5).
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Government Code sec. 312.003(a).
Tex. Admin. Code. This refers to the Texas Administrative Code.
Texas [subject] Code. This identifies a specific subject matter code of legislatively adopted statutes, as
classified and numbered by the Texas Legislative Council under authority of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5429b-1,
predecessor to Texas Government Code sec. 323.007.
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation “Vernon's Ann. Civ. St.” means the latest edition or supplement to
Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes.
V.T.C.A. The abbreviation “V.T.C.A.” means and refers to the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas
Code Annotated.
State law reference–Statutory references, Texas Government Code sec. 312.008.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/554
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” includes any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Government Code sec. 312.011(17).
Year. The term “year” means a calendar year.
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Government Code sec. 312.011(18).
(1976 Code, sec. 1-3; 1998 Code, sec. 1-3)
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including
the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1976 Code, sec. 1-2; 1998 Code, sec. 1-2)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, Texas Government Code sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1-4. References to chapters or sections.
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.
State law reference–Construction of statutory references, Texas Government Code sec. 311.027.
Sec. 1-5. History notes.
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal
effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.
Sec. 1-6. References and editor's notes.
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are
not controlling or meant to have any legal effect.
Sec. 1-7. Amendments to Code–Effect.
Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of
the city council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that
reference to the “Code of Ordinances, City of Forest Hill, Texas,” shall be understood and intended to include
such additions and amendments. (1976 Code, sec. 1-4; 1998 Code, sec. 1-4)
Sec. 1-8. Same-Manner.
All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this
Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein,
or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances,
such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and
the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered
or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. (1976 Code, sec. 1-5; 1998 Code,
sec. 1-5)
Sec. 1-9. Same–Language.
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific
reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: “That section of the Code of
Ordinances, City of Forest Hill, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:” The new provisions shall then be
set out in full as desired. (1976 Code, sec. 1-6; 1998 Code, sec. 1-6)
Sec. 1-10. Same-New material.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/554
(a) In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may
be used: “That the Code of Ordinances, City of Forest Hill, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section (or
article, chapter or other designation as the case may be), to be numbered __________, which reads as
follows:…” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
(b) In lieu of subsection (a) of this section, when the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general
and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the council desires to
incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such
ordinance: “It is the intention of the city council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance
shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Forest Hill, Texas, and the sections of this
ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention.”
(1976 Code, sec. 1-7; 1998 Code, sec. 1-7)
Sec. 1-11. Same-Repeal.
All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically
repealed by section number, article number, chapter number or other number, as the case may be. (1976 Code,
sec. 1-8; 1998 Code, sec. 1-8)
Sec. 1-12. Same-Subject to general penalty.
In case of the amendment by the city council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the
general penalty as provided in section 1-15 shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment
contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another
section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section
so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. (1976 Code, sec. 1-9; 1998 Code, sec. 1-9)
Sec. 1-13. Supplementation of Code.
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the
Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and,
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision
numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this division,” etc., as the case may be, or to “sections _____ to _____” (inserting section
numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the
ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/554
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
(1976 Code, sec. 1-10; 1998 Code, sec. 1-10)
Sec. 1-14. Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion
of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this
section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. (1976 Code, sec. 1-11; 1998 Code, sec. 1-11)
Sec. 1-15. General penalty for violations; continuing violations.
(a) In this section “violation of this Code” means any of the following:
(1) Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a
misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation
adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(2) Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by
reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or
regulation authorized by ordinance.
(3) Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense,
a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state
rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(b) In this section “violation of this Code” does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to
perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as
provided in this section.
(c) Unless a higher penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city,
an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such
Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, except for:
(1) Violations of municipal ordinances that govern fire, safety, zoning, public health and sanitation,
including dumping of refuse, vegetation and litter violations in which the maximum fine shall be
$2,000.00 for each offense; and
(2) Violations of traffic laws which are punishable as a Class C misdemeanor shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed $200.00.
(3) However, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar
offense under the laws of the state.
(d) Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Any violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances which constitutes an immediate danger to the health,
safety, and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purposes. If any violation
of this Code is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this Code, such nuisance may be summarily
abated by the city in addition to the imposition of a fine or imprisonment.
(e) Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any
ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed $500.00 does not require a culpable
mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense.
(f) Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any
ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds $500.00 shall require a culpable mental
state of intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/554
(g) In any prosecution in the municipal court of the city or of any other court of competent jurisdiction, a
complaint charging a violation of this Code need not negate the existence of any affirmative defense or
exception, but the existence of such may be raised by the defendant in any such prosecution by way of defense
as provided in the Texas Penal Code. When the defendant shall rely upon any such exemption or exception as
a defense or justification, the burden of proving the exemption or exception shall be upon the defendant.
(h) The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this Code shall not prevent the revocation or
suspension of any license, franchise or permit issued or granted under the provisions of this Code.
(i) Each day any violation of an ordinance or of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense
punishable hereunder.
(1976 Code, sec. 1-12; 1998 Code, sec. 1-12)
State law reference–Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code, Texas Local Government Code sec.
53.001; penalty for ordinance violations, Texas Local Government Code sec. 54.001.
Sec. 1-16. Violations of Code or ordinance; culpable mental state.
(a) In any prosecution filed under a provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city which expressly
requires proof that the actor engaged in conduct intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence,
then a person does not commit an offense unless he is shown to have engaged in such conduct as the
definition of the offense requires.
(b) Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act or a failure to act is prohibited, or is made or
declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or a misdemeanor, and such provision does not expressly require proof
of a culpable mental state, proof of a culpable mental state is not required for conviction of such offense, it
being the intent of the city council to dispense with the requirement of any culpable mental state in prosecutions
filed under such provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city; provided, however, that if such offense
is punishable by a fine exceeding the amount authorized by Texas Penal Code sec. 12.23, a person does not
commit such offense unless he is shown to have recklessly engaged in such conduct as the definition of the
offense requires.
(c) Proof of a higher degree of culpability than that charged constitutes proof of the culpability charged.
Sec. 1-17. Civil penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of any ordinance covered by Texas Local Government Code sec. 54.012,
shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. (1976 Code, sec. 1-12.1; 1998 Code, sec. 1-
13)
Sec. 1-18. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
(a) The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance
repealed took effect.
(b) The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took
effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or
cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.
(1976 Code, sec. 1-13; 1998 Code, sec. 1-14)
Sec. 1-19. Severability of parts of Code.
(a) It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of
this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the
incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/554
(b) If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any person, fact, situation or circumstance is
held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application of such provision to other persons, facts, situations
or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(1976 Code, sec. 1-14; 1998 Code, sec. 1-15)
Sec. 1-20. Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those
of ordinances or resolutions existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a
continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
State law reference–Repeal of statute, Texas Government Code secs. 311.030, 312.007.
Sec. 1-21. Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code.
(a) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or
done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this Code.
(b) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of
any general ordinance of the city repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code
shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the
liability of any person or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or section thereof in force at the
time of the adoption of this Code.
State law reference–Similar provisions, Texas Government Code sec. 311.031 et seq.
Sec. 1-22. Rates, charges and fees established.
(a) Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this Co de shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion,
resolution or ordinance of the city council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city
pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the city
council, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code.
(b) Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the city
council, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any
dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount
established, set or fixed by the city council by ordinance, resolution or motion.
(c) The list of authorized rates, charges and fees shall be maintained in the city secretary's office.
Sec. 1-23. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
(a) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect
the validity of any of the following:
(1) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or
right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code;
(2) Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness;
(3) Any contract or obligation assumed by the city;
(4) Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless
superseded;
(5) Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or
personnel policies and procedures;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/554
(6) Any right of franchise granted by the city to any person, firm or corporation;
(7) Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing,
opening, widening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city;
(8) Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the
city;
(9) Any appropriation ordinance;
(10) Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term;
(11) Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing truces therefor;
(12) Any specific rezoning ordinance or amendments thereto;
(13) Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for
subdivision regulations;
(14) Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city or annexing
property to the city;
(15) The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Code;
(16) Any ordinance levying or imposing truces not included in this Code;
(17) Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning
through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of
vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code;
(18) Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision;
(19) The City of Forest Hill TX Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance or amendments thereto not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; and
(20) Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent
nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect.
(b) Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution
or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is
repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force
and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.
Sec. 1-24. Councilmembers not to hold other office; appointive officers becoming candidate for
nomination or election.
(a) No person elected to the city council shall, during the term for which he was elected, be appointed to any
office or position in the service of the city. If a member of the council shall become a candidate for nomination or
election to any public office, other than that of councilperson, he shall immediately forfeit his place in the
council; and any appointive officer or employee of the city who shall become a candidate for nomination or
election to any public office shall immediately forfeit the office or employment held under the city.
(b) Nothing in this section shall prevent a council member from serving as a liaison officer to a board or
committee. A liaison officer shall serve in an advisory capacity only and shall have no voting authority.
(c) Nothing in this section shall prevent a council member from being appointed to the community
development board and serving in that capacity with all duties and rights as defined by the corporate charter of
that board.
(1976 Code, sec. 2-6; 1998 Code, sec. 2-7; Ordinance 2010-05-006, sec. 2, adopted 8/3/10)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/554
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. Title 28 adopted.
The city hereby adopts and accepts the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. tit. 28, together with any
amendments thereto, relating to cities and towns. (1976 Code, sec. 2-1; 1998 Code, sec. 2-1)
Sec. 2-2. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the city is hereby established as the period beginning October 1 through September 30 of
each year. (1976 Code, sec. 2-2; 1998 Code, sec. 2-2)
State law reference–Authority of home rule municipality to prescribe its fiscal year, Texas Local Government Code sec.
101.022.
Sec. 2-3. Purchasing procedures manual adopted by reference.
The city purchasing manual is hereby adopted by reference as though copied at length herein, and is
designated as the official purchasing procedures of the city. (1976 Code, sec. 2-2.1; 1998 Code, sec. 2-3)
Editor's note–The purchasing manual is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city
secretary.
Sec. 2-4. Municipal liability-Generally.
The city shall never be liable on account of damage or injury to persons or property arising from or occasioned
by any defect in any public street, sidewalk, highway or ground or public works of the city, or from any
obstruction therein, unless the specific defects or obstruction causing the damage or injury shall have been
actually known to the city engineer by a personal inspection for a period of at least 24 hours prior to the
occurrence of the injury or damage, or unless the attention of the city council or the city engineer shall have
been called thereto by notice in writing at least 24 hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage, and
proper diligence had not been used to rectify the defect or obstruction after actually known or called to the
attention of the city council or the city engineer, as aforesaid. (1976 Code, sec. 2-3; 1998 Code, sec. 2-4)
Sec. 2-5. Same-Claims for damages.
Before the city shall become liable for damages for personal injury of any kind, the person injured or the owner
of the property injured or destroyed, or someone in his behalf, shall give to the city council notice in writing of
such injury or destruction, duly verified, within 120 days after the same has been sustained, stating in such
written notice when, where and how the injury or destruction occurred, the apparent extent thereof, the amount
of damages sustained, the amount for which the applicant will settle, the actual residence of the claimant by
street and number at the date the claim is presented, and the actual residence of such claimant for six months
immediately preceding the occurrence of such injury or destruction, and the names and addresses of all
witnesses upon whom he relies to establish his claim. No suit shall be maintainable on any of the causes of
action herein set out for a period of 120 days after the notice shall have been given to the city council, in
compliance with this section, in order to enable the city council to investigate the merits of this claim and adjust
the same without suit if deemed advisable so to do. (1976 Code, sec. 2-4; 1998 Code, sec. 2-5)
Sec. 2-6. Authority of city manager to pay claims.
The city attorney shall submit his recommendations concerning disposition of each claim to the city council in
executive session. Unless at least two councilmembers indicate a desire that a claim be taken up and voted on
in a public meeting, the city manager is authorized to pay claims in the amount recommended by the city
attorney, but not exceeding $10,000.00. (1976 Code, sec. 2-4.1; 1998 Code, sec. 2-6)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/554
Sec. 2-7. Appointive officers.
The city council shall appoint the city attorney, the municipal judge and the city manager. All other officers and
employees of the city shall be appointed by the city manager. (1976 Code, sec. 2-7; 1998 Code, sec. 2-8)
Sec. 2-8. Council meetings and work sessions.
(a) The city council shall hold its regular monthly meeting on the third Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. at
the city council chambers. In addition, the city council shall hold a regular work session or a regular meeting on
the first Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. in the city council chambers.
(b) The meetings scheduled as set forth in subsection (a) of this section may be canceled, moved or
changed by majority vote of the city council acting in open meeting. Special meetings may be called by the
mayor or by the request of any three city councilmembers submitted to the city secretary at least four days prior
to such meeting together with proposed agenda items for such special meeting.
(c) Items for meetings and work sessions may be placed on the agenda by the city manager, the mayor, or
any other city councilmember. Such items shall be given to the city secretary as soon as practicable, but in any
event, in time to permit the secretary to comply with the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings law. For regular
meetings, items shall be given to the city secretary by noon on the Wednesday preceding such meeting. Items
shall be listed as submitted unless changed with the consent of the person who placed such item on the
agenda. Every agenda item shall be worded in a manner which will permit action by the council.
(1976 Code, sec. 2-8; 1998 Code, sec. 2-9; Ordinance 96-0001, sec. 1, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 2-9. Code enforcement officer.
The position of code enforcement officer is hereby created. The code enforcement officer shall perform his
duties under the direction, supervision and control of the city manager or his designee. Whenever the term or
title “administrative authority,” “building official,” “code enforcement officer,” “chief inspector,” or other similar
designation is used herein or in any of the technical codes, it shall be construed to mean the code enforcement
officer. The code enforcement officer and his deputies shall have those powers, responsibilities, and immunities
granted by ordinance to any of such officials. The code enforcement officer and his deputies shall have such
further duties and responsibilities as may be assigned by the city manager. (1976 Code, sec. 2-9; 1998 Code,
sec. 2-10)
State law reference–Home rule municipality has authority to create municipal offices, determine method of selecting
officers, and prescribe qualifications, duties, and tenure of officers, Texas Local Government Code sec. 26.041.
Sec. 2-10. Uniform Administrative Code-Adopted.
The Uniform Administrative Code, 1991 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials,
a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, as amended by section 2-11, is hereby adopted by
reference and designated as the administrative code of the city. (1976 Code, sec. 2-10; 1998 Code, sec. 2-11)
Sec. 2-11. Same–Amendments.
The Uniform Administrative Code adopted in section 2-10 is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Demolition fees. A fee of $25.00 shall be charged for demolition. In addition, a $200.00 deposit
shall be required. The deposit will be returned after a final inspection is completed and it is
determined that all trash and debris has been removed and that the property is properly graded to
allow adequate drainage.
(2) Miscellaneous fees. If an inspection is required by any of the codes of the city and a fee is not
otherwise provided, a fee sufficient to cover administrative costs shall be imposed. This fee shall be
at least $15.00 and shall not exceed $30.00 as may be determined by the inspector depending upon
the complexity and time requirements of the inspection. This fee shall not be deemed to cover those
situations in which the fee is to be determined by a formula involving time or cost.
(1976 Code, sec. 2-11; 1998 Code, sec. 2-12)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/554
Sec. 2-12. Firefighters and police officers civil service act adopted.
Texas Local Government Code ch. 143, the firefighters and police officers civil service act, is hereby adopted
effective October 30, 1992. (1976 Code, sec. 2-12; 1998 Code, sec. 2-13)
State law reference–Municipal civil service for firefighters and police officers, Texas Local Government Code sec. 143.001
et seq.
Sec. 2-13. Official publication of the city.
The Commercial Recorder, a publication of general circulation in the county, is hereby declared and designated
as the official publication of all legal and other notices by, and for, the city, as required by law. (1998 Code, sec.
2-14; Ordinance 200022, sec. 1, adopted 2/1/00)
Sec. 2-14. Payment by credit card, processing fee and service charge.
(a) The finance director or designee is hereby authorized to accept payment by credit card for a fee, fine,
court cost or other charge imposed by city departments, including, but not limited to, the municipal court, the
city secretary's office, utility billing, permits, maintenance and inspection department.
(b) A processing or handling fee of three percent (3%) is hereby established to be charged by the town at the
point of sale for processing or handling each time a credit card is used to pay a utility bill. For the purposes of
this section, a utility bill includes those charges commonly found on a town utility bill, including but not limited to
charges associated with water, sewer, trash, storm drainage and optional donations. A processing or handling
fee of five percent (5%) is hereby established to be charged by the town at the point of sale for processing or
handling each time a credit card is used to pay all other municipal fees, fines, court costs or other charges. The
town council finds that said amounts are reasonably related to the expense incurred by the town in processing
or handling the credit card payment.
(c) A service charge in an amount equivalent to that which is authorized by law to be charged for the
collection of a check drawn on an account with insufficient funds is hereby established to be charged by the city
if, for any reason, a payment by credit card is not honored by the credit card company on which the funds are
drawn.
(d) The finance director or designee shall deposit all processing fees and service charges in the general fund
of the city, as authorized by the Texas Local Government Code sec. 132.006 as it exists and as it may be
amended.
(e) The city manager shall be authorized on behalf of the city to contract with a company that issues credit
cards to collect and seize credit cards issued by the company that are outdated or otherwise unauthorized.
Such contract may provide that the city will charge the company a fee for the return of such credit cards, as
authorized by Texas Local Government Code sec. 132.005.
(Ordinance 200815, sec. 2, adopted 2/5/08; Ordinance 2016-10-001, secs. 2, 3, adopted 10/18/16)
Sec. 2-15. Access to confidential information.
The police chief and fire chief shall provide access to information made confidential by Texas Local
Government Code sec. 143.089(g) to the city manager and the city attorney. (Ordinance 2012-03-003 adopted
3/20/12)
Secs. 2-16–2-31. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 2-32–2-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. SOCIAL SECURITY
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/554
Sec. 2-51. Fund established.
A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out
the provisions of the social security fund. Such money so allocated and set aside shall be known as the city
social security fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. (1976 Code,
sec. 2-53; 1998 Code, sec. 2-94)
Secs. 2-52–2-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PROPERTY DISPOSITION*
Sec. 2-76. Disposal of property.
The chief of police shall dispose of all property that is presumed abandoned pursuant to state law. (1976 Code,
sec. 2-61; 1998 Code, sec. 2-122)
Sec. 2-77. Firearms, weapons and drugs.
(a) All firearms or other weapons and ammunition shall be disposed of pursuant to state law.
(b) Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Firearms, weapons and ammunition deemed to be of value for display purposes as having an
educational, historical, unique or antique value; or
(2) Pistols, rifles and shotguns and other weapons which may be legally sold in the state in good
condition as determined by the chief of police or his designate.
(c) Pistols, rifles and shotguns, ammunition and other weapons which may be legally sold in the state shall
be disposed of in the same manner as other abandoned property, or if the city manager believes that such
articles are required by the police department and cannot be purchased on the open market for the amount of
money said weapons are likely to bring at an auction, the city manager may cause said items to be inventoried
and retained as city property.
(1976 Code, sec. 2-65; 1998 Code, sec. 2-126)
Sec. 2-78. Surplus property.
Unless the city enters into a contract for requiring a different method of disposition, surplus city property shall,
at the option of the city manager, be disposed of by one of the following methods:
(1) Sold competitively; or
(2) Traded in for new equipment.
(1976 Code, sec. 2-66; 1998 Code, sec. 2-127)
Sec. 2-79. Scrap.
The city manager is authorized to determine from time to time, within his discretion, which city-owned items
have no value except for salvage, and may at any time authorize the sale of such items for cash as scrap, with
all proceeds paid to the city. (1976 Code, sec. 2-67; 1998 Code, sec. 2-128)
Secs. 2-80–2-101. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 2-102. System adopted.
The city council. on behalf of the city. hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the
employees of all departments now existing participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System and all of the
benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees. (1976 Code, sec. 2-80;
1998 Code, sec. 2-151)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/554
Sec. 2-103. City manager's responsibilities.
The city manager or designee is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System at its office at Austin, Texas, the city's contribution to the system, including the supplemental
benefits fund and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as
required by said board under the provisions of the TMRS Act, and the city manager or designee is hereby
authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially, on behalf of the city, the prior service rendered to said
municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service
compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports
and certifications which may be required of the city under the provisions of the TMRS Act, or in compliance with
the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. The rate of
contribution to the supplemental benefits fund of the TMRS shall not exceed one-half of one percent of the
earnings of the employees of the city who are covered under such fund. (1976 Code, sec. 2-87; 1998 Code,
sec. 2-158)
State law reference–Authorization of updated service credits, Texas Government Code secs. 853.401–853.404.
Secs. 2-104–2-134. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ETHICS*
Sec. 2-135. Statement of purpose.
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government
requires that city elected officials, members of boards, commissions and committees, city officials, employees
and volunteers be independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of the city, that governmental
decisions and policy should be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that no city elected
official, member of any board, commission or committee, city official, employee or volunteer should have any
interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage in any business, transaction or professional activity
or incur any obligation of any nature which is in conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public
interest; that public offices are positions of public trust imposing the duty of a fiduciary upon all office holders,
who are not to use their public position for personal gain, and that the public should have confidence in the
integrity of its government. To implement such a policy, the city council deems it advisable to enact the code of
ethics and conduct for all elected city officers, board, commission and committee members, city officials,
employees, and volunteers, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, to serve not only as a guide for
official conduct of the city's public servants, but also as a basis for discipline as defined by section 2-144 and/or
the city Charter for those who refuse to abide by its terms. The code of ethics and conduct is cumulative of
other ordinances, city Charter provisions and state statutes defining and prohibiting conflicts of interest.
(b) The code of ethics and conduct is not intended to be nor shall it be used as a political weapon to
intimidate or embarrass persons affected.
(Ordinance 2009016, sec. 1(2-191), adopted 7/21/09)
Sec. 2-136. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Advisory board means any board, commission or committee appointed by the city council and/or established
pursuant to the Charter, city ordinances or laws of the state, that functions in an advisory or study capacity, as a
recommending or quasi judicial body, including but not limited to the planning and zoning commission, zoning
board of adjustment, 4A and 4B commissions.
Benefit means anything reasonably regarded as pecuniary gain or pecuniary advantage, including benefit to
any other person in whose welfare the beneficiary has a direct and substantial interest. A pecuniary gain or
advantage shall not include insignificant amounts or items of de minimis value. The terms “insignificant” and “de
minimis” shall have their usual meanings and be subject to interpretation consistent with the provisions of
permissible gifts and gratuities.
Business entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, holding company, joint-stock
company, receivership, trust, or any other entity recognized in law.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/554
Candidate means every person who declares for or files for any office of the city to be filled by election.
City employee, for the purpose of this article, means any person employed by the city.
City official, unless otherwise expressly defined, means all elected officials, or any person appointed by the city
council, including but not limited to the city manager, city attorney, judges of the municipal court, city prosecutor,
city secretary and members of any committee, commission or board established by the city Charter or by
ordinance.
Code means the code of ethics and conduct.
Compensation means any economic benefit received in return for labor, services, property, or investment.
Confidential information means information to which the following apply:
(1) At the time of the use or disclosure of the information, the information is not a public record
subject to public disclosure under the Texas Public Information Act, or may be subject of an
exception to disclosure under the Public Information Act; and
(2) The use or disclosure of the information will have, or could reasonably be expected to have, a
material financial effect on any investment or interest in real property that a city officer, board,
commission or committee member, or any person to whom the city officer, board, commission or
committee member provides the information, has at the time of the use or disclosure of the
information or acquires after the use or disclosure of the information.
Conflict of interest means action upon any matter which would constitute a violation of this Code, the Texas
Penal Code, Texas Local Government Code chs. 171 and 176 and Texas Government Code ch. 573.
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city
council or other city board, committee or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council,
board, committee or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body.
Department head means any city employee designated by the city manager to have supervisory and
operational responsibility over an identified city department, including but not limited to police chief, fire chief,
public works director, economic development director, finance director and any future city employee that the city
manager specifically designates as department head in the personnel policy or established job description.
Economic benefit means any money, real or personal property, purchase, sale, lease, contract, option, credit,
loan discount, service, or other tangible or intangible thing of value, whether similar or dissimilar to those
enumerated.
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability partnership, firm, corporation, professional
corporation, holding company, joint stock company, joint venture, receivership, trust or any other entity
recognized by law through which business may be conducted.
Executive session has the meaning assigned by chapter 551 of the Texas Government Code, subchapter D, as
related to “closed meetings”; an “executive session” in the city shall be synonymous with the terms and usage
options set forth in the statutes found in subchapter D regulating a “closed meeting” under state law.
False means a knowing or willful misrepresentation or concealment of any item required to be disclosed by this
article.
Family member means a person related in the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined by Texas
Government Code ch. 573, to any person subject hereto, unless another degree is specified by state law.
Gift means a favor, hospitality or economic benefit, other than compensation, but does not include campaign
contributions reported as required by state law.
Intentionally means a person acts intentionally, or with intent, with respect to the nature of his conduct or to a
result of his conduct when it is his conscious objective or desire to engage in the conduct or cause the result.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/554
Knowingly means a person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to the nature of his conduct or to
circumstances surrounding his conduct when he is aware of the nature of his conduct or that the circumstances
exist. A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to a result of his conduct when he is aware that
his conduct is reasonably certain to cause the result.
Ministerial act means an act performed in a prescribed manner and not requiring the exercise of any judgment
or discretion.
Officer means any member of the city council and any member of a city board, commission or committee
established by ordinance, Charter or state law; provided no member of an advisory board shall be deemed an
officer of the city.
Permissible gifts/gratuities means a thing of nominal value given (not to exceed $50.00 in value for city
employees or $250.00 in value for city officials and department heads), not to request a specific favor, special
treatment, or influence a city official, employee or volunteer. Marketing advertisement items of nominal value, or
certificates or plaques having no intrinsic value, are considered permissible gifts or gratuities. The purchase of
meals of nominal value, provided there is a rotation of purchasing, is considered a permissible gift or gratuity.
The provision of training/education programs of a general nature is considered a permissible gift or gratuity.
Items that exceed $50.00 in value, if divided (e.g., holiday food or sporting event tickets distributed by lot) or
donated for a city-sponsored function, are considered permissible gifts and/or gratuities.
Substantial interest.
(1) A person bas a substantial interest in a business entity if:
a. The interest is ownership often percent or more of the voting stock or shares of the
business entity or ownership of $2,500.00 or more of the fair market value of the business
entity;
b. Funds received by the person from the business entity exceed ten percent of the person's
gross income for the previous year;
c. A person bas a substantial interest in real property if the interest is an equitable or legal
ownership with a fair market value of $2,500.00 or more;
d. An interest of a person related in the first degree by either affinity or consanguinity to the
local public official is a substantial interest;
e. The person holds a position of member of the board of directors or other governing body
of the business entity;
f. The person serves as an elected officer of the business entity;
g. The person is an employee of the business entity;
h. The person is a creditor, debtor or guarantor of any person, group or business entity in the
amount of $5,000.00 or more; or
i. Property of the person has been pledged to a person, group or business entity or is
subject to a lien in favor of the person, group or business entity in the amount of $5,000.00 or
more.
(2) A person does not have a substantial interest in a business entity if:
a. The person holds a position as a member of the board of directors or other governing
board of a business entity;
b. The person has been designated by the city council to serve on such board;
c. The person receives no remuneration, either directly or indirectly, for his service on such
board; and
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/554
d. The primary nature of the business entity is charitable, nonprofit or governmental.
(3) A person has a substantial interest in real property if the interest is an equitable or legal
interest with a fair market value of $2,500.00 or more (see Texas Local Government Code sec.
171.002).
(4) A person has a substantial interest under this article if the person's spouse or a person related
to the person in the first degree by consanguinity or affinity has a substantial interest under the code
(see Texas Local Government Code sec. 171.002). A person is related in the first degree by
consanguinity to his father, mother, son or daughter. A person is related in the first degree by affinity
to his father-in-law, mother-in-law, stepson, stepdaughter, son-in-law or daughter-in-law.
(5) The person has a substantial interest in real property if the person receives notice of a hearing
consistent with state law and city ordinance of a matter pending before the city council, board,
commission, committee and/or advisory board and such notice is not sent to the general public.
Volunteer means an individual who provides services to the city without expectation or receipt of compensation
or financial gain and who has completed a formal application and/or approval process. For the purpose of this
article, the term “volunteer” includes, but is not limited to, individuals in established volunteer positions, such as
firefighters or reserve police officers.
(Ordinance 2009016, sec. 1(2-192), adopted 7/21/09; Ordinance 2018-06-26, sec. 2, adopted 6/26/18)
Sec. 2-137. Affected parties.
The persons subject to the provisions hereof (“affected parties”) shall be:
(1) The members of the city council, including the mayor;
(2) The members of any city board. commission or committee established pursuant to the Charter
or the ordinances of this city, or the laws of this state;
(3) City official, city employee and volunteer;
(4) Candidates for any city elected office; and
(5) Any person listed within affected parties shall include persons related within the first degree of
consanguinity or affinity and specifically the spouse.
(Ordinance 2009016, sec. 1(2-193), adopted 7/21/09)
Sec. 2-138. Standards of conduct.
(a) City officers and advisory board members shall not use their position to secure special privileges and
shall avoid situations that could cause any person to believe that they may have brought bias or partiality to a
question before the council, any board, or decision maker. When an item to be considered by the council or any
advisory board presents a conflict of interest to a city officer or advisory board member, it will be the
responsibility of the city official to make such conflict known to the city attorney and to remove himself from
discussion and voting on the matter, and remove themselves from the chamber. Members of the council will not
condone, overlook or forgive any unethical or illegal activity and shall take all appropriate action pursuant to
state law and city charter. All members of the council and every advisory board agree to uphold the intent of the
code and to govern their actions accordingly.
(b) City officers and advisory board members shall strive to recognize their responsibility to future
generations by addressing the interrelationship of the social, cultural and physical characteristics of the
community when making policies.
(c) City officers and advisory board members shall make a commitment to improve the quality of life for the
individual and the community, and be dedicated to the faithful stewardship of the public trust.
(d) City officers and advisory board members shall continue to be dedicated to friendly and courteous
relationships with staff, other city officials and the public, and shall seek to improve the quality and image of
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/554
public service.
(Ordinance 2009016, sec. 1(2-194), adopted 7/21/09)
Sec. 2-139. Prohibited conduct.
(a) No city officer, advisory board member, city officials, city employees, volunteers or their spouses shall
knowingly:
(1) Accept or solicit any gift, favor, service or thing of value from any person, group or business
entity that might reasonably tend to influence him in the discharge of his official duties. This
prohibition shall not apply to:
a. An occasional nonpecuniary gift, insignificant in value, defined herein as a permissible gift
or gratuity;
b. An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; or
c. Any gift which would have been offered or given to him if he were not a city officer,
advisory board member, city official, city employee volunteer or their spouses, consistent with
state, federal and local laws, statutes, regulations and ordinances.
(2) Grant in the discharge of his official duties any favor, service or thing of value to any person,
group or business entity.
(3) Solicit or accept, from any source, any compensation, gift, favor, service, economic benefit, or
thing of value, including a promise of future employment, that might reasonably tend to influence
him, in the discharge of his official duties, in consideration of any person subject hereto exercising or
having exercised any official power or performing or having performed any official duty on behalf of
the city, from any person group or business entity:
a. Who is licensed, or has a substantial interest in any business entity that is licensed, by
any city department, agency, commission or board on which the city officer or advisory board
member serves; or
b. Who has a financial interest in any proposed ordinance or decision upon which the city
officer or advisory board member may or must act or make a recommendation; provided,
however, that any city officer or advisory board member and their spouses may accept travel
and related expenses to attend ceremonial functions, provided that such acceptance and
attendance have been approved by the city council prior to the occurrence of the ceremonial
function.
(4) Disclose any confidential information gained by reason of the position of the officer, advisory
board member or spouse concerning the property, operations, policies or affairs of the city, or use
such confidential information to advance any personal interest, financial or otherwise, of such officer
or advisory board member, spouse or others. This subsection shall not preclude disclosure of such
confidential information in connection with any investigation or proceeding regarding whether there
has been a violation of the standards of conduct set forth in this article to any investigatory,
administrative or judicial authority.
(5) Use one's position or office to secure special privileges or exemption for himself or another or
for the private gain of the city officer, advisory board member or his spouse.
(6) Hold himself out as representing the city in any capacity other than that for which he was
appointed, or elected and/or representing the council person's and advisory board member's
individual opinion as the opinion of the council or the advisory board.
(7) Engage in or accept private employment or render a service when such employment or
service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair his
independent judgment in the performance of his official duties.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/554
(8) Make unauthorized use, or permit unauthorized use, of city-owned vehicles, equipment,
materials or property.
(9) Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is
available to every other citizen.
(10) After termination of service with the city, appear before the council or any advisory board in
relation to any case, proceeding or application in which he personally participated or which was
under his active consideration during the period of his service.
(11) Transact any business in his official capacity with the city with a business entity in which he
has a substantial interest.
(12) Engage in any dishonest or criminal act or any other conduct prejudicial to the government of
the city or that reflects discredit upon the government of the city, including but not limited to
prohibited conflicts of interests or violations of criminal law that constitute crimes of moral turpitude,
official misconduct and malfeasance.
(13) Perform or refuse to perform any act in order to deliberately thwart the execution of city
ordinances, rules or regulations or the achievement of official city programs.
(14) Be an interested party to any exchange, purchase, or sale of property, goods or services with
the city, or enter into any contract with the city, except in full and impartial compliance with statutes,
city Charter, ordinances and regulations applicable thereto and subject to any restrictions of the city
Charter; provided further that such persons shall receive no favor or special concession or
inducement not customarily available and granted by the city in such a transaction; and provided
further that any discretion by officers of the city, in connection with any such transaction shall be
exercised impartially and upon the same standards applied to all citizens of the city.
(b) No member of the city council or city officer shall knowingly represent, directly or indirectly, any person,
group or business entity:
(1) Before the city council or any department, agency, board or commission of the city;
(2) In any action or proceeding against the interests of the city or in any litigation in which the city
or any department, agency, board or commission is a party; or
(3) In any action or proceeding in the municipal court of the city which was instituted by a city
officer or employee in the course of his official duties, or a criminal proceeding in which any city
officer or employee is a material witness for the prosecution.
(c) No member of a city advisory board shall knowingly represent, directly or indirectly, any person, group or
business entity:
(1) Before the city council or the board or commission of which he is a member;
(2) Before a board or commission which has appellate jurisdiction over the board or commission
of which he is a member;
(3) In any action or proceeding against the interests of the city or in any litigation in which the city
or any department, agency, board or commission thereof is a party; or
(4) In any action or proceeding in the municipal courts of the city which was instituted by a city
officer or employee in the course of his official duties, or a criminal proceeding in which any city
officer or employee is a material witness for the prosecution.
(d) The restrictions contained in subsections (b) and (c) of this section do not prohibit the following:
(1) A member of a city advisory board (other than city council), or his spouse, appearing before
the city council or a city department, agency, board or commission to represent himself in a matter
affecting his property; provided, however, that no such person, or his spouse, shall appear before
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/554
the board or commission of which he is a member and must submit case through an authorized
representative;
(2) An officer of an employee organization appearing before the city council or a city department,
agency, board or commission to address employment matters.
(e) The city council shall not approve or award any bid or contract for the city's purchase of goods or services
from any person, group or entity which at any time prior to such award or approval, has hired a person who, at
any time within such six-month period, was either a member of the city council or the chief or assistant
administrator of any city department or agency that had direct, or indirect, review or consideration, or
recommending or approval authority for the project or decision which is the subject of the award of such bid or
contract.
(f) A person subject hereto who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a
nonprofit entity may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city for the entity, if
said official receives any fee, compensation or other monetary payment from the entity, unless the city council
appointed such city official to the board of directors or such corporate office.
(g) Nothing in this article shall prohibit the city council from participating in a vote or decision relating to
salaries or travel budgets of city council members.
(h) No person subject hereto shall use his official position to secure confidential information for any purpose
other than official responsibilities.
(i) No person subject hereto shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes,
except to the extent that such uses are customary, incidental or lawfully available to the public.
(j) No member of the city council shall interfere with the city manager's administrative duties of appointment
to and removal of persons from employment with the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council and
its members shall deal with the city departments and city employees for which the city manager is responsible
solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders,
directions or directives to any of the subordinates of the city manager, including but not limited to city
employees or volunteers, either publicly or privately, that relate to or affect the employee's or volunteer's work
duties, responsibilities or other obligations.
(k) No person, including a member of the council, shall engage in any of the following conduct:
(1) Making an audio or audio/visual recording of an executive session.
(2) No council member may remove any document prepared or presented by any person as part
of the executive session from the room.
(3) No council member may remove any notes taken by any person during the executive session
from the room.
(4) All documents used in executive session shall be handled as required by laws regulating the
retention and destruction of government records.
It is an exception to the application of subsection (k)(2) that the documents were removed in order to make
copies during the executive session to facilitate the discussion in executive session. All copies made of any
documents are subject to the non-removal clause set forth in this subsection.
It is an exception to the application of subsection (k)(1) that the recording was made pursuant to a policy,
ordinance or resolution lawfully adopted by council authorizing an audio or audiovisual recording of executive
session in lieu of a certified agenda.
(l) The restrictions in this section do not prohibit the following:
(1) Rendering service to the city as an officer, employee or advisory board member;
(2) The paying of taxes, fines, utility service or filing fees;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/554
(3) Subject to restrictions contained in the city Charter, executing and performing any community
facilities contract or plat in compliance with laws and regulations applicable to any person; provided,
however, that if any city ordinance, rule or regulation allows any discretion by the appropriate officers
of the city in the interpretation or enforcement of such ordinance, rule or regulation, such officers
shall exercise such discretion in favor of the city in connection with any such community facilities
contract or plat;
(4) Purchasing goods or services from the city in full compliance with all applicable state and local
laws;
(5) Members and spouses of members of the advisory boards set up by ordinance, city Charter or
state law who are not otherwise officers of the city, may engage in any exchange, purchase or sale
of property, goods or services with the city, or enter into a contract with the city, provided, however,
that the board of which they are a member has no advisory function or cognizance, direct or indirect,
present or prospective, with respect to the transaction in which such advisory board member
engages or proposes to engage; or
(6) A city contract for the purchase of services or personal property with a business entity in which
a member of the governing body has a substantial interest if the business entity is the only business
entity that provides the needed service or product within the jurisdiction of the city and is the only
business entity that bids on the contract.
(Ordinance 2009016, sec. 1(2-195), adopted 7/21/09; Ordinance 2018-06-26, secs. 3, 4, adopted 6/26/18)
Sec. 2-140. Disclosure of interest.
(a) The city council hereby directs all members of the city council, or members of appointed advisory boards,
committees and commissions to present a statement annually to the city secretary by October 15 of each fiscal
year using a form approved by the city council which is incorporated herein for all purposes; such statement
providing a complete disclosure of business and professional relationships with entities that do business with
the city or plan to do business with the city in the future. Any individual required to complete this statement has
a duty to amend the statement if a change in its disclosures should occur during each fiscal year. Amendments
must occur within 30 days of the individual acquiring knowledge of the business relationship. Any individual who
fails to file a required disclosure pursuant to this section within 60 days of its due date may be removed from
office by majority vote of the city council for failure to conform to the requirements of the code.
(b) If any officer or advisory board member has a substantial interest in any person, group or business entity,
or real property involved in any decision pending before such officer or advisory board member, or the body of
which he is a member, such officer or advisory board member shall disclose such interest as provided in
subsection (d) of this section and shall not, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, discuss the
substance of the matter at any time with any other member of the board of which he is a member or any other
body which will vote on the matter or otherwise participate in the consideration of the matter.
(c) If any of the following interests are involved in any decision pending before any city or advisory board
member, or the body of which he is a member, such officer or advisory board member must disclose such
interest as provided in subsection (d) of this section, but he shall be permitted to vote on and participate in the
consideration of such matter:
(1) A decision concerning a bank or other financial institution from which the officer or advisory
board member has a home mortgage, automobile loan, or other installment loan, if the loan is not
currently in default, was originally for a term of more than two years and cannot be accelerated
except for failure to make payments according to the terms thereof;
(2) A decision concerning a bank or other financial institution in which the officer or advisory board
member holds a savings account, checking account or certificate of deposit and which is fully
insured by the U.S. government or an agency thereof;
(3) A decision concerning a business entity with which the officer or advisory board member has a
retail or credit card account;
(4) A decision concerning the approval of substitution of collateral by a city depository bank;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/554
(5) A decision concerning real property in which the officer or advisory board member has a
substantial interest if it is not reasonably foreseeable that such decision would have a special
economic effect on the value of the property, distinguishable from the effect on the public (see Texas
Local Government Code sec. 171.004).
(d) A city officer or advisory board member shall disclose the existence of any substantial interest in any
person, business entity or real property involved in any decision pending before such officer or advisory board
member, or the body of which he is a member. To comply with this subsection, a city officer or advisory board
member shall, prior to any discussion or determination of the matter, either file an affidavit of disclosure as
required by Texas Local Government Code sec. 171.004 or, if not so required, shall publicly disclose in the
official records of the city to the city secretary the nature of the interest. In disclosing a substantial interest in a
business entity, a city officer or advisory board member shall not be required to disclose the dollar amount of
any income that he receives from the business entity.
(e) Where the interest of a city officer or advisory board member in the subject matter of a vote or decision is
remote or incidental, the city officer or advisory board member may participate in the vote or decision and need
not disclose the interest.
(1) Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city officer or advisory
board member, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a
council member in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive
zoning ordinance or similar decisions is incidental to the extent that the council member would be
affected in common with the general public.
(2) Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial
interest and which has insignificant value, or which would be affected only in a de minimis fashion by
a decision. This definition does not establish dollar limits on the terms “insignificant value” and “de
minimis” which shall have their usual meanings and be subject to interpretation consistent with the
provisions of permissible gifts and gratuities.
(Ordinance 2009016, sec. 1(2-196), adopted 7/21/09)
Sec. 2-141. Voting for appointments to city boards, commissions, and committees and applicant
responsibility to report campaign contributions.
Any person being considered, or with an application pending, for appointment to any city board, commission or
committee established pursuant to the city Charter or ordinances of the city, or the laws of the state, if that
person has made a financial contribution of $250.00 or more to the election campaign of a member of the city
council during the two years preceding the date of the proposed appointment, the city council member or
members who received such contribution must abstain from voting on such appointment. All persons shall enter
upon the application for city boards and commissions, information regarding any financial contribution as noted
in this section, or if an application is on file for an appointment, shall notify the city secretary of such
contributions for notation on the application within 30 days of the passage of the ordinance from which this
article is derived. The city secretary shall send a copy of this section to all persons who have an application on
file requesting appointment. The provisions of this section shall apply only to contributions made on or after
January 1, 2007. (Ordinance 2009016, sec. 1(2-197), adopted 7/21/09)
Sec. 2-142. Enforcement.
(a) The city council shall have the primary responsibility for the enforcement of the code consistent with city
Charter.
(b) In matters where it is alleged that a city officer or advisory board member, other than a member of the city
council, violated the code, the city council may direct the city attorney to investigate or prosecute any apparent
violation of the code by one or more such persons. At the direction of the city council, the city attorney shall
have the power to investigate any such complaint, to initiate any suit, to file any complaint in municipal court,
and to prosecute any such complaint or action on behalf of the city where such complaint or action is
appropriate against a city officer or advisory board member, other than a member of the city council.
(c) In matters where it is alleged that a member of the city council violated the code, the city council may
direct the city attorney to investigate as in subsection (b) of this section, or if the city council feels the alleged
conduct is an extreme violation of the code, the city council may select an outside, independent attorney or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/554
investigative agency to investigate or prosecute any apparent violation of the code by a member of the city
council. The city council shall select such attorney or agency from a list of five experienced, qualified attorneys
and/or agencies to be nominated by the city attorney. At the direction of the city council, such independent
attorney or investigative agency shall have the power to investigate any such complaint, to initiate any suit, to
file any complaint in municipal court, and to prosecute any such complaint or action on behalf of the city where
such complaint or action is appropriate against a member of the city council.
(d) Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of the code has occurred may file a complaint with
the city council which may then proceed as provided in subsections (b) or (c) of this section. However, nothing
in the code shall be construed to prevent complainants from instituting direct legal action through the
appropriate judicial authority.
(Ordinance 2009016, sec. 1(2-198), adopted 7/21/09)
Sec. 2-143. Advisory opinions.
(a) Where any officer or advisory board member bas a doubt as to the applicability of any provision of the
code to a particular situation, or as to the definition of terms used herein, he may apply to the city attorney for
an advisory opinion. The officer or advisory board member shall have the opportunity to present his
interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicability of provisions of the code before such advisory opinion
is made.
(b) The city attorney shall only issue advisory opinions concerning how the code applies prospectively to a
particular situation, or how the definition of terms used herein applies prospectively to such a situation. The city
attorney shall not issue advisory opinions to city officer or advisory board members in matters when a complaint
is already pending with the city council or the situation in question has already occurred. These matters shall be
handled as provided in section 2-142
(c) Until amended or revoked, any advisory opinion shall be binding on the city, the city council, and the city
attorney in any subsequent actions concerning the public officer or advisory board member who sought the
opinion and acted on it in good faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in the request for the
advisory opinion. Such opinion shall not be binding in any judicial proceedings initiated by any private citizen.
(Ordinance 2009016, sec. 1(2-199), adopted 7/21/09)
Sec. 2-144. Penalties; forfeited position; exemptions; injunctions.
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who
resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of the code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction, fined not more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day that a violation continues or is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, allegation and evidence
of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this article.
(b) Whenever the city council has determined that any officer or advisory board member has violated any
provision of the code, such officer or advisory board member shall be subject to discipline, including forfeiture of
his office or position. Any removal of an official from elected office shall be done in accordance with applicable
state laws and city Charter. The code shall be construed to prohibit any such officer or advisory board member
from being re-elected, or reappointed to any position with the city for a period of three years from the date of
termination.
(c) The city council may exempt from the provisions of the code any conduct found to constitute a violation by
an officer or advisory board member if it finds that the enforcement of the code with respect to such conduct is
not in the public interest.
(d) Any contract or transaction which was the subject of an official act or action of the city in which there is an
interest prohibited by the code, or which involved the violation of a provision of the code, shall be voidable at
the option of the city council.
(e) At the discretion of the city council, the city attorney or the city's outside independent attorney shall have
the power, where a violation of the provisions of the code is threatened or has occurred, to bring a civil action or
proceeding, at law or in equity, for a judgment enjoining any violation of the provisions of the code or requiring
the relinquishment of any prohibited interest or the voiding of any such contract or transaction, taking into
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/554
account the interests of the city and any third persons who may be injured thereby. Where the city council
determines that the public interest may best be served by not voiding a contract or transaction entered into in
violation of the code, such contract or transaction may be enforced and an action or proceeding may be brought
against any officer or advisory board member found in violation of provisions of the code for damages, not to
exceed twice the damages suffered by the city or twice the profit or gain realized by the officer or advisory
board member, whichever is greater.
(Ordinance 2009016, sec. 1(2-200), adopted 7/21/09)
Sec. 2-145. Distribution of code of ethics and conduct.
The city secretary shall cause a copy of the code in booklet form to be distributed to and signed for by every
officer, city official, advisory board member and city employee of the city within 30 days after enactment of the
ordinance from which the code is derived. Each officer and advisory board member thereafter elected or
appointed shall be furnished and sign for a copy before entering upon the duties of his office. (Ordinance
2009016, sec. 1(2-201), adopted 7/21/09)
Secs. 2-146–2-173. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 2-174. Definition of records.
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by
the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (Ordinance 2019-03, sec. 1,
adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 2-175. Additional definitions.
Department head means the officer who by ordinance or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city
that creates or receives records.
Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of its operations in
an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of its legal and financial status, or to the protection and fulfillment
of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is
given as permanent.
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management
officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition
information that the records management program may require.
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance,
retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the
efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules; the management
of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical
and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics, electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-178 of this article.
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-179 of this article.
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ordinance 2019-03, sec. 2, adopted 3/5/19)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/554
Sec. 2-176. Municipal records declared public property.
All records as defined in section 2-174 of this plan are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No official
or employee of the city has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even
though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or
use of such records is prohibited. (Ordinance 2019-03, sec. 3, adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 2-177. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all records of this office through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act and accepted
records management practice. (Ordinance 2019-03, sec. 4, adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 2-178. Designation of records management officer.
The city secretary and the successive holders of said office shall serve as records management officer for the
city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director
and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as
applicable. The records management officer will ensure that the maintenance, destruction, electronic storage,
or other dispositions of the records of this office are carried out in accordance with the requirements of the
Local Government Records Act. (Ordinance 2019-03, sec. 5, adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 2-179. Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan.
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to
the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the
efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and to properly
preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the
records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department
head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of
this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as
a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(Ordinance 2019-03, sec. 6, adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 2-180. Duties of records management officer.
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in
its implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and
procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to
re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records
of the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/554
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library
and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's
records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(8) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(9) Ensure the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the
records of the city are carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management plan and the requirements of state law;
(10) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules or through records destruction authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed
or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or
disposition;
(11) Report annually to the city manager on the implementation of the records management plan
in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical data compiled under subsection
(10); and
(12) Bring to the attention of the city manager non-compliance by department heads or other
municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the
Local Government Records Act.
(Ordinance 2019-03, sec. 7, adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 2-181. Duties and responsibilities of department heads.
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out
the requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs,
and duties for which the department heads and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction,
or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management
program of the city and the requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 2019-03, sec. 8, adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 2-182. Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state.
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads, shall prepare records control
schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records series created or received by the department
and the retention period for each series. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information
regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved
by the department head and the city council.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/554
(d) Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the
director and librarian.
(Ordinance 2019-03, sec. 9, adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 2-183. Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule.
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-182
shall be implemented by department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records
management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record; the subject matter of the record is pertinent to pending law suit,
or the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an
additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer and the city council.
(Ordinance 2019-03, sec. 10, adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 2-184. Destruction of unscheduled records.
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may not be destroyed if its
destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the
records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved
destruction authorization request. (Ordinance 2019-03, sec. 11, adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 2-185. Records control schedules.
(a) Appropriate records control schedules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission shall
be adopted by the records management officer for use in the city, as provided by law. Any destruction of
records of the city will be in accordance with these schedules and the Local Government Records Act.
(b) The city hereby adopts the Texas State Library and Archives Commission (TSLAC) Local Government
Retention Schedule and will continue to use this schedule as it is regularly amended by the commission.
(c) The following TSLAC schedules shall be utilized:
Schedule EL (Records of Elections and Voter registration)
Part 1: Election Records
Part 2: Records of Candidacy and Campaign Finance
Part 3: Voter Registration Records
Schedule GR (Records Common to All Governments)
Part 1: Administrative Records
Part 2: Financial Records
Part 3: Personnel and Payroll Records
Part 4: Support Services Records
Part 5: Information Technology Records
Schedule HR (Records of Public Health Agencies)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/554
Part 1: Records Common to Public Health Agencies
Part 2: Records of Local Public Health Authorities
Part 3: Records of Local Public Hospitals
Part 4: County Indigent Health Care Records
Part 5: Animal Control and Health Records
Part 6: Records of the County Inspector of Hides and Animals
Schedule LC (Records of Justice and Municipal Courts)
Part 1: Civil and Criminal Records
Part 2: Inquest Records
Part 3: Vital Statistics Records
Part 4: Miscellaneous Records
Part 5: Juvenile Records
Schedule PS (Records of Public Safety Agencies)
Part 1: Records Common to Public Safety Agencies
Part 2: Law Enforcement Records
Part 3: Records of County Medical Examiners
Part 4: Records of Fire Fighting and Emergency Medical Service Agencies
Part 5: Records of Community Supervision and Corrections Departments
Part 6: Records of County, District and Criminal District Attorneys
Schedule PW (Records of Public Works and Services)
Part 1: General Records
Part 2: Planning and Zoning Records
Part 3: Building Permit and Inspection Records
Part 4: Public Transportation and Engineering Records
Part 5: Soil and Water Conservation Records
Part 6: Agriculture Extension Agent Records
Part 7: Environmental Hazards Records
Part 8: Weights and Measures Records
Part 9: Library and Museum Records
Part 10: Parks and Recreation Records
Part 11: Zoo Records
Part 12: Public Broadcasting Records
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/554
Part 13: Social Services Records
Part 14: Veterans Service Officer Records
Part 15: Gaming Records
Part 16: Cemetery Records
Part 17: County Historical Commission Records
Part 18: Miscellaneous Records
Schedule TX (Records of Property Taxation)
Part 1: Appraisal Records
Part 2: Property Tax Collection Records
Part 3: Motor Vehicle and Boat Licensing and Registration Records
Part 4: Liquor Licensing Records
Part 5: Occupation Tax Records
Part 6: Miscellaneous Records of County Tax Assessor-Collectors
Appendix
Schedule UT (Records of Utility Services)
Part 1: General Records
Part 2: Water and Wastewater
Part 3: Solid Waste and Hazardous Waste Management Records
Part 4: Electric Utility Records
Part 5: Gas Utility Records
(Ordinance 2019-03, sec. 12, adopted 3/5/19)
Secs. 2-186–2-222. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEYS
Sec. 2-223. Authority of the city attorney to appoint assistant city attorneys.
(a) The city attorney is hereby authorized to appoint such assistant city attorneys as the city attorney believes
are necessary to carry out legal responsibilities of the city.
(b) Assistant city attorneys shall be under the direction, supervision, and control of the city attorney.
(c) Assistant city attorneys shall receive compensation as may be determined by the city attorney as
approved by the city council.
(d) Assistant city attorneys shall have the authority to exercise and perform all powers and duties imposed on
the city attorney, including full power and authority in municipal prosecutions as provided for in the Texas C.C.P.
art. 45.201.
(Ordinance 200892, sec. 3, adopted 8/5/08)
Secs. 2-224–2-254. Reserved.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/554
ARTICLE VIII. CODE ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 2-255. Short title.
This article may also be cited as the “notice of violation ordinance.” (Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-30), adopted
8/19/08)
Sec. 2-256. Purpose.
This article provides procedural and substantive rules relating to the issuance of citations by non-peace-officers
to defendants accused of violating criminal ordinances of the city. (Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-31), adopted
8/19/08)
Sec. 2-257. Application.
This article applies to the issuance of citations alleging criminal violations within the jurisdiction of the municipal
court. The procedures of this article apply only to offenses alleged to occur on or after the date of enactment.
(Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-32), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-258. Definitions.
(a) Generally. Words and phrases used in the article shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Terms
that are not defined below, but are defined elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances, shall be given the meanings
set forth in this Code. Words and phrases not defined in this Code of Ordinances shall be given their common,
ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the plural number shall include the singular
number (and vice versa). The word “shall” is always mandatory, while the word “may” is merely directory.
Headings and captions are for reference purposes only.
(b) Specific.
City means the City of Forest Hill, an incorporated municipality located in Tarrant County, Texas.
Notice of violation, when issued in the form set forth in section 2-260, shall also be known and treated as a
citation and the terminology is merely to distinguish forms issued by peace officers and shall not be afforded
any legal distinction.
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, business, corporation or other entity.
(Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-34), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-259. Relation to related laws.
A citation issued pursuant to this article does not relate to the issuance of a citation by a peace officer pursuant
to the Texas C.C.P. art. 14.06(b) of or the Texas Transportation Code sec. 543.003. (Ordinance 200894, sec.
2(1-35), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-260. Authority to issue notice of violations.
Pursuant to this article, and the scope of their assigned duties, a notice of violation may be issued by any of the
following individuals, or their authorized designees:
(1) Health inspector.
(2) City inspector.
(3) Building inspector or official.
(4) Road inspector.
(5) Fire marshal.
(6) Animal control officer.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/554
(7) Fire chief.
(8) Code enforcement or code compliance officer.
(9) Any other individual authorized to enforce this Code of Ordinances by and through specific
authorization or designation.
(Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-35), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-261. Form and content of notice of violation.
Notice of violation issued under this section must be in a form approved by the municipal court clerk that
includes the following information:
(1) The name, address, date of birth or driver's license number and physical description, and
telephone number of the person cited;
(2) The offense for which the person is charged;
(3) The date and location of the offense;
(4) An appearance date;
(5) A statement requiring the person receiving the notice of violation to appear at municipal court
on or before the appearance date indicated on the notice of violation;
(6) A statement of the person's promise to respond to the citation, pursuant to the Texas C.C.P.
art. 27.14, by the appearance date indicated on the citation, including a place for the person cited to
provide the person's signature; and
(7) The signature of the person issuing the citation.
(Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-36), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-262. Pleading subsequent to the issuance of a notice of violation.
All pleas arising from the issuance of a notice of violation under this article shall be made pursuant to the Texas
C.C.P. art. 27.14. (Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-37), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-263. Issuance of notice of violation by mail.
(a) Notice of violation may be sent certified mail or regular mail consistent with applicable city ordinances and
state law for the offense alleged.
(b) A notice of violation issued by mail must be in the same form and of the same content, as that contained
in section 2-261 to the extent practicable.
(c) No warrant shall be issued for failure to appear for any notice of violation issued under this section, unless
further judicial action is taken as provided in subsections (d) and (e) of this section.
(d) If the notice of violation is by any manner other than personal delivery where a signature is obtained, the
court may issue a summons for the person with a copy of the complaint attached ordering the appearance of
the person to appear in person, by legal counsel or in a manner authorized by the Texas C.C.P. art. 27.14.
(e) If a defendant fails to appear in response to a summons, a capias warrant may issue consistent with the
Texas C.C.P. art. 23.03.
(Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-38), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-264. Ordinance violation of written promise to appear.
A person issued a notice of violation, as authorized by this article, commits an offense if the person fails to
appear or enter a plea pursuant to section 2-262 on or before the appearance date indicated on the citation.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/554
(Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-39), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-265. Ordinance violation failure to appear.
A person issued a notice of violation, as authorized by this article, commits an offense if the person fails to
appear or enter a plea pursuant to section 2-262 on or before the appearance date indicated on the summons.
Such a person may also be held in contempt, consistent with state law. (Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-40),
adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-266. Interference or obstruction of issuance.
A person commits an offense if the person interferes with or obstructs the issuance of a notice of violation
under this article. (Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-41), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-267. Providing false or fictitious name.
A person commits an offense if the person gives a false or fictitious name, address, or other information to an
individual authorized to issue a citation under this article. (Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-42), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-268. Deferred disposition.
Any person, upon agreement with the prosecution, and order of the court, may receive deferred disposition on
any city code violation. (Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-43), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-269. Penalty.
Each violation under this section is a misdemeanor offense punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed
$500.00. (Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-44), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 2-270. Culpable mental state.
Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this
article. (Ordinance 200894, sec. 2(1-45), adopted 8/19/08)
CHAPTER 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 4-1. Definitions.
The definitions set forth in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code sec. 1.04 (definitions), as amended, shall be
effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used
herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings
ascribed to them in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code sec. 1.04, as amended, and shall have the same scope
and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code sec.
1.04, as amended.
Sec. 4-2. Penalty for violation of certain sections.
Any person violating any of the provisions of sections 4-6, 4-7, 4-12 and 4-14 through 4-17 as set forth herein
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon final conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not to
exceed $200.00. The city attorney is authorized to bring civil proceedings to enjoin the operation of any
premises not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (1976 Code, sec. 5-1; 1998 Code, sec. 10-1)
Sec. 4-3. Applicability to private clubs.
This chapter shall not apply to private clubs incidental to a hotel or motel, as defined in the zoning ordinance, or
to private clubs licensed by the state which are owned and operated by nonprofit service organizations such as
the Veterans of Foreign Wars and the American Legion. (1976 Code, sec. 5-2; 1998 Code, sec. 10-2)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/554
Sec. 4-4. Permit or license-Application; contents.
Any person applying for a permit or license issued by the authority of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, or a
renewal of such permit or license, or to change the location of the place of business designated in such permit
or license, shall deliver to the city secretary, for filing, one copy of the appropriate forms prescribed by the state
alcoholic beverage commission, together with scale drawings showing the proposed location of the applicant's
business in relation to streets, property lines, and the nearest church, public school or public hospital. Such
person shall also provide a statement of his name, current address, addresses for the previous ten years, age,
all other city permits or licenses held and the names and addresses of all persons with an interest in such
business, which statement shall include an affidavit that the information given is true and correct. The applicant
shall give permission for his fingerprints, height, weight, coloring and other description to be obtained by the
police department. (1976 Code, sec. 5-3; 1998 Code, sec. 10-3)
Sec. 4-5. Same-Investigation of applicant.
The city secretary shall direct the applicant for an alcoholic beverage permit or license to deliver such
information to the chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to be made as to the applicant's reputation
as well as those of his business associates and also as to the applicant's criminal record, if any. On completion,
the chief of police shall forward such application and information together with his investigative findings to the
zoning official with primary responsibility for enforcing the zoning laws, who shall determine the use district in
which such business is located, the distance to the nearest church, public school and public hospital and any
deficiencies in the building proposed or planned for use. (1976 Code, sec. 5-4; 1998 Code, sec. 10-4)
Sec. 4-6. Same-Review of information by zoning official; objections to issuance.
The zoning official shall, upon receiving the information required by section 4-5, determine whether the
applicant's place of business is to be located in a zoning district where such is prohibited and whether the use is
prohibited to this applicant by any ordinance or state law at such location. The zoning official shall notify the city
secretary of his determination and shall advise the city secretary to certify on the application that the
manufacture, distribution or sale of alcoholic beverages as applied for is or is not prohibited at the location of
the applicant's place of business. If from the zoning official's examination it appears that the applicant is
disqualified, or that the applicant's place of business is inadequate, unsafe or unsanitary or does not comply
with all the terms of this chapter and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, or that any lawful reason exists why
the permit or license should not be issued, it shall be the duty of the zoning official to file objections to the
issuance of the permit or license with the alcoholic beverage commission or the county judge. (1976 Code, sec.
5-5; 1998 Code, sec. 10-5)
Sec. 4-7. Duty of permittee or licensee to pay permit or license tax.
No permittee or licensee under this chapter shall engage in the business authorized by his permit or license
without first having paid to the city the permit or license tax levied by this chapter. It shall be the duty of the
zoning official to petition the state alcoholic beverage commission to cancel the permit or license of any
permittee or licensee who shall engage in the business authorized by such permit or license without first having
paid the taxes levied by this chapter. (1976 Code, sec. 5-6; 1998 Code, sec. 10-6)
Sec. 4-8. Permit fee-Levied.
There is hereby levied against every holder of a state alcoholic beverage permit for premises located within the
corporate limits of the city, a fee of one-half the state fee for each such permit. (1976 Code, sec. 5-7; 1998
Code, sec. 10-7)
Sec. 4-9. Same-Exemptions.
The following are exempt from the fee authorized by section 4-8:
(1) Agent's airline beverage, passenger train beverage, industrial carrier's, private carrier's, private
club registration, local cartage, storage and temporary wine and beer retailer's permit;
(2) A wine and beer retailer's permit issued for a dining, buffet or club car; and
(3) A mixed beverage permit during a three-year period following the issuance of the permit.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/554
(1976 Code, sec. 5-8; 1998 Code, sec. 10-8)
Sec. 4-10. Same-Payment in advance; separate license required for each place of business.
The occupation taxes required for licenses and permits as required by this chapter shall be paid in advance for
one year. A separate license shall be obtained for every place of business where the business of alcoholic
beverage manufacture, distribution or sale is conducted, and occupation taxes shall be paid for each license.
(1976 Code, sec. 5-9; 1998 Code, sec. 10-9)
Sec. 4-11. Issuance and contents of license.
Upon approval by the zoning official and payment of occupation truces, the city secretary shall issue a license
in the name of the city which shall acknowledge receipt of such amount and shall contain the number, name
and expiration date of the state permit or license, the name of the permittee or licensee, the trade of such
permittee or licensee, the address of the business and the date of issuance. (1976 Code, sec. 5-10; 1998
Code, sec. 10-10)
Sec. 4-12. Display of license.
The license issued by the city secretary pursuant to this chapter shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous
place within the licensed place of business. (1976 Code, sec. 5-11; 1998 Code, sec. 10-11)
Sec. 4-13. Refunds of occupation true.
No refund of an occupation true paid the city under the terms of this chapter shall be made for any reason
except when the permittee or licensee is prevented from continuing in business as the result of a local option
election or an amendment of the zoning regulations of the city concerning the property on which the place of
business is situated. (1976 Code, sec. 5-12; 1998 Code, sec. 10-12)
Sec. 4-14. Proximity of place of business to schools, churches or hospitals.
(a) No person shall sell or engage in the business of selling any alcoholic beverage where the place of
business of such person is located within:
(1) 300 feet of any church, public school or public hospital;
(2) 1,000 feet of a public school, if the city council receives a request from the board of trustees of
a school district under Texas Education Code sec. 38.007; or
(3) 1,000 feet of a private school if the city council receives a request from the governing body of
the private school.
(b) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and
the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front
door, and in a direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business
where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public schools shall be from the nearest property line of the public
school to the property line of the place of business, along street lines and in a direct line across intersections.
(1976 Code, sec. 5-13; 1998 Code, sec. 10-13)
Sec. 4-15. Location of business to be in proper zoning use district.
No person shall engage in the business of manufacturing, distributing or selling any alcoholic beverage unless
the place of business of such person is located in the use district, as established by present and future zoning
regulations of the city, in which the manufacture, distribution or sale of such alcoholic beverage is permitted.
(1976 Code, sec. 5-14; 1998 Code, sec. 10-14)
Sec. 4-16. Sale of beer for off-premises consumption.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer for off-premises consumption except in original packages. (1976
Code, sec. 5-15; 1998 Code, sec. 10-15)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/554
Sec. 4-17. Submission of copies of records by businesses and private clubs.
(a) All establishments desiring to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city, including private
clubs, shall submit to the city secretary sworn copies of all state sales tax returns and state alcoholic beverage
tax returns filed by the establishment, together with a form authorizing the city to verify the returns with
appropriate state agencies.
(b) The applicant shall also supply receipts from suppliers upon request of the city secretary. Licensees shall
supply such copies with applications for renewal. Private clubs shall supply such copies on or before January
15 of each year. Such records shall cover the most recent calendar year.
(1976 Code, sec. 5-16; 1998 Code, sec. 10-16)
CHAPTER 6
AMUSEMENTS AND ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 6-1–6-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Sec. 6-19. Purpose and intent.
(a) It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this chapter to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment.
(b) It is the intent of the city council that the locational regulations of section 6-31 are promulgated pursuant
to Texas Local Government Code chs. 51, 54, 215, 217, and 243, and the city Charter.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-1; 1998 Code, sec. 110-1)
Sec. 6-20. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slugoperated
or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which as one of its principal business
purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or
describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified
sexual activities.
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/554
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
(2) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities; or
(3) Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is
less than ten hours.
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or his designated agent.
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for
another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish
escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration.
Establishment means and includes any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business;
(3) The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented
business; or
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued,
as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified
anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
Nudity or state of nudity means:
(1) The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female
breast; or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/554
(2) A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female
genitals or areola of the female breast.
Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be
found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an
owner, part owner or licensee of the business.
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
Residential district means a single-family, duplex, townhouse, multifamily or mobile home zoning district as
defined in chapter 64, zoning.
Residential use means a single-family, duplex, multifamily or mobile home use as defined in chapter 64, zoning.
Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae
of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business
purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
(1) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
(2) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or
more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female
breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or
sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections
(1) through (3) of this definition.
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the
business by more than 25 percent.
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by
sale, exchange or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of
the person possessing the ownership or control.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-2; 1998 Code, sec. 110-2)
Sec. 6-21. Classification.
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/554
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(3) Adult cabarets;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult motion picture theaters;
(6) Adult theaters;
(7) Escort agencies;
(8) Nude model studios; and
(9) Sexual encounter centers.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-3; 1998 Code, sec. 110-3)
Sec. 6-22. License required; application.
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued
by the city for the particular type of business.
(b) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must
be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of
total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches. An applicant who must comply with section 6-37 shall submit a diagram
meeting the requirements of section 6-37
(c) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter.
(d) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the
application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other
than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the
application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 6-23 and each applicant
shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
(e) The fact that a person possesses a valid theater license, dancehall license, or public house of
amusement license does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business
license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a theater license, public house of
amusement license or dancehall license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter as
well as the requirements and provisions of other chapters of this Code when applicable.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-4; 1998 Code, sec. 110-4)
Sec. 6-23. Issuance of license.
(a) The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license by the assessor and collector of taxes to an
applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one or more of the
following to be true:
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age.
(2) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a
sexually oriented business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license
or bas falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/554
(4) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this
chapter, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within
two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect.
(5) The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
(6) An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity
within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually
oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law
enforcement officers.
(7) An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with
section 6-25, 6-30, 6-31, 6-33, 6-34, 6-35, 6-36, 6-37, or 6-38
(8) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime:
a. Involving:
1. Any of the following offenses as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 43:
(i) Prostitution;
(ii) Promotion of prostitution;
(iii) Aggravated promotion of prostitution;
(iv) Compelling prostitution;
(v) Obscenity;
(vi) Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor;
(vii) Sexual performance by a child;
(viii) Possession of child pornography.
2. Any of the following offenses as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 21:
(i) Public lewdness;
(ii) Indecent exposure;
(iii) Indecency with a child.
3. Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Texas Penal Code ch.
22;
4. Incest, solicitation of child or harboring a runaway child as described in Texas Penal
Code ch. 25; or
5. Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the offenses set forth in
this subsection (a)(8)a;
b. For which less than:
1. Two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of
a misdemeanor offense;
2. Five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense; or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/554
3. Five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are
of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24-month period.
(b) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or
the applicant's spouse.
(c) An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in
subsection (a)(8) of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period
required by subsection (a)(8)b of this section has elapsed.
(d) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any
time.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-5; 1998 Code, sec. 110-5)
Sec. 6-24. Fees.
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be as established by the city council, from time to
time. (1976 Code, sec. 26½-6; 1998 Code, sec. 110-6)
Sec. 6-25. Inspection.
(a) An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire
department, housing and neighborhood services department, and building inspection division to inspect the
premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is
occupied or open for business.
(b) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he
refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it
is occupied or open for business.
(c) The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by
a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-7; 1998 Code, sec. 110-7)
Sec. 6-26. Expiration of license.
Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application
as provided in section 6-22. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date,
and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-8; 1998 Code, sec. 110-8)
Sec. 6-27. Suspension of license.
The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee
or an employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with section 6-25, 6-30, 6-31, 6-33, 6-34, 6-35, 6-36, 6-37 or 6-
38
(2) Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business
premises.
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by
this chapter.
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/554
(5) Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and
law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-9; 1998 Code, sec. 110-9)
Sec. 6-28. Revocation of license.
(a) The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 6-27 occurs and the license
has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
(b) The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police
during the application process;
(2) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises;
(3) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period
of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
(5) A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 6-23(a)(8)a for which the time
period required in section 6-23(a)(8)b has not elapsed;
(6) On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons committed an
offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 6-23(a)(8)a, for which a
conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented
business at the time the offenses were committed;
(7) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term “sexual
contact” shall have the same meaning as defined in Texas Penal Code sec. 21.01; or
(8) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or
sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
(c) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
(d) Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license
unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view.
(e) When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee
shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis of the revocation has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(S) of this section, an applicant
may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 6-23 (a)(8)b
has elapsed.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-10; 1998 Code, sec. 110-1)
Sec. 6-29. Appeal.
If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the chief of police shall
send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the
right to an appeal. Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the licensee whose
application for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right
to appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days after the
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/554
receipt of notice of the decision of the chief of police. The licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court. (1976
Code, sec. 26½-11; 1998 Code, sec. 110-11)
Sec. 6-30. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business
under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. (1976 Code,
sec. 26½-12; 1998 Code, sec. 110-12)
Sec. 6-31. Location of sexually oriented businesses.
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within
1,000 feet of:
(1) A church;
(2) A public or private elementary or secondary school;
(3) A boundary of a residential district as defined and located in the city's comprehensive zoning
ordinance and map;
(4) A public park; or
(5) The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this chapter.
(b) A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial
enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another
sexually oriented business.
(c) A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of
more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of
floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another
sexually oriented business.
(d) For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of
the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a
church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public
park. residential district or residential lot.
(e) For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior
wall of the structure in which each business is located.
(f) A sexually oriented business law fully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use
by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public
or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or residential lot within 1,000 feet of
the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply
when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-13; 1998 Code, sec. 110-13)
Sec. 6-32. Exemption from location restrictions.
(a) If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually
oriented business establishment is in violation of section 6-1, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar
days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for an exemption from the
locational restrictions of section 6-31
(b) If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the ten-day limit, the zoning board of adjustment
shall consider the request. A date for the hearing shall be set within 60 days from the date the written request is
received.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/554
(c) The zoning board of adjustment may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions
of section 6-31 if it makes the following findings:
(1) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on
nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare;
(2) The granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this chapter;
(3) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property
values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development or urban blight;
(4) The location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any
program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or
restoration; and
(5) All other applicable provisions of this chapter will be observed.
(d) The board shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall
result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the
evidence. The decision of the zoning board of adjustment is final.
(e) If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the board's action.
Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions
of section 6-31 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
(f) If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least 12 months
have elapsed since the date of the board's action.
(g) The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this chapter other
than the locational restrictions of section 6-31
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-14; 1998 Code, sec. 110-14)
Sec. 6-33. Additional regulations for escort agencies.
(a) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(b) A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under
the age of 18.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-15; 1998 Code, sec. 110-15)
Sec. 6-34. Additional regulations for nude model studios.
(a) A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(b) A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the
premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18
years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(c) A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a
state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
(d) A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises,
except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-16; 1998 Code, sec. 110-16)
Sec. 6-35. Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters.
(a) The requirements and provisions of this chapter remain applicable to adult theaters and adult motion
picture theaters.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/554
(b) A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 to appear in a state of
nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
(c) A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or
on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (b) and (c) of this section if the person under 18 years
was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-17; 1998 Code, sec. 110-17)
Sec. 6-36. Additional regulations for adult motels.
(a) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and
vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that
the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
(b) A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a
sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same
sleeping room again.
(c) For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term “rent” or “subrent” means the act of permitting a
room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-18; 1998 Code, sec. 110-18)
Sec. 6-37. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos.
(a) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel,
which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film,
videocassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be
accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or
more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any
portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed
11 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or
to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and
certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the
prior approval of the chief of police or designee.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee
is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If
the premises have two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/554
manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and
employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this
section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at
all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access
to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section.
(7) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 1.0
footcandle as measured at the floor level.
(8) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and
employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at
all times that any patron is present in the premises.
(b) A person having a duty under subsection (a) of this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to
fulfill that duty.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-19; 1998 Code, sec. 110-19)
Sec. 6-38. Display of sexually explicit material to minors.
(a) A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 17 years,
he displays a book. pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film or videocassette, the cover of which depicts, in a
manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion
for commercial gain, any of the following:
(1) Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy;
(2) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts;
(3) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the
female breast below the top of the areola; or
(4) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered.
(b) In this section, the term “display” means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining
assistance from an employee of the business establishment:
(1) It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or
(2) The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-20; 1998 Code, sec. 110-20)
Sec. 6-39. Enforcement.
(a) Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating section 6-31, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00.
(b) If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then
violation of section 6-22(a) or 6-31 is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor.
(c) Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating a provision of this chapter other
than section 6-31, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under section 6-22(a), 6-31 or 6-34(d) that a person appearing in a state of
nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/554
(1) By a proprietary school licensed by the state, or a college, junior college or university,
supported entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
a. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
b. Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in
advance of the class; and
c. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(e) It is a defense to prosecution under section 6-22(a) or 6-31 that each item of descriptive, printed, film or
video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value.
(1976 Code, sec. 26½-21; 1998 Code, sec. 110-21)
CHAPTER 8
ANIMAL CONTROL*
Sec. 8-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter a word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to
females and to firms, partnerships, associations, and corporations as well as to males. For the purposes of this
chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words used herein shall be interpreted to read as follows; and any
words not herein defined shall be construed in the context used and by ordinary interpretation, and not as a
word of art:
Abandon shall mean to dump, desert, or leave any animal on public or private property with the intent of
terminating any further responsibility for said animal; and shall also mean failing to timely redeem any animal
impounded or quarantined by the city, as specified herein.
Abused shall mean the intentional wounding, maiming, trapping, beating, crippling, starving, or torturing by any
means or lack of necessary immediate medical care or failure to give food or water when there is a duty to do
so.
Adequate/proper shelter shall mean a shelter for a dog that shall effectively protect the animal from any form of
cold, overheating, inclement weather and direct effects of wind, rain, snow, ice or the sun. By way of example,
and not limitation, a shelter may consist of a three sided structure, with a roof. The shelter shall provide shade
during hot weather months with provisions for cooling the animal when temperatures exceed 90° Fahrenheit.
During temperatures 50° Fahrenheit or lower auxiliary heat or clean, dry bedding material shall be provided for
insulation against the cold.
Animal shall mean any living creature classified as a member of the animal kingdom including, but not limited
to, birds, fish, fowl, mammals and reptiles, but specifically excluding human beings.
Animal control officer (ACO) shall mean the person or persons designated by the city to represent and act for
the city in the impoundment of animals, the controlling of stray animals, and all other matters as otherwise
required by this chapter; or shall mean city code compliance officer, code enforcement officer, police officers or
other authorized representatives or contractors delegated by agreement to be responsible for animal control
services.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/554
Animal fighting paraphernalia shall mean equipment that is used for animal fighting purposes which includes,
but is not limited to, instruments designed to be attached to the leg of a bird, such as a knife, gaff, or other
sharp instrument, or items used to train and condition animals to fight, such as hanging devices or “bite sticks.”
Animal services shall mean the office of the animal control officer of the city.
Animal service facility means a facility operated, controlled or contracted with the city, or its designated
contractor, for the purpose of impounding, confining, safekeeping, controlling or caring for animals held under,
and consistent with the authority of this chapter, or an establishment designated or contracted by the city for the
keeping of said animals.
At large shall mean:
(1) Off premises. Any animal:
a. Which is not under immediate, effective control of a person by means of a cage, leash,
physical restraint, or when such animal fails to respond to the voice command or other audible
command of the person immediately upon issuance of said command, and is, at all times,
within the visible presence of said person and not more than ten (10) feet from said person.
b. Which, even when in the visible presence of the owner, or under physical restraint, as
defined herein, enters onto the private property of another person, without that property
owner's consent.
(2) On premises. Any animal not confined on the premises of the owner by a substantial fence of
sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal from escaping therefrom, or secured on the
premises by a metal chain or leash sufficient in strength to prevent the animal from escaping from
the premises, and so arranged that the animal will remain upon the premises and not come any
closer than six (6) feet to a public walkway or sidewalk when the restraint leash is stretched to full
length.
Bee shall mean any stage of the common domestic honeybee (Apis mellifera).
Bodily injury shall mean physical pain, illness or any impairment of physical condition.
Breeder shall mean a person who breeds dogs or cats and transfers possession of more than two (2) litters in a
twelve (12) month period.
Cat shall mean a domesticated animal that is a member of the feline family (Felis domesticus).
City shall mean the City of Forest Hill, Texas, Tarrant County, Texas.
Collar shall mean any collar constructed of nylon, leather, or similar material, specifically designed to be used
for a dog.
Colony shall mean a hive or apiary and its equipment and appurtenances including bees, combs, honey, pollen
and brood.
Conviction means a finding of guilty after a trial; a plea of guilty; a finding of deferred adjudication or disposition;
or a plea of no contest.
Court shall mean the municipal court of the City of Forest Hill, Tarrant County, Texas.
Cruel or inhumane treatment shall mean beating or torturing an animal, cruelly confining or transporting,
seriously over loading, seriously over working, or abusing an animal.
Dangerous animal shall mean any animal, including a dog, which has been:
(1) Determined to be dangerous as set forth herein by the ACO or an appropriate court;
(2) Which demonstrates behavior and/or possesses the vicious propensity to inflict serious bodily
injury or death upon human beings and constitutes a danger to human life or domestic animals;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/554
(3) Any animal certified by a doctor of veterinary medicine, licensed in the State of Texas, after
observation thereof, as posing a danger to human beings or animals;
(4) Any animal that commits an unprovoked attack upon a person or animal that causes bodily
injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept that was
reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving that enclosure on its own;
(5) Any animal that commits an unprovoked act that causes a person to reasonably believe that
the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to that person;
(6) Has been declared a dangerous animal previously by the ACO.
Direct physical control shall mean outside with the dog and near enough to the dog to exercise physical control
over the dog in the event it should become necessary to do so to protect the dog, a human, or another animal
from harm.
Dog shall mean a domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family (canis amilaris).
Domestic animal shall mean any animal whose physiology has been determined or manipulated through
selective breeding, and which does not occur naturally in the wild, and which may be vaccinated against rabies
with an approved rabies vaccine, and which has an established rabies quarantine observation period.
Enclosure shall mean any structure or device used to immediately restrict any animal or animals to a limited
amount of space, such as a fence, room, pen, run, cage, compartment, or hutch.
Exotic animal shall mean any non-domesticated animal, other than livestock, that is native to a foreign country
or of foreign origin or character, is not native to the United States, or was introduced from abroad. This term
specifically includes, but is not limited to, animals such as lions, tigers, jackals, dingoes, leopards, elephants,
pandas, camels, antelope, anteaters, kangaroos, chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, water buffalo, and species
of foreign domestic livestock requiring state or federal permits.
Fowl shall mean a bird of any kind, including but not limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, guineas, pigeons,
roosters, turkeys, and pheasants.
Gender shall mean a word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to
firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as, to males.
Guard dog shall mean a dog that has received protection or guard dog training and used by law enforcement,
private security, or in protective functions where the dog is responsive to control by its owner or handler and
used only for protective functions, irrespective of its status as a personal pet of its owner or handler.
Guide dog shall mean a dog that is trained to assist a handicapped person.
Harboring shall mean the act of keeping and caring for an animal or providing premises to which the animal
returns for feed, shelter, or care for a period of three consecutive days. This term shall not include the feeding
of wildlife or providing assistance in an emergency to an injured or ill animal or providing care on a temporary or
one-time basis so long as such activity is not a nuisance to others.
Immediate effective control shall mean:
(1) An animal which is under the power or restraint of a person by a means of cage, leash, or
physical restraint. For the purposes of this chapter, an animal is not under immediate effective
control of a person when it is not restrained by means of a leash or chain of sufficient strength and
not more than six (6) feet in length to control the actions of such animal while off the owner's
property.
(2) When such animal responds to the voice command of the person immediately upon issuance
of said command, and is at all times, within the visible presence of said person and not more than
ten (10) feet from said person. It shall be prima facie evidence for the purposes of this chapter that
the animal is at large when the animal is not in the visible presence of the owner or fails to response
immediately to a verbal command.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/554
Inhumane treatment of animals shall mean any treatment of an animal prohibited by section 42.09 of the Texas
Penal Code, chapters 821, 822 or 826 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, or by any other
provision of law including federal, state and local laws, ordinances, or rules.
Kennel shall mean any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether operated separately
or in connection with another business or establishment, that keeps, boards, and/or trains dogs and/or cats.
Kennels must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning and land use
regulations of the city.
Livestock shall mean any horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, swine, ostriches, emus, or rheas. Small
livestock shall include but not be limited to all types of domesticated swine, sheep, and goats. Large livestock
shall include but not be limited to horses and any member of the domesticated horse family, including but not
limited to mules, donkeys, llamas, alpacas, ponies; all types and varieties of cattle; ostriches, emus, and rheas.
Multiple pet owner shall mean an individual who desires to keep more than two (2) but not more than four (4)
dogs or cats or combination of dogs and cats as personal pets.
Neglected shall mean without sufficient food, shelter, water, or without appropriate veterinary care and
treatment to maintain health, or heavily infested with parasites.
Nuisance animal shall mean any wild or feral animal found on a person's property that potentially could be a
threat to personal property, safety, or health.
Owner shall mean any person, partnership, corporation, or association that harbors, shelters, owns, maintains,
feeds, controls, manages, possesses or has whole or part interest in any animal. The occupant, owner or head
of a household of any premises where an animal remains for seventy-two (72) hours or more shall be
presumed to be the owner of such animal for the purpose of this chapter. This presumption is rebuttable and
shall have the effects and consequences as set forth in section 2.05 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended.
Should a person under the age of seventeen (17) years of age own an animal subject to the provisions of this
chapter, the head of the household of which such person under the age of seventeen (17) years of age is a
member shall be the person responsible for the animal under this chapter. Such household head may himself
be under the age of seventeen (17) and therefore subject to prosecution under this chapter. There may be more
than one (1) person responsible for an animal.
Person shall mean a natural individual, firm, corporation, or other legal entity.
Pet shall mean any animal normally kept for pleasure rather than utility.
Pet store shall mean any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether operated
separately or in connection with another business or establishment that buys and sells dogs, cats, and/or other
species of pets for profit. Pet stores or shops must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with
all applicable zoning and land use regulations of the city.
Properly fitted shall mean, with respect to a collar, a collar that measures the circumference of a dog's neck
plus at least one inch.
Public auction shall mean any place or facility where animals are sold to the highest bidder. This definition does
not apply to individual sales of animals by private owners to other private owners.
Public nuisance shall mean the following:
(1) An owner's failure to control, restrain or otherwise allow, either by conduct or condition, any
animal to:
a. Engage in conduct which establishes such animal as a “dangerous animal;” or
b. Be “at large” as defined herein; or
c. Cause a disturbance by excessive, continuous, or untimely barking, howling, crowing, or
otherwise make excessive noise near the private residence of another; or continual barking,
howling, whining, crowing, or other audible noise, in excess of fifteen (15) minutes, even if in
sporadic bursts, shall be prima facie evidence that the same constitutes a nuisance; or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/554
d. Produce maggots, flies, odors or unclean conditions sufficient to annoy adjacent property
owners or residents; or
e. Chase vehicles or molest, attack, or interfere with other animals or persons on public
property; or
f. Damage, soil, defile, or defecate on private property other than the owner's property or on
public walks or recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly
disposed of by the owner; or
g. Allow such fecal matter or other animal waste to accumulate to such a degree as to cause
unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions.
(2) Any animal normally found in the wild that has entered onto any public or private property and
by its presence is committing a threat to public health and safety or is generally interrupting the
tranquility of the location.
Restraint shall mean to be secured by a leash, tether, lead, cord, chain, rope, or other device six (6) feet or less
in length; or by electronic wires, probes, or other similar device; or secured within a kennel or pen, or secured
within the fenced real property limits of its owner, and may not come any closer than six (6) feet to a public
walkway or sidewalk when the restraint lead is stretched to full length; or a device that attaches a dog to a
stationary object or trolley system.
Secure enclosure shall mean an animal housing enclosure that is located inside a separate fenced area. The
enclosure must be equipped with a lock and must prevent the entry of the general public, including children. It
must prevent the escape or release of an animal. It must have a concrete floor or have the sides buried not less
than two (2) feet into the ground to prevent the animal from digging out. It must be located a minimum of five (5)
feet from any fence line that abuts adjacent property or a public area. It must conform with any additional
requirements as established and provided in writing to the owner by the animal services division.
Serious bodily injury shall mean bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death,
serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or
organ. An injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause
a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization
without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment, satisfies this definition. For purposes of
this chapter, serious bodily injury includes but is not limited to injuries for which the injured party seeks
emergency or in-patient treatment irrespective of length of hospital stay.
Stray shall mean an animal that is improperly restrained and that wanders upon a public place, roadway, street,
highway, or the property of another person.
Unprovoked shall mean that the animal was not hit, kicked, pulled, struck, pinched, or squeezed by a person
with an object or part of the person's body, or otherwise teased or tormented in any manner.
Vaccination shall mean the inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine or other medicine that is accepted by
the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that species, and which is administered by a veterinarian,
licensed in the State of Texas, for the purpose of immunizing the animal against rabies or other diseases.
Veterinary hospital or clinic shall mean any establishment that is maintained and operated by a veterinarian,
licensed in the State of Texas, for the diagnosis, treatment or surgery of injuries and diseases to animals.
Wild animal shall mean any animal not normally considered domesticated and which is now or historically has
been found in the wild, or in the wild state, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Reptiles: venomous reptiles, any type of crocodile or alligator; or
(2) Fish: piranha; or
(3) Birds: condors, eagles, hawks, falcons, owls; or
(4) Mammals: ocelots, lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, wolves or wolf hybrids, dingoes,
coyotes and coyote mixes, jackals, weasels, martens, minks, badgers, skunks, raccoons, pandas,
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/554
bears, kangaroos, opossums, sloths, anteaters, armadillos, monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas,
orangutans, porcupines, antelope, deer, fox, elephant, lynx, camels, squirrels; or
(5) Any species of animal illegal to own under federal, state, or local law.
Zoonotic disease shall mean an illness which is of animal origin and usually causes illness to other animals but
which can be transmitted to, and cause illness in humans.
To the extent not otherwise defined herein, reference may be made, for purposes of clarifying definitions, to
state law and/or generally accepted industry publications.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-2. Penalties.
(a) Violations penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and fined as provided in section 8-20 of this chapter or by a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00), unless specific provision for a penalty, or enhancement thereof, is provided herein. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues
to occur.
(b) Mental state. Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, or in state law as adopted, allegation and
evidence of culpable mental state are not required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-3. Enforcement.
(a) The ACO shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, except as may be provided herein.
Enforcement may be by the filing of a complaint in municipal court, by proceedings to enjoin nuisances or in
any other manner authorized by law. An ACO is authorized to issue citations for a violation of this chapter.
(b) If the individual who is to receive the citation is not present, the ACO may send the citation to the alleged
offender by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. If said citation should come back unclaimed,
the citation shall be sent regular mail. If this regular mailing does not come back unclaimed, then service shall
be deemed completed.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-4. Animal care generally.
(a) Care of animals. Animals shall be provided humane care, treated and transported in a humane manner
and not in violation of section 42.09 of the Texas Penal Code, title 10 of the Texas Health and Safety Code as
amended, or any other provision of law, including federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, and rules.
(b) Prohibited actions against animals. A person commits an offense if:
(1) A person fails to provide an animal under his or her care, custody, and/or ownership with
adequate wholesome food and water, proper shelter, protection from inclement weather, and
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; or
(2) A person having charge or care, custody or control of an animal places or confines such
animal, or allows such animal to be placed or confined, in a motor vehicle, trailer or other enclosure
under such conditions, or for such a period of time as to endanger the health of the animal due to
heat, lack of food or water, or such other circumstances as may cause injury or death to the animal;
or
(3) A person treats an animal in an inhumane or cruel manner as defined by section 42.09 of the
Texas Penal Code, as amended, or chapter 821 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended;
or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/554
(4) A person knowingly owns, harbors, trains, sells or offers for sale any animal which is to be
used for the purpose of fighting; or to be trained, tormented, badgered or baited for the purpose of
causing or encouraging said animal to attack human beings or animals when not provoked, except
that this section shall not apply to guard dogs; or
(5) A person mutilates any animal, whether such animal is dead or alive. This subsection does not
apply to medical or veterinary medical research, medical or veterinary medical autopsies, or biology
class use of animals for educational purposes; or
(6) A person causes an animal to fight another animal or person, this shall not be applicable to
police dogs; or
(7) A person other than a licensed veterinarian docks an animal's tail, or crops an animal's ears;
or castrates an animal; provided, however, this section shall not apply to normal livestock operations
occurring within the city; or
(8) A person dyes or colors chicks, ducks, rabbits, reptiles, or bird; or
(9) A person transporting an animal fails to effectively restrain an animal so as to prevent the
animal from leaving or being accidentally thrown from a vehicle during normal operation of the
vehicle; or fails to effectively restrain an animal so as to prevent infliction of bodily harm to
passersby. Provided, however, the provisions herein shall not prohibit a person from transporting an
effectively confined or tethered dog(s) in the open bed of a pickup truck; or
(10) A person is in control of a motor vehicle which strikes a domestic animal or livestock within
the territorial limits of the city and fails to report the accident to the ACO as soon as practical; or
(11) A person abandons any animal, including the abandonment of an impounded animal at the
animal services facility with the intent to readopt the animal to avoid impoundment fees.
(12) A person cruelly confines an animal in a manner that prevents the animal from being able to
stand to their full height, stretch out, turn around and lie down and make normal postural
adjustments comfortably for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or more.
(13) A person confines an animal in such a way that the animal is forced to stand and/or lay within
its own feces, standing water, or other unsanitary conditions.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-5. Unlawful restraint of dogs or animals.
(a) A person ties or tethers a dog or horse in a manner that prevents the animal from access to adequate
shelter, food, and water.
(b) A person ties or tethers a dog or horse in such a manner that the animal could become entangled or
injured.
(c) An owner may not leave a dog outside and unattended by use of a restraint that unreasonably limits the
dog's movement:
(1) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (Central Standard Time);
(2) Within 500 feet of the premises of a school;
(3) In the case of extreme weather conditions, which include:
a. The actual or effective outdoor temperature is below 32 degrees Fahrenheit;
b. A heat advisory has been issued by a local or state authority or jurisdiction; or
c. A hurricane, tropical storm, or tornado warning has been issued for the jurisdiction by the
National Weather Service.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/554
(d) In this section, a restraint unreasonably limits a dog's movement if the restraint:
(1) Uses a collar that is pinch-type, prong-type, or choke-type or that is not properly fitted to the
dog;
(2) Is a length shorter than the greater of:
a. Five (5) times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip of the dog's nose to the
base of the dog's tail; or
b. Ten (10) feet;
(3) Is in an unsafe condition; or
(4) Causes injury to the dog.
(e) Exceptions to the regulations in this section if the following is true:
(1) A dog is restrained to a running line, pulley, or trolley system and that is not restrained to the
running line, pulley, or trolley system by means of a pinch-type, prong-type, choke type, or improperly
fitted collar.
(2) A dog is restrained for a reasonable period, not to exceed three (3) hours in a 24-hour period,
and no longer than is necessary for the owner to complete a temporary task that requires the dog to
be restrained.
(3) A dog is restrained while the owner is engaged in, or actively training for, an activity that is
conducted pursuant to a valid license issued by this state if the activity for which the license is
issued is associated with the use or presence of a dog.
(4) A dog is restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly related to the business of
shepherding or herding cattle or livestock.
(5) A dog is restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly related to the business of
cultivating agricultural products, if the restraint is reasonably necessary for the safety of the dog.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-6. Rabies control.
(a) State regulations adopted. The city hereby adopts the Rabies Control Act of 1981 (Texas Health and
Safety Code, chapter 826) as amended, and the standards established by the Texas Board of Health as
minimum standards for rabies control and quarantine provisions with the city. In addition thereto, all of the
rabies control provisions of this chapter, which are adopted pursuant to sections 826.015 and 826.033 of the
Texas Health and Safety Code, shall have application within the city. A copy of the statute may be obtained
from the ACO.
(b) Designation of local rabies control authority. The ACO shall act as the local rabies control authority for the
purposes of this section and enforcing the provisions of chapter 826 of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-7. Annual identification and registration.
(a) Annual animal identification/registration/vaccination.
(1) The ACO shall annually register and issue registration tags, to any person living in the city who
owns or possesses a dog or cat requiring vaccination to prevent rabies. Said issuance will be for the
purpose of owner identification in cases where a dog or cat has been bitten, scratched, attacked or
injured a human being or another animal and in cases where the dog or [cat] might become
impounded, lost, or injured.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/554
(2) Application for the registration tag must be made annually, by the owner in person and shall be
accompanied by proof that the dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies and the vaccination
certificate is current and shall not be ready to expire within the upcoming six months or as directed
by a veterinarian. If there is a change in ownership, the new owner shall have the registration tag
transferred to his or her name within ten (10) days after taking possession of the dog or cat. There
shall be no charge for transfer of registration to the new owner. Application for such transfer shall be
made to animal services in person.
(3) No owner shall have within the city any dog or cat four (4) months of age or older unless such
dog or cat is currently registered with animal services. A current metal registration tag issued by
animal services must be affixed to a collar or harness that must be worn by the dog or cat at all
times. No dog or cat shall be registered until it has a current vaccination.
(4) Application for initial issuance or renewal of each registration must be made by the owner in
person and must be accompanied by a fee of $10.00 for each un-spayed or unneutered animal. If
the animal has been sterilized by a licensed veterinarian and proof is submitted to animal services
then a fee of $5.00 will be charged.
(5) Registration certificates shall be renewed annually. The registration period will be from
January 1 to December 31. Certificates for the new period shall be available for sale at least thirty
(30) days in advance and shall constitute a valid registration upon issuance.
(6) Registration and/or vaccination tags shall be valid for only the animal for which the certificate
or tag was originally issued.
(7) Fee exempt registrations may be issued for the following:
(a) Police or sheriff's department dogs;
(b) Animals specially trained or equipped to help a “handicapped person,” as defined in the
V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code, section 121.002(4).
(8) Registration tags shall be securely attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat and worn
at all times by the animal. Tags will be valid only for the animal for which the tag was originally
issued.
(9) Owners claiming any impounded dog or cat, four (4) months of age or older, will be required to
provide the city with proof of current rabies vaccination. If no proof is presented then said dog or cat
must be vaccinated against rabies and the owner must provide proof of said vaccination to the ACO
and register said animal within three (3) business days of the release of the animal.
(10) Animals classified as a dangerous animal shall obtain an additional registration for keeping
an animal once it has been deemed dangerous according to section 8-10 of this chapter and said
registration shall be accompanied by an additional annual fee of $100.00.
(b) Vaccination and license identification. An registration tag may not be issued for an animal that the owner
cannot show current proof that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies.
(c) Wild and/or exotic animals. The ACO shall register and issue wild or exotic animal permits to only those
exemptions noted in sections 8-12(b) and (c) herein. Said issuance will be for the purpose of owner
identification in cases where an animal has bitten, scratched, attacked or injured a human being or another
animal and in cases where the animal might become impounded, lost, or injured. Said annual permit application
shall be accompanied by a fee of $10.00. In cases where international, federal, or state licenses and/or permits
are required, the owner of the wild or exotic animal shall also obtain a wild or exotic animal permit from the
ACO. No permits will be issued for the purpose of keeping any wild or prohibited animal as a pet.
(d) Guard dogs. Each dog which has received protection or guard dog training and is kept in the city must be
registered as a guard dog with animal services annually in addition to the annual dog registration. It shall be a
violation of this chapter for any person who keeps or allows any such dog to be kept upon their premises to fail
or refuse to present proof to the ACO, upon request, that such dog has been registered as a guard dog within
the preceding twelve (12) month period. The ACO shall issue a permit to each qualifying dog. Such permit and
tag shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months and are not transferable to any other animal. The
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/554
registration tag shall be prominently displayed on the dog at all times by securely affixing it to a properly fitted
collar, harness, or similar device worn by the dog. The tag and permit can only be issued provided the owner
first presents proof that the dog is currently vaccinated against rabies. No fee shall be required for the issuance
of guard dog permit as provided herein.
(e) Livestock. For each head of livestock currently residing in residentially zoned districts, the owner shall
register their animal annually and a picture shall be obtained of said animal by the ACO. Should the animal be
sold or shall pass away then no other head of livestock may be allowed to replace said animal within
residentially zoned properties as required by section 8-13 of this chapter, provided that the number of livestock
shall not exceed the requirements of section 8-13(a)(1)b. of this section. Such annual registration shall be
accompanied by a fee of $15.00 per head of livestock.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-8. Impoundment, redemption, adoption, and disposition of animals.
(a) Impoundment generally.
(1) The ACO is hereby authorized to capture and impound any animal upon having probable
cause to believe said animal to be in violation of any provision of this chapter or state law which
authorized or requires the animal's capture and impoundment, and in so doing, to enter upon any
fenced or unfenced lot, tract, or parcel of land when deemed necessary for the protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare, as allowed by law. As a matter of policy, the ACO shall not enter
upon private property to capture and/or impound any animal known to belong to the owner of said
property without probable cause. The ACO may enter upon the property, as allowed by law, to
capture an animal if it is believed that said animal poses a threat or danger to property, human
beings, or other animals.
(2) Additionally, it is the responsibility of the ACO to accept any animal delivered to the ACO
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, except those animals that are voluntarily released by
their owners. For an animal to be voluntarily released, the owner must sign an owner release form
as well as pay a $75.00 voluntary release fee. In addition, it is the duty of the ACO to capture and
impound wild or non-domesticated animals in response to citizen's complaints of public nuisance or
to control feral populations.
(b) Duties of the animal control officer.
(1) If, by registration tag, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the ACO will, as
soon as practical, notify the owner either in person or by telephone of said impoundment. If the
animal is locally owned within the city and telephone contact can or cannot be made, the ACO will
post a notice on the front door of the owner's residence indicating that the animal has been
impounded.
(2) All impounded animals shall be kept for not less than three (3) days, unless the animal is
reclaimed earlier by the owner under acceptable conditions. However, no impoundment period is
required for an animal voluntarily delivered and released to the ACO by its owner.
(3) After the expiration of any required impoundment period, the impounded animal shall be
released to the animal services facility. At that time, the animal shall be disposed of by adoption from
the facility, by offering it to a local animal humane group for adoption, or by humanely destroying the
animal.
(4) Any animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, which is in great pain and suffering due to injury
and probably will not recover, or which appears to have rabies, and/or which is at large and is posing
an imminent danger to human beings or to other animals, may be humanely destroyed by the ACO
or an agent at the animal services facility.
(5) Any owner or person redeeming an unsterilized animal from the animal services facility for the
fourth (4th) time within any twelve (12) consecutive month period must have the animal sterilized
within thirty (30) days of the date the animal is released from the facility. Proof of said sterilization
must be provided to the ACO within ten (10) days of compliance. Failure to provide said proof shall
constitute a violation of these regulations and will be subject to a citation.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/554
(c) State laws for cat and dog sterilization adopted. The city shall comply with all sterilization laws as set forth
in chapter 828, of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended. A copy of the statute may be obtained from
the ACO.
(d) Adoption.
(1) A person may adopt a dog and/or cat from the animal services facility that has not been
sterilized. The adopting person must sign an agreement to have the animal sterilized within a given
period of time determined by an ACO. Written confirmation of such sterilization must be provided to
ACO within seven (7) days of the given date. The new owner shall be solely and legally responsible
for compliance with all requirements specified in the adoption receipt and sterilization agreement
executed at the time the animal is adopted.
a. The ACO or an agent of the animal services facility may establish an adoption receipt and
sterilization agreement for use in the adoption process and violation of any term of such
agreement shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
b. Any person who fails to sterilize the animal set forth in the sterilization agreement is guilty
of a misdemeanor offense and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not less than $200.00
and not to exceed $500.00.
(2) The ACO may refuse to allow a person to adopt an animal, including but not limited to a
person to whom he has reason to believe:
a. Would not have proper facilities to contain or care for the animal.
b. Wants the animal for the purpose of resale or for purposes other than pet ownership.
c. There are reasonable grounds to believe the animal would be subjected to abandonment
or cruelty.
d. The person is under the age of eighteen (18).
e. That the purpose of the adoption is to avoid, or assist in the avoidance of, the
enforcement of any provision of this chapter.
(3) The person adopting the animal shall pay all applicable costs of adoption as set forth in
section 8-21(h) herein.
(4) An ACO shall be the sole judge as to whether an animal is suitable to offer for adoption;
however, a decision to offer a particular animal for adoption shall not constitute any warranty,
expressed or implied, of the health, temperament, or age of the animal.
(5) The city and its agents, employees and officers shall have no liability associated with the
adoption or impoundment of any animal.
(e) Reclamation of adopted animals.
(1) If the ACO does not receive written confirmation of sterilization or other written disposition
regarding an adopted animal, as required in this chapter, after the seventh (7th) day after the
sterilization agreement executed at the time the animal was adopted, the ACO may promptly reclaim
the animal from the new owner, or require the new owner to return the animal to animal services
facility, or impose any other penalty as provided in this chapter.
(2) A person shall not be entitled to any refund, reimbursement, or other compensation regarding
an animal reclaimed or returned under this section.
(f) Requirements to redeem an impounded animal.
(1) An animal which has been impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be redeemed
by its owner or the lawful representative, provided that the redeeming person:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/554
a. Is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
b. Identifies themselves as the owner of the impounded animal or provides proof that he is
the lawful representative of such owner;
c. Presents identification, which verifies his/her identity and date of birth;
d. Properly completes all applicable redemption forms as required; and
e. Pays the applicable redemption fees and charges as prescribed by section 8-21, herein.
(2) The owner of an impounded animal, which is subject to the rabies vaccination requirements of
this chapter, shall be required to provide positive proof that the animal is currently vaccinated against
rabies at the time it is redeemed. If the owner cannot or refuses to provide proof that the animal is
currently vaccinated against rabies at the time of redemption, the owner shall also be required to:
a. Sign an agreement, as prescribed by animal services, and cause the animal to be
vaccinated against rabies within three (3) days. Failure to provide written confirmation of
current rabies vaccinations is a violation of this chapter and subject to a fine.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-9. Interference with impounding officers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, or attempt to prevent, the ACO from capturing or
impounding any animal which may be legally impounded or otherwise interfering with the ACO while carrying
out his or her lawful duties. (Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-10. Dangerous animals.
(a) State law adopted. The city council hereby expressly adopts the regulations and procedures outlined in
the Texas Health and Safety Code, section 822.001, et seq., as amended.
(b) Permit required. No person shall knowingly sell, own, offer for sale, breed, possess, keep, buy or attempt
to buy, or train a dangerous animal within the city unless the owner has received the proper permit(s) pursuant
to this chapter.
(c) Complaints regarding dangerous animals to animal services.
(1) Upon receipt of a written sworn notarized affidavit by any person, charging that a particular
animal is dangerous, the ACO shall investigate the incident within two (2) working days to determine
whether such animal is, in fact, dangerous. If the animal has bitten a human or other animal then the
animal must be held at the animal services facility or at an approved quarantine veterinarian clinic
for the period required by law. Any written sworn notarized affidavit shall contain at least the
following information:
a. Name, address, and telephone number of the complainant and witnesses;
b. Date, time, and location of the incident(s);
c. A complete description of the animal including breed, color, sex, size, etc.;
d. Name, address, and telephone number of the animal's owner, if known, and/or the
premises where the animal is kept;
e. A statement that the animal bit or attacked with as much detail as possible with regard to
the incident and whether medical attention was required; and
f. Any other facts that the complainant believes to be relevant.
(2) The following will apply regarding the investigation pursuant to chapter 822 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code to determine whether an animal shall be declared “dangerous”:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/554
a. The owner of the animal shall deliver the animal to the ACO for impoundment within five
(5) days of the notice that a sworn complaint has been filed.
b. The suspect animal shall be seized by the ACO pursuant to a sworn complaint, and
impounded and if necessary medically examined at the owner's expense if the animal caused
serious bodily injury to a person or other animal requiring medical treatment. An animal
causing serious bodily injury shall be held at an animal services facility pending the outcome of
an investigation and determination as to whether the animal is, in fact, classifiable as
dangerous. Such an investigation to determine if an animal is dangerous shall be conducted
within ten (10) days after receipt of the complaint or seizure of the animal.
c. Notice of the investigation shall be provided by the ACO to the owner of the animal either
in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The complainant in the matter shall also
be notified either in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested of the investigation.
During the investigation all parties shall be given the opportunity to present evidence on the
issue of whether such animal is to be declared dangerous.
(3) Upon conclusion of an investigation to determine if an animal is dangerous, the ACO may find
that the animal is not dangerous. In such case, the animal shall be returned to the owner, provided
the animal has been properly vaccinated and registered, and all impoundment and medical fees
paid.
(4) Should the animal be classified as a dangerous animal, the owner shall comply with one of the
following requirements:
a. Provide for the keeping of the animal as detailed in subsections (e) and (g) of this section
and consistent with state law requirements, as amended; or
b. Humane destruction of the dangerous animal by a person listed in the Texas Health and
Safety Code, section 822.004, as amended.
(5) No animal shall be declared a dangerous animal if the threat, injury, or damage caused by the
animal was the result of a willful trespass upon another's property; or the person injured was
tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or its owner, or was committing or attempting to
commit a crime at the time of injury.
(6) If an animal that has been declared a dangerous animal causes death or serious bodily injury
to a person, the court may order the dangerous animal destroyed by a person listed in the Texas
Health and Safety Code, section 822.004, as amended, and all related expenses will be paid by the
owner.
(7) The owner may permanently remove the dangerous animal from the city limits, upon
compliance with the following conditions:
a. The new owner must comply with local and state regulations for owning a dangerous dog
and acknowledge, by sworn affidavit, that he has been advised that the dog has been deemed
dangerous, is aware of the state law requirements and agrees to be bound by state law
requirements.
b. The name, address, and phone number of location the animal will be kept must be
submitted to the ACO.
c. The ACO shall notify the local authority of the classification of said animal as dangerous.
d. Proof of compliance with the local and state laws from the local authority relating to
dangerous dogs must be provided to the city.
(d) Seizure of dog.
(1) Basis of seizure. The municipal court shall order the seizure of a dog and issue a warrant
authorizing said seizure upon:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/554
a. A sworn complaint that the dog caused the death or serious bodily injury to a person; and
b. Upon a showing of probable cause to believe that the dog caused the death or serious
bodily injury to a person.
The dog is to be seized and impounded until the court orders the disposition of the animal.
(2) Hearing. A hearing is to be set by the court not later than the 10th day after the date on which
the warrant is issued. The court is to give written notice to the concerned parties, the owner or
person from whom the dog was seized and the complainant and any other interested party, including
the city attorney.
(3) Destruction of dog. The dog must be destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused the death
of a person. The dog may be ordered destroyed if the court finds it caused only serious bodily injury
by attacking, biting, or mauling a person. If such findings are not made, the court is to release the
dog to the owner, the person from whom the dog was seized or to any other authorized person.
(4) Exceptions to destruction. Even if the dog caused serious bodily injury to a person by
attacking, biting, or mauling, the court may not order its destruction if it also finds one of the following
to be true:
a. The dog was being used for protection of a person or a person's property and the attack,
bite, or mauling occurred in the enclosure in which the dog was being kept, and:
1. The enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure
on its own and notice was provided of the presence of the dog; and
2. The injured person was at least eight (8) years old, and was trespassing in the
enclosure at the time of the attack, bite, or mauling;
b. The dog was not being used for the protection of a person or a person's property but the
attack, bite, or mauling occurred in the dog's enclosure, and the injured person was at least
eight (8) years old, and was trespassing in the enclosure at the time of the attack, bite, or
mauling;
c. The attack, bite, or mauling occurred during an arrest or other action by a peace officer
while the peace officer was using the dog for law enforcement purposes;
d. The dog was defending a person from an assault or person's property from damage or
theft by the injured person; or
e. The injured person was younger than eight (8) years old and the attack, bite, or mauling
occurred in the dog's enclosure in which the dog was being kept, and the enclosure was
reasonably certain to keep a person younger than eight (8) years old from entering the
enclosure.
(e) Keeping of dangerous animals. Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that the person is the
owner of a dangerous dog, then the person shall:
(1) Register the dangerous dog with the ACO;
(2) Obtain liability insurance or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog
causing bodily injury or death of any person, or for damages to any person's property, resulting from
the keeping of such dangerous animal. Acceptability of such proof of liability insurance coverage
shall be subject to the final review and approval of the city attorney, which coverage shall require
that it may not be cancelled without prior written notification to the city not less than thirty (30) days
prior to cancellation. It shall be unlawful for an owner of any dangerous dog found in the city to fail or
refuse to present proof to an ACO or a designated representative, upon request of current liability
insurance coverage as required under this section;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/554
(3) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash no more than six (6) feet in length and in
the immediate control of the owner, or in a secure pen enclosure as prescribed in this section:
a. All dangerous dogs, if not in a secure pen, shall be securely confined indoors.
b. No dangerous animal may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure
that would allow the animal to exit such building of its own volition. In addition, no dangerous
animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen
windows or screen doors are the only obstacles preventing the animal from exiting the
structure;
(4) Provide to the ACO the name and address of the owner, breed, age, sex, color and any other
identifying marks of said animal; the location where the animal is to be kept if not at the address of
the owner; two (2) color photographs of the dangerous animal, and the aforementioned certificate of
liability insurance;
(5) Provide proof of the required documents necessary to register the animal, and pay the
required registration fee. The ACO shall provide to the owner a registration tag designating the
animal as dangerous. The owner must place the tag on the animal's collar and must ensure that the
animal wears such tag and collar at all times;
(6) Not allow the animal to go outside its pen, cage or enclosure unless the animal is under
physical restraint and securely muzzled. No person shall permit a dangerous animal to be kept
outside its cage, pen, or enclosure on a chain, rope, or other type of leash unless the owner is in
physical control of the chain, rope, or other type of leash. Dangerous animals shall not be leashed to
inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. Signs giving notice of the dangerous animal
shall be prominently displayed so that all persons entering said property are immediately notified a
dangerous animal is being kept at the location; and
(7) Owner shall microchip the dangerous animal, provide the microchip identification number and
proof of insertion of the chip from a licensed veterinarian to animal services.
(f) Failure to comply.
(1) If the owner fails to register and restrain the dangerous dog and/or obtain liability insurance
and/or comply with all other municipal restrictions, regulations or requirements and/or otherwise
deliver the dog to the ACO, said owner shall deliver the dog to the ACO not later than the 30th day
after the owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog. If, upon application, a justice court, county
court, or municipal court finds that the owner failed to comply with subsection (e) of this section, the
court shall order the ACO to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure of the
dog. The ACO shall seize or cause to be seized the dog and provide for impoundment under secure,
humane conditions. The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the city related to the seizure,
acceptance and impoundment of the dog. The owner then has eleven (11) days after the seizure to
comply or the dog must be ordered humanely destroyed. The court can destroy the dog after fifteen
(15) days if the owner cannot be found.
(2) Failure to comply constitutes a misdemeanor, which upon conviction, is punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500.00.
(g) Dangerous animal enclosure. The pen, cage, or enclosure for a dangerous animal must be constructed of
new materials of sufficient strength to prevent the animal's escape, and must have secure sides, a secure top
attached to the sides, and a secure bottom which is either attached to the sides or constructed so that the sides
of the structure are embedded in the ground no less than two (2) feet.
(h) Dangerous dog determination. An owner learns that he is the owner of a dangerous dog when one of the
following events occurs:
(1) Owner knows of an attack as described in the Texas Health and Safety Code section
822.041(2)(A) or (B) and as provided herein;
(2) The dog makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a
place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonable certain to
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/554
prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own;
(3) The dog commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was
being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own
and those acts cause a person to reasonable believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury
to that person;
(4) The owner receives notice that the municipal court has found the dog is dangerous after a
hearing on the matter, either on a report of an attack that caused bodily injury, or after an owner fails
to comply with the requirements of an owner of a dangerous dog; or
(5) The owner is informed by the ACO that the dog is dangerous as determined by the ACO
through investigations and upon sworn statements. The owner may appeal this decision to the
municipal court within fifteen (15) days.
(i) Appeal of dangerous dog determination. Findings of the ACO pertaining to dangerous animals may be
appealed to the city municipal court, county court, or justice court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with
the Health and Safety Code, section 822.0421(b), as amended. An owner may appeal the decision of the ACO
to the magistrate of the municipal court in the same manner as an appeal is made for other criminal cases, but
not later than the 15th day after the owner is notified; however, the animal shall continue to be impounded at
the owner's expense at the designated animal services facility for observation and to protect the health and
safety of the public until a final disposition is reached, or compliance with the requirements for the keeping of a
dangerous dog are satisfied. Appeal from the municipal court determination is the same as any other appeal
from the municipal court.
(j) Culpable mental state. Criminal responsibility for the keeping of a dangerous dog may be established by
intent, knowledge, or recklessness.
(k) Report of dangerous dog to municipal court.
(1) A person may report a dangerous dog incident to the municipal court requiring only the
establishment of bodily injury and not serious bodily injury.
(2) The dog owner must then deliver the dog to the ACO not later than the 5th day from the date
the owner receives notice that the report has been filed.
(3) If the owner fails to deliver the animal, the municipal court can issue a warrant authorizing the
seizure of the dog. The dog will be impounded, at the owner's expense, until the court orders the
disposition of the dog.
(4) Once the court has received an incident report, the court will hold a hearing to determine
whether a dog is dangerous or whether the owner has complied with the requirements for an owner
of a dangerous dog not later then the 10th day after the dog is seized or delivered in accordance
with section 822.0423 [of the Health and Safety Code].
(5) The appeal of the municipal court's decision is in the same manner as provided in the appeal
of other municipal court cases.
(l) Dogs that attack domestic animals.
(1) The ACO, to the extent applicable, shall adhere to procedures relative to dogs that are a
danger to animals, as set forth in subchapter B, section 822.011, et seq. of the Texas Health and
Safety Code.
(2) Dogs deemed to be dangerous due to attacks on domestic animals shall be subject to the
procedures set forth in this section for registration, hearing, determination and/or destruction.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-11. Right of entry/quarantine.
(a) Right of entry; search warrants.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/554
(1) ACOs are hereby authorized to enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract, or parcel of land,
to the extent allowed by law, for the purpose of capturing, impounding, and/or quarantining any
animal upon having probable cause to believe said animal to: have bitten, injured, or otherwise
attacked a human being or other animal; to have, or have been exposed to, rabies or another
communicable disease posing a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare; or otherwise pose a
clear and present danger to human beings or other animals. This authorization is granted due to the
emergency created by the potential rabies hazard or danger of injury to person or other animals, and
in recognition of the likelihood that such animal will otherwise escape capture. As a matter of policy,
ACOs shall not enter upon private property to capture and/or impound any animal known to belong
to the owner of said property without probable cause. An ACO may enter upon a person's property if
it is believed that said animal poses a threat or danger to property, human beings or other animals,
or is in violation of the restraint law.
(2) Furthermore, should the ACO have probable cause to believe an animal has been, or is being,
cruelly treated or has rabies or another communicable disease, the ACO may, pursuant to section
821.022 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, obtain a seizure warrant and impound
such animal, even if it is enclosed on private property.
(3) The ACOs may seek all available remedies allowed by law to gain entry onto property,
including but not limited to search and seizure warrants.
(b) Failure to deliver animal for quarantine. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person
to fail to deliver an animal to the ACO, upon demand for impoundment, when an animal must be quarantined
for legitimate medical reasons or for other health and safety reasons stated in this chapter.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-12. Keeping of wild or exotic animals.
(a) Keeping of wild or exotic animals prohibited. Any species of wild or exotic animal, not considered
domesticated according to generally accepted animal control or veterinary practices, that poses a potentially
serious threat to public health, safety or welfare, or is protected by international, federal, or state regulations or
any other wild animal, including birds of prey capable of or inclined to do serious bodily harm to humans or
other domestic animals or fowl, shall not be kept within the corporate limits of the city.
(b) Exemptions to prohibition to keeping wild or exotic animals. The provisions in subsection (a) above shall
not apply to the keeping of wild or exotic animals if the owner or possessor:
(1) Is a governmental agency or entity; or
(2) Holds a circus, carnival, or zoo license from the State of Texas; or
(3) Is a licensed individual, or a member of a non-profit animal rehabilitation organization holding
a permit from the Texas Department of Parks and Wildlife; or
(4) Is a research institution or an accredited educational institution.
(c) Exceptions to prohibition to keeping wild or exotic animals.
(1) The following wild or exotic animals may be kept within the city, provided certain requirements
are met.
a. Bison, provided they are kept on lots or tracts of land two (2) acres or greater in area;
however, it shall be a defense of prosecution regarding the keeping of bison on lots or tracts of
land less than two (2) acres in area that no more than the number of bison in question were
being kept on the same premises, by the same owner, prior to the adoption of this chapter; and
b. Emus, ostriches, or rheas, pursuant to the provisions of section 8-13 herein; however, it
shall be a defense to prosecution regarding the number of emus, ostriches, or rheas being
kept, that no more than the number of emus, ostriches, or rheas in question were being kept
on the same premises, by the same owner, prior to the adoption of this chapter; and
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/554
c. Exotic birds, provided they are not birds of prey; or
d. Any other animal not previously excluded in subsection (a) of this section and legally
procured from breeders, pet stores, or other persons, businesses or corporations engaged in
the buying, selling, or trading of said animals.
(2) The aforementioned animals listed in this section may be kept within the city provided the
owner or possessor of such animals meets the following requirements:
a. Any area within the city where these animals are kept is greater than two (2) acres and
maintains an agricultural exemption on property taxes.
b. Any enclosure, corral, pen, cage or restrictive area in which these animals are kept is
constructed so as to prevent their escape.
c. All necessary international, federal, state, or local licenses and/or permits have been
obtained, if required.
(d) Impoundment, quarantine, or seizure of wild or exotic animals. The ACO may seize and/or order the
immediate impoundment or quarantine, at the owner's expense, of any wild or exotic animal found in the city
where there is a potentially serious threat to public health, safety, or welfare, and/or if in violation of any
provision of this chapter. The ACO may seek a seizure warrant from a justice court, county court, or municipal
court, which court, upon probable cause, may issue a warrant authorizing a seizure. A hearing shall be
conducted on this disposition of the animal within ten (10) business days of the date of seizure. The owner or
harborer of the animal, to the extent the same is known or can be determined through reasonable due
diligence, shall receive written notice of the hearing, by personal service and/or certified mail, return receipt
requested, as soon as practicable but not later than five (5) days prior to the hearing.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-13. Keeping of livestock.
(a) Keeping of livestock generally.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping of livestock on premises
owned by him or under his control, except in compliance with the following regulations:
a. Livestock shall be only allowed to be kept on lots or tracts of land that have an agricultural
exemption registered with the Tarrant Appraisal District and the overall area of the property
exceeds one (1) acre.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a cow, horse, or other livestock animal on any
premises in which the overall area of the property is less than one (1) acre for each animal
being kept, or to keep more than can be cared for under sanitary conditions and not create a
nuisance, and in no event shall the number of such animals exceed the permitted number of
adults, and their foals or calves up to six months of age. The number of cows, horses, or other
livestock animal permitted shall not exceed one (1) adult or animal over the age of six (6)
months per one (1) acre of property. The person in lawful possession of the premises, as
owner or tenant, may keep thereon livestock belonging to others, but the limitation as to the
number of animals on the premises and the area and distance requirements of this section
shall apply and the keeping of such animals shall not be done as a commercial business in
violation of the zoning ordinance.
c. Any enclosure, pen, corral, or other restrictive area for small livestock shall consist of a
solid wall stretching from the ground to at least four feet in height and does not sway or give
way when tested by the ACO or shall consist of a fence that is sufficient enough to hold said
animal(s).
d. Gates for small livestock enclosures shall be mounted on hinges to a solid wall or fence
post and stretch from the ground to at least four (4) feet above the ground. Such a gate must
connect with another fence post or wall in such a manner that small livestock cannot pass
through it, and the gate itself must be constructed so that there is not an opening in it larger
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/554
than 7-1/2 inches by 12 inches. Such gates must have a latch or chain attached capable of
keeping the gate closed when tested by an ACO.
e. Any enclosure, pen, corral, or restrictive area for large livestock shall consist of a solid
wall stretching from the ground to at least four feet in height and does not sway or give way
when tested by the ACO or shall consist of a fence that is sufficient enough to hold said
animal(s).
f. Gates for large livestock shall be mounted on hinges to a solid wall or fence and stretch
from one foot above the ground to at least four (4) feet above the ground. Such a gate must
connect to another fence post or solid wall in such a manner that large livestock cannot pass
through and the gate itself must be constructed so that there is not an opening in it large
enough for large livestock to pass through. Such gates must have a latch or chain attached
capable of keeping the gate closed when tested by an ACO.
g. When small and large livestock are kept together, the standards for small livestock must
be met.
h. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to keep on premises under his or
its control, with the city limits, any small or large livestock in such a manner that the livestock
will be quartered closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet to any human living quarters or
abutting properties, other than the living quarters of the owner or keeper.
i. Male equines, including but not limited to horses, capable of breeding, will be confined in
such a manner that said animal will not be dangerous to human beings, and all breeding shall
be under the control of the owner or handler.
j. The provisions of section 8-4 herein, relative to animal care in general, shall specifically
apply to the keeping of livestock.
k. It shall be a defense to prosecution regarding the number of livestock being kept, that the
same livestock and no more than the number and kinds of livestock in questions were being
kept on the same premises, by the same owner, prior to the adoption of this chapter.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, at such time as the livestock on the property dies or is
otherwise disposed of by the owner, it may not be replaced until such time as the livestock
meets the requirements set forth herein and then may only be replaced to the extent such
number and kind is in conformance with section 8-7(e).
l. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this
chapter, for any person, other than a veterinarian, to keep any live swine within the city, except
on properties exceeding three (3) acres.
(2) Notwithstanding the forgoing, should another provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances, such
as the zoning ordinance, govern the setback requirement for a specific structure, or related to the
keeping of livestock, said other provision controls. Further, any structure that is in existence on the
date of the passage of this chapter shall constitute a non conforming structure, which shall be
grandfathered until such time as the same is removed with the intent to abandon, enlarge,
change/remodel, or relocate the structure or is otherwise deemed to be a nuisance.
(b) Adequate fences and barriers. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on their premises any livestock
without providing adequate fences or barriers that will prevent such livestock from escaping and/or damaging
neighboring flowers, trees, shrubbery and/or other property located on adjacent property. It shall be a rebuttable
presumption that such fences or barriers are inadequate for the designated purpose, if livestock escapes from
the premises. This presumption is rebuttable and shall have the effects and consequences set forth in section
2.05 of the Texas Penal Code. A fence or barrier may include but is not limited to electronic barriers, whether
underground, electrified wiring, or the erection of any structure of wood or wire, wood and wire, masonry or any
other material, whether it encloses land on all sides or only on one or more sides, which is intended to prevent
the passage of livestock. Such a fence or barrier is the means by which the land is enclosed so as to prevent
the ingress and egress of livestock, and to make complete enclosure that is sufficient, in usual circumstances,
to turn livestock of ordinary habits and disposition.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/554
(c) Barns, stables, and other animal facilities. All barns, stables, and other animal facilities constructed after
the passage of this article shall meet requirements of the city building code and zoning ordinances, as
applicable thereto.
(d) Places livestock prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow any type of livestock upon
any public school ground, public park or municipal grounds within the city other than public right of-ways or
areas designated for such purpose; provided, however the provisions of this section shall not apply to the riding
or showing of horses or other livestock in conjunction with authorized parades, carnivals or other school or civic
sponsored programs or events. At all times, it shall be unlawful for any person to allow said livestock to
defecate on the public right-of-way and not remove such defecation.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-14. Impounding of livestock.
(a) Authority to impound livestock. Any livestock found running at large within the corporate limits of the city
may be impounded by the ACO, the county sheriff's department, or their designee.
(b) Disposal of impounded livestock.
(1) In the event that ownership of the impounded livestock cannot be determined, and after being
held for a period of three (3) days, the livestock may be impounded by the Tarrant County Sheriff's
Department. Should the owner be located within the three (3) day period, the owner shall pay all
required fees set forth in section 8-21, herein. The city, by this provision, intends to comply with any
applicable provision of state law relative to the impoundment of estrays.
(2) If impounded livestock are sold at public auction by Tarrant County Sheriff's Department, the
county holding facility will apply such amount of the proceeds as necessary to satisfy the fees and
costs incurred because of animal impoundment and auction, any fees and costs incurred by the city
for impounding the livestock, restitution for any damage sustained by a property owner for said
livestock having been at-large, upon submission of a notarized affidavit and satisfactory proof of
such damage. Upon payment of all fees, costs and restitution, any remaining monies shall be
returned to the owner of the livestock, upon submission of a sworn, notarized affidavit that the
applicant was in fact the owner of the livestock immediately prior to the sale.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-15. Keeping of fowl, rabbits, and pot-bellied pigs restricted.
(a) Enclosure requirements. Fowl, rabbits, and pot-bellied pigs must be kept indoors, or if outdoors, in a
secure pen or enclosure and owner shall have at least one (1) acre of property. Litter and droppings from these
animals must be collected and disposed of in accordance with section 8-20(b) herein. Provided, however, that
the provisions of this section shall not apply to ducks or other waterfowl inhabiting natural or manmade
watercourses or bodies of water.
(b) Number of rabbits and pot-bellied pigs. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly be in possession
of more than twelve (12) rabbits or three (3) pot-bellied pigs on any premises in the city. It shall be a defense to
prosecution regarding the number of rabbits or pot-bellied pigs being kept, that the same rabbits or pot-bellied
pigs and no more than the number and kinds of rabbits or pot-bellied pigs in question were being kept on the
same premises, by the same owner, prior to the adoption of this chapter. Provided, however, that no rabbit or
pot-bellied pig dies or is otherwise disposed of by the owner, may be replaced to the extent that such
replacement would be in excess of the allowable limitation of animals.
(c) Regulation of fowl.
(1) Chickens and roosters are prohibited within the city limits and are declared to be nuisances
under chapter 217 of the Texas Local Government Code when located in residential districts.
(2) Roosters are banned within the corporate city limits and are declared to be nuisances under
chapter 217 of the Texas Local Government Code when located in residential districts.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/554
(d) Exotic birds. Except for exotic birds not raised, kept, or harbored for commercial purposes, it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to maintain, own, or control any premises within the city limits
where more than an aggregate of twelve (12) fowl are kept or harbored in one enclosure; provided further,
however, that not more than one-forth of the maximum allowable number of such animals may be of the male of
the species.
“One enclosure” as that term is used herein shall be held to mean any and all connected buildings, whether
under one roof or otherwise, and buildings and sheds which may have entrances to the same or adjoining lot or
lots with a gateway or other opening between them.
(e) Wild birds. It shall be unlawful to own or keep ducks, turkeys, geese, or peacocks within the corporate city
limits.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-16. Keeping of bees.
It is unlawful for any person to keep, or allow to be kept, bees in such a manner as to deny the reasonable use
and enjoyment of adjacent property or endanger the personal health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of
the city. Honeybees may be kept if the following conditions are met:
(1) All hives shall be located a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) feet from any inhabited
dwelling other than that of the person keeping such bees; and
(2) No more than three (3) hives shall be allowed on lots or tracts of land less than one (1) acre in
area; and
(3) There is an adequate source of water within twenty (20) feet of all hives; and
(4) Any hive contaminated with or known to have Africanized honey bees (killer bees) shall be
destroyed by a qualified beekeeper at the owner's expense.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-17. Placement and baiting of animal traps.
(a) Animal traps. Only humane live animal traps may be used for capturing animals roaming unrestrained in
the city; provided, however, this does not preclude the use of commercially sold rat and mousetraps to be
utilized, as intended by the manufacturer in accordance with the manufacturer's direction for use, in that
person's residence, accessory structure or commercial establishment.
(b) Certain traps prohibited. The placing or baiting of any steel jawed trap (commonly known as a “bear trap,”
“wolf trap,” or “coyote trap”) within the corporate limits of the city is expressly prohibited. As an exception to this
subsection, governmental agencies and entities shall be permitted to use such traps and equipment necessary
and permitted by state law or regulations.
(c) Traps on public property. Any animal traps found on public property are hereby declared to be
abandoned, and the ACO(s) are hereby authorized and directed to seize any such trap and process the same
as abandoned property in accordance with the applicable provisions of state law and city procedures.
(d) Domestic animal traps. It shall be a violation of this chapter to use anything other than commercially sold
animal food to bait any trap used for the purpose of trapping any at-large domestic animal. Unless the adjacent
properties are separated by a solid masonry or wood fence of a minimum six-foot (6') height, traps used for
such purpose shall not be placed or located within ten feet (10') of adjacent property lines. In the event no such
fence exists and the size, shape, or other characteristics of the property preclude traps from being placed or
located ten feet (10') from adjacent property lines, said traps shall be placed or located as far from adjacent
property lines as practicable.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-18. Poisoning of animals prohibited.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/554
No person shall place any substance or article which has in any manner been treated with any poisonous
substance in any place accessible to human beings, birds, dogs, cats, or other animals with the intent to kill or
harm animals. This shall include anti-freeze purposely left exposed to poison animals. This section, however,
does not preclude the use of commercially sold rodent poisons when applied in accordance with the
manufacturer's directions for such use, in that person's residence, accessory structure or commercial
establishment. (Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-19. Disposal of dead animals.
(a) Disposal of dead animals except livestock.
(1) It shall be the owner's responsibility to remove and properly dispose of a deceased animal with
twenty-four (24) hours of the death of the animal. If requested by the owner, the ACO will pick-up a
deceased domestic animal if the animal has been placed in a sealed clear plastic bag and left at
curb side and has paid a fee of $20.00 per animal per incidence.
(2) The ACO shall have the authority to take custody of and dispose of all deceased animals
found on any roadway, street, highway, and/or public or private property where the owner cannot
otherwise be identified.
(b) Disposal of dead livestock. It shall be the specific responsibility of the owner of any livestock to have the
livestock removed and properly disposed of within twenty-four (24) hours of the death of said livestock,
consistent with state law.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-20. Public nuisances.
(a) Maximum number of animals.
(1) The keeping of more than the maximum number of animals permitted by this chapter, or the
zoning ordinance, as amended, shall be a public nuisance.
(2) It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor more than four (4) dogs and four (4) cats in the
aggregate three (3) months of age or older on any premises used or zoned for residential purposes,
unless otherwise restricted by the zoning ordinance.
(b) Disposal of excrement: defecation on public and private property.
(1) All animal manure and other excrement shall be disposed of in such a manner so as to prevent
it from becoming a public nuisance.
(2) An owner, harborer, or other person having care, custody, or control of a dog or a horse
commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the dog or the horse to
defecate in the city, except:
a. On private property other than property owned, leased, or controlled by the owner,
harborer, or person having care, custody, or control of the dog; or
b. On public property or any other place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access, including but not limited to a street, sidewalk, alley, park, or playground, or
any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, or
shop.
(3) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (2) that:
a. The owner, harborer, or other person having care, custody, or control of the dog or horse
immediately and in a sanitary manner removed and disposed of, or caused the removal and
disposal of, all excreta deposited on the property by the dog or horse;
b. The dog was specially trained to assist a person with a disability and was in the care,
custody, or control of that disabled person at the time it defecated on the property;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/554
c. The owner or person in control of the property had given prior consent for the dog or
horse to defecate on the property; or
d. The dog or horse was being used in official law enforcement activities.
(4) A person who violates this section is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, is punishable by
a fine not to exceed:
a. $100.00 for the first offense;
b. $150.00 for the second offense; and
c. $200.00 for the third and each subsequent offense.
(c) Noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to cause a disturbance by
excessive, continuous, habitual, or untimely barking, howling, crowing, or noise making near the private
residence of another, consistent with the city's noise ordinance, section 34-124 of the Code of Ordinances. A
person shall be deemed to have knowingly violated the terms of this section if such a person is notified by the
ACO of a complaint regarding an animal noise disturbance and fails to cease and thereafter prevent its
recurrence.
(d) Odors or unclean conditions prohibited.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to be kept in a manner or under conditions
which create foul odors, unsanitary conditions, an unreasonable presence of vermin or their
offspring, or other harmful or offensive conditions which can be attributed to the presence of the
animal, or to its physical or environmental conditions, including but not limited to the accumulation of
animal excreta.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to produce odors or unclean conditions
sufficient to create a public nuisance.
(3) A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor offense and, upon conviction,
is punishable by a fine of not less than $200 or more than $2,000.
(e) Animals at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to chase vehicles or
molest, attack, or interfere with other animals or persons on public property, or be at large as defined in section
8-1 herein. The ACO is authorized to impound any animal at large.
(f) Enhancement of penalty. Violation of this section, except as otherwise specifically stated herein, is a
misdemeanor offense and, upon conviction, is punishable by fine not to exceed:
(1) $200.00 for the first offense;
(2) $300.00 for the second offense;
(3) $400.00 for the third offense;
(4) $500.00 for the fourth and each subsequent offense.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 8-21. Fees.
(a) Class A: Dogs and cats.
(1) Impoundment fees for each dog or cat that has been sterilized shall be as follows:
a. First impoundment within the calendar year: $60.00.
b. Second impoundment within the calendar year: $65.00.
c. Third impoundment within the calendar year: $70.00.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/554
d. Fourth and each subsequent impoundment within the calendar year: $80.00.
(2) Impoundment fees for each dog or cat that has not been sterilized shall be as follows:
a. First impoundment within the calendar year: $75.00.
b. Second impoundment within the calendar year: $80.00.
c. Third impoundment within the calendar year: $90.00.
d. Fourth and each subsequent impoundment within the calendar year: $100.00.
Dogs and cats under the age of one (1) year shall be charged the sterilized animal fee. Animals may be
exempted from sterilization upon written recommendation from a licensed veterinarian that such
alternatives would be harmful or dangerous to the animal. Owners of these animals are to be subject to
the lower impoundment fee.
(b) Class B: Small livestock. This shall include goats, sheep, lambs, swine, calves, foals, and animals of the
same approximate size and weight. Fees shall be set by the county in accordance with the Texas Estray Act
(V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code chapter 142).
(c) Class C: Large livestock. This shall include cattle, horses, ponies, mules, and animals of the same
approximate size and weight. Fees shall be set by the county in accordance with Texas Estray Act (V.T.C.A.,
Agriculture Code chapter 142).
(d) Class D: Other animals. Animals not listed hereinabove shall be disposed of at the discretion of the ACO.
(e) Handling fee. A daily handling fee shall be charged for every day, or fraction thereof, that an animal is at
the animal services facility. Said fee shall be based upon the class of animal enumerated above. Class A
animals shall be charged $10.00 per day per animal and Class D animals shall be charged $15.00 per day per
animal. Class B and Class C animals are impounded by the county in accordance with Texas Estray Act
(V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, chapter 142).
(f) Fees for quarantined animals. The owner of any class A animal held in quarantine for observation
purposes shall be charged $15.00 for each day or fraction of a day an animal is at the animal services facility.
The owner of a Class D animal shall be charged $20.00 for each day or fraction of a day the animal is
quarantined at the animal services facility. This fee shall be in addition to impoundment and daily handling fees.
(g) Euthanasia fees. Fees for euthanasia, shipping and testing a sample, shall be $150.00.
(h) Adoption fees. The prospective adopter pays the adoption fee as assessed by the Ft. Worth Animal Care
and Control Center.
(i) Fees charged may include one or more of the enumerated fees stated herein and shall be itemized upon
release of the animal.
(Ordinance 2013-07-001 adopted 7/2/13)
CHAPTER 10
BUILDING*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. License, inspection, permit, fees, etc.
(a) All persons, firms or corporations applying for licenses, inspections, permits or other city services,
activities, or uses that require the applicant to pay a fee incident to such application shall pay the requisite fees
as established by the city council.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/554
(b) All persons, firms or corporations applying for licenses, inspections, permits or other city services,
activities, or uses that require the applicant to submit plans, drawings or documents for review shall pay the
actual cost of that review by city staff or persons retained by the city for the purpose of reviewing such plans.
These costs shall be paid upon receipt of an invoice from the city and work shall not proceed until such costs
have been paid in full.
(c) It shall be a violation of this chapter to conduct any activity or commence any use for which payment of a
fee is required until such fee has been paid. It shall be a violation of this chapter to conduct any activity or
commence any use for which payment of these costs are required until such payment has been made. The
penalty for violations shall be a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day that a violation occurs shall be a separate
violation.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-1; Ordinance 200649, sec. 13, adopted 7/11/06; Ordinance 2019-07, secs. 2, 3, adopted
3/19/19)
Sec. 10-2. Plumbing license law adopted.
Before any person shall do any work or make any connections with the sewer system or the gas system in the
city, or do any plumbing work connected or intended to be connected with the sewer or gas system, he shall be
licensed as provided in the Plumbing License Law, as amended, the same being Texas Occupations Code sec.
1301.001 et seq. (1976 Code, sec. 24-1; 1998 Code, sec. 98-1)
Secs. 10-3–10-22. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TECHNICAL CODES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 10-23. Conflicts.
In the event any provision of the building and construction technical codes adopted by this article conflicts with
a provision of this Code of Ordinances or state law, the provisions of state law or of this Code of Ordinances
shall prevail and be controlling. (1976 Code, sec. 9-18; 1998 Code, sec. 30-35)
Sec. 10-24. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Corporation counsel means, whenever the term “corporation counsel” is used in the codes adopted by this
article, the city attorney.
Municipality means, whenever the term “municipality” is used in the codes adopted by this article, the City of
Forest Hill, Texas.
(1976 Code, sec. 9-19; 1998 Code, sec. 30-36)
Sec. 10-25. Penalty for violation.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the codes adopted by the provisions of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided by section 1-15. Each day such violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (1976 Code, sec. 9-20; 1998 Code, sec. 30-37)
Secs. 10-26–10-53. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. BUILDING CODE
Sec. 10-54. International Building Code adopted.
The 2018 edition of the International Building Code, all appendixes, the recommended amendments of the
North Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as the official building
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/554
code of the city. This building code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its
entirety. The material contained in the International Building Code shall not be included in the formal municipal
codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be
available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. (1976 Code, sec. 9-16; 1998 Code,
sec. 30-31; Ordinance 95-950207-1, sec. 1, adopted 12/5/95; Ordinance 200649, sec. 5, adopted 7/11/06;
Ordinance 2015-12-002, sec. 2, adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 2, adopted 8/6/19)
Secs. 10-55–10-81. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. MECHANICAL CODE
Sec. 10-82. International Mechanical Code adopted.
The 2018 edition of the International Mechanical Code, all appendixes, the recommended amendments of the
North Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as the official
mechanical code of the city. This mechanical code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this
article in its entirety. The material contained in the International Mechanical Code shall not be included in the
formal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and
will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. (1976 Code, sec. 9-17; 1998
Code, sec. 30-33; Ordinance 95-950207-1, sec. 2, adopted 12/5/95; Ordinance 200649, sec. 4, adopted
7/11/06; Ordinance 2015-12-002, sec. 4, adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 4, adopted 8/6/19)
Secs. 10-83–10-107. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. RESIDENTIAL CODE
Sec. 10-108. International Residential Code adopted.
(a) The 2018 edition of the International Residential Code, all appendixes, the recommended amendments of
the North Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as the official
residential code of the city. This residential code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this
article in its entirety. The material contained in the International Residential Code shall not be included in the
formal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and
will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours.
(b) Wood shingles of any type may not be used for roofing or exterior wall covering in the incorporated city
limits.
(c) Permits are required for any structure in excess of thirty-two (32) square feet.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-51; Ordinance 200649, sec. 1, adopted 7/11/06; Ordinance 2015-12-002, sec. 3, adopted
12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 3, adopted 8/6/19)
Secs. 10-109–10-129. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
Sec. 10-130. International Energy Conservation Code adopted.
The 2018 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, the recommended amendments of the North
Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as the official energy
conservation code of the city. This energy conservation code is fully incorporated by reference as though
copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the International Energy Conservation Code shall
not be included in the formal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of
the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. (1998
Code, sec. 30-111; Ordinance 200649, sec. 7, adopted 7/11/06; Ordinance 2015-12-002, sec. 8, adopted
12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 8, adopted 8/6/19)
Secs. 10-131–10-158. Reserved.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/554
DIVISION 6. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Sec. 10-159. International Property Maintenance Code adopted.
The 2018 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, all appendixes, the recommended
amendments of the North Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as
the official property maintenance code of the city. This property maintenance code is fully incorporated by
reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the International Property
Maintenance Code shall not be included in the formal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a
public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during
regular business hours. (1998 Code, sec. 30-121; Ordinance 200649, sec. 8, adopted 7/11/06; Ordinance
2015-12-002, sec. 10, adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 10, adopted 8/6/19)
Secs. 10-160–10-186. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. INTERNATIONAL CODE COUNCIL PERFORMANCE CODE
Sec. 10-187. International Code Council Performance Code adopted.
The 2018 edition of the International Code Council Performance Code, all appendixes, the recommended
amendments of the North Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as
the official code council performance code of the city. This code council performance code is fully incorporated
by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the International Code
Council Performance Code shall not be included in the formal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained
as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during
regular business hours. (1998 Code, sec. 30-131; Ordinance 200649, sec. 11, adopted 7/11/06; Ordinance
2015-12-002, sec. 11, adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 11, adopted 8/6/19)
Secs. 10-188–10-212. Reserved.
DIVISION 8. PLUMBING CODE
Sec. 10-213. Adopted.
The 2018 edition of the International Plumbing Code, all appendixes, the recommended amendments of the
North Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as the official plumbing
code of the city. This plumbing code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its
entirety. The material contained in the International Plumbing Code shall not be included in the formal
codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be
available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. (1976 Code, sec. 24-15; 1998 Code,
sec. 98-31; Ordinance 95-950207, sec. 1, adopted 12/5/95; Ordinance 200649, sec. 3, adopted 7/11/06;
Ordinance 2015-12-002, sec. 5, adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 5, adopted 8/6/19)
Sec. 10-214. Amendments.
No PEX tubing will be allowed in the rough or top out stages of construction in the city limits. (1976 Code, sec.
24-15.1; 1998 Code, sec. 98-32; Ordinance 200649, sec. 3, adopted 7/11/06)
Secs. 10-215–10-236. Reserved.
DIVISION 9. SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE
Sec. 10-237. Adopted by reference.
The Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, 1991 edition, published by the International Conference
of Building Officials, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is hereby adopted as the
swimming pool, spa and hot tub code of the city. (1976 Code, sec. 24-19; 1998 Code, sec. 98-36)
Sec. 10-238. Penalty for violation.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/554
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $2,000.00. Each and every day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (1976 Code, sec. 24-20; 1998
Code, sec. 98-37)
Secs. 10-239–10-269. Reserved.
DIVISION 10. GAS CODE
Sec. 10-270. International Fuel Gas Code adopted.
The 2018 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, all appendixes, the recommended amendments of the
North Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as the official fuel gas
code of the city. This fuel gas code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its
entirety. The material contained in the International Fuel Gas Code shall not be included in the formal
codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be
available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. (1998 Code, sec. 98-51; Ordinance
200649, sec. 6, adopted 7/11/06; Ordinance 2015-12-002, sec. 7, adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 7,
adopted 8/6/19)
Secs. 10-271–10-275. Reserved.
DIVISION 11. EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Sec. 10-276. Adopted.
The 2018 edition of the International Existing Building Code, all appendixes, the recommended amendments of
the North Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as the official
existing building code of the city. This existing building code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied
into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the International Existing Building Code shall not be
included in the formal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the
city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. (Ordinance
2015-12-002, sec. 9, adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 9, adopted 8/6/19)
Secs. 10-277–10-280. Reserved.
DIVISION 12. WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE
Sec. 10-281. Adopted.
The 2018 edition of the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code, all appendixes, the recommended
amendments of the North Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as
the official wildland-urban interface code of the city. This wildland-urban interface code is fully incorporated by
reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the International Wildland-
Urban Interface Code shall not be included in the formal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a
public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during
regular business hours. (Ordinance 2015-12-002, sec. 12, adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 12,
adopted 8/6/19)
Secs. 10-282–10-285. Reserved.
DIVISION 13. PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE
Sec. 10-286. Adopted.
The 2018 edition of the International Private Sewage Disposal Code, all appendixes, the recommended
amendments of the North Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as
the official property maintenance code of the city. This private sewage disposal code is fully incorporated by
reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the International Private
Sewage Disposal Code shall not be included in the formal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/554
a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during
regular business hours. (Ordinance 2015-12-002, sec. 13, adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 13,
adopted 8/6/19)
Secs. 10-287–10-288. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. DANGEROUS OR SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS*
Sec. 10-289. Purpose and scope.
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to provide a just, equitable and practical method, to be cumulative
with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the building code, the Texas Local Government Code ch.
214, or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings, as defined herein, which from any cause endanger the
life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants and may be
required to be repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or secured. The purpose of this article is also to provide
minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all structures to safeguard life, limb, health,
property and public welfare.
(b) Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings which are hereinafter defined as
dangerous or substandard buildings whether now in existence or whether they may hereafter become
dangerous.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-61; Ordinance 200167, sec. 1, adopted 7/17/01)
Sec. 10-290. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Board means the city council.
Building means and includes any building, fence, awning, canopy, sign, shed, garage, house, tent or other
structure whatsoever and the enumeration of specific types of structures shall not be deemed to exclude other
types of structures to which the sense and meaning of the provisions hereof in context reasonably have
application.
Building code means the Uniform Building Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building
Officials, as adopted and amended by the city.
Building official means the person designated by the city council to enforce this article.
Electrical code means the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted and
amended by the City of Forest Hill.
Fire code means the 2006 edition of the International Fire Code, including appendix chapters A, B, C, D, E, F
and G, as adopted and amended by the city.
Housing code means the 2006 edition of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the
city.
Mechanical code means the 2006 edition of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by
the city.
Plumbing code means the 2006 edition of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the
city.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-62; Ordinance 200167, sec. 2, adopted 7/17/01)
Sec. 10-291. Enforcement.
(a) Generally.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/554
(1) Administration. The building official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this
article. The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this article and to adopt
and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions.
Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this
article.
(2) Inspections. The building official and the fire marshal or their designees are hereby authorized
to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this
article.
(3) Right of entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
article, or when the building official or his designee has a reasonable cause to believe that there
exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this article
which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official or his
designee may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties
imposed by this article, provided that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be
presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the
building official or his designee shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the
building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
(b) Abatement of dangerous or substandard buildings. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined
after inspection by the building official to be dangerous or substandard as defined by this article are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, vacation, demolition, removal or securing in
accordance with the procedures specified in this article.
(c) Unlawful to violate article. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, or
use, occupy or maintain any building that is deemed herein to be a nuisance or cause or permit the same to be
done in violation of this article.
(d) Inspection authorized. All buildings within the scope of this article and all construction or work for which a
permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-63; Ordinance 200167, sec. 3, adopted 7/17/01)
Sec. 10-292. Substandard buildings declared.
(a) For the purpose of this article, any building, regardless of the date of its construction, which has any or all
of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a substandard building, and a
nuisance:
(1) Any building that is dilapidated, substandard or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the
public health, safety and welfare.
(2) Any building that, regardless of its structural condition, is unoccupied by its owners, lessees or
other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or
used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by
children.
(3) Any building that is boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if:
a. The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
b. The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or
use of the building in the manner described by subsection (a)(2) of this section.
(4) Whenever any building, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration,
damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire
hazard.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/554
(5) Whenever any building is in such a condition as to make a public nuisance known to the
common law or in equity jurisprudence.
(6) Whenever any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the
building.
(7) Whenever any building is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an
attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
(8) Any building constructed and still existing in violation of any provision of the building code, fire
code, plumbing code, mechanical code. electrical code or housing code of the city to the extent that
the life, health or safety of the public or any occupant is endangered.
(b) For the purpose of this article, any building, regardless of the date of its construction, which has any or all
of the conditions or defects hereinafter described to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property,
safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a
substandard building, and a nuisance:
(1) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient
width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or
panic.
(2) Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so
warped, worn, loose, tom or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in
case of fire or panic.
(3) Whenever the stress in any materials, or members or portion thereof, due to all dead and live
loads, is more than 1½ times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
(4) Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any
other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it
was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for
new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
(5) Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become
detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.
(6) Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the
exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in
place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building
code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working
stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings.
(7) Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped. buckled or settled to such an extent that
walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is
required in the case of similar new construction.
(8) Whenever the building, or any portion thereof, because of:
a. Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
b. Faulty construction;
c. The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting such building;
d. The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or
e. Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/554
(9) Whenever, for any reason, the building, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the
purpose for which it is being used.
(10) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such
an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle onethird
of the base.
(11) Whenever the building, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or
deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 or more percent damage or deterioration
of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
(12) Whenever the building has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, flood or other
causes, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become:
a. An attractive nuisance to children; or
b. A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons.
(13) Whenever any building has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any
specific requirements or prohibition applicable to such building provided by the building regulations
of this jurisdiction, as specified in the building code, or of any law or ordinance of the state or
jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.
(14) Whenever any building which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws
and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any
supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the:
a. Strength;
b. Fire-resisting qualities or characteristics; or
c. Weather-resisting qualities or characteristics;
required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in
the same location.
(15) Whenever a building, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement,
inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the building official to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or
disease for reasons including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or
lodginghouse.
b. Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of
guests in a hotel.
c. Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.
d. Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel.
e. Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or lodginghouse.
f. Lack of adequate heating facilities.
g. Lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilating equipment.
h. Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this building code.
i. Room and space dimensions less than required by this building code.
j. Lack of required electrical lighting.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/554
k. Dampness of habitable rooms.
i. Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents.
m. General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
n. Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
o. Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-64; Ordinance 200167, sec. 4, adopted 7/17/01)
Sec. 10-293. Determination of substandard building by building official.
When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and bas found and determined
that the building is substandard, the building official may take any or all of the following actions, as he deems
appropriate:
(1) Issue notice to the record owner that the building is substandard and must be repaired or
demolished;
(2) Issue citations for violations of this article;
(3) Secure the building if permitted by section 10-299(a); or
(4) Recommend to the board that abatement proceedings be commenced pursuant to section 10-
294
(1998 Code, sec. 30-65; Ordinance 200167, sec. 5, adopted 7/17/01)
Sec. 10-294. Public hearing for abatement of substandard buildings.
(a) Commencement of proceedings. When the building official has found and determined that a building is a
substandard building, the building official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation, relocation
of occupants, removal, demolition or securing of the building.
(b) Public hearing to be held. Except when the city council finds that a building is likely to immediately
endanger persons or property, a public hearing before the board shall be held to determine whether a building
complies with the standards set out in section 10-292. If the city council determines that the building constitutes
an immediate danger, the procedure set forth in section 10-299(b) shall be followed.
(c) Notice. Not less than ten days prior to the date on which the hearing is set, the building official shall issue
a notice of the public hearing directed to the record owner of the building, and to all mortgagees and
lienholders. The city shall use diligent efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder or
mortgagee of the building through searching the county real property records of the county in which the building
is located; appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located; records of the
secretary of state; assumed name records of the county in which the building is located; tax records of the city;
and utility records of the city. The notice shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the record owner;
(2) The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which
the building is located;
(3) A statement that the building official has found the building to be substandard or dangerous,
with a brief concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous or
substandard under the provisions of section 10-292
(4) A statement that the owner. lienholder or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing
proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article, and the time it will
take to reasonably perform the work;
(5) Notice of the time and place of the public hearing; and
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/554
(6) A statement that if the building is found to be in violation of this article, the board may order
that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished within a reasonable time.
(d) Additional notice of public hearing. Prior to the public hearing, the city may file a copy of the notice mailed
pursuant to subsection (c) of this section in the official public records of real property in the county in which the
property is located. If such notice is not filed of record, each identified mortgagee and lienholder must be
notified of any abatement order issued by the board at the public hearing, prior to any remedial action by the
city.
(e) Burden of proof At the public hearing, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has the burden of proof to
demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article, and the time it will take to
reasonably perform the work.
(f) Conduct of public hearing. At the public hearing, the owner of the building, and all other interested persons
may make their appearance and be heard. Any evidence may be received and considered by the board. The
hearing may be adjourned from day to day or continued upon a majority vote of the board, in compliance with
the Open Meetings Act.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-66; Ordinance 200167, sec. 6, adopted 7/17/01)
Sec. 10-295. Order of building board of appeals.
(a) Findings of the board. If the board, by a majority vote, finds upon evidence presented at the public
hearing that the building is in violation of standards set out in section 10-294, the board may order that the
building be repaired, vacated, removed or demolished, secured, or the occupants relocated, by the owner,
mortgagee or lienholder within a reasonable time as provided herein.
(b) Time allowed to complete work.
(1) The order must require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building to within 30 days:
a. Secure the building from unauthorized entry; and/or
b. Repair, remove or demolish the building unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the
hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days.
(2) If the board allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove or
demolish the building, the board shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and
performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property
in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined
by the board.
(3) The board may not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair,
remove or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the
owner, lienholder or mortgagee:
a. Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
b. Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot be reasonably completed within 90 days
because of the scope and complexity of the work.
(4) If the board allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part
of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the board shall require the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the building official to demonstrate
that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established for
commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee appear before the board or the building official to demonstrate compliance with the time
schedules.
(c) Contents of order. The order of the board must contain at minimum:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/554
(1) An identification which is not required to be a legal description of the building and the property
on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of minimum standards present in the building;
(3) A description of the ordered actions, including a statement that the owner may repair, if
feasible, or demolish or remove at his option;
(4) A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within the time allowed, and charge the
cost to the property; and
(5) If the board has determined that the building will endanger persons or property and that the
building is a dwelling with ten or fewer dwelling units, a statement that the city may repair the
building and charge the costs to the property if the ordered action is not taken within the time
allowed.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-67; Ordinance 200167, sec. 7, adopted 7/17/01)
Sec. 10-296. Notice of order of the board.
(a) If order not complied with, city may take action. If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed
or demolished within the time specified by the order and the owner has not appealed the board's decision within
the timeframe established by statute, then the city may vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish the building
or relocate the occupants at its own expense, provided however:
(1) The city may not act to remove or demolish a building until after the board has found:
a. Such defects or conditions exist to the extent that the life, health. property or safety of the
public or the occupants of the building are endangered; and
b. The building is infeasible of repair; or there is no reasonable probability that the building
will be repaired within a reasonable period of time if additional time is given.
(2) The city may only repair a building as provided herein to the extent necessary to correct the
conditions which render the building dangerous, and may not act to repair a building unless:
a. The board has made a determination that the building is likely to endanger person or
property; and
b. The building is a residential dwelling with ten or fewer dwelling units.
(3) In the event there are mortgagees or lienholders, the city may only repair, remove or demolish
the building after allowing the lienholder or mortgagee an additional 30 days after the time
prescribed in the order has expired to complete the required work.
(b) Posting of notice to vacate building. If the order requires vacation or if compliance is not had with the
order within the time specified therein, the building official is authorized to require that the building be vacated.
Notice to vacate shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the occupant of the building and it
shall be posted at or upon each entrance to the building and shall be in substantially the following form:
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.
____________________________
Building Official, City of Forest Hill
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/554
(c) Remedial action by city. Any repair or demolition work, or securing of the building shall be accomplished
and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided. Any surplus realized from the sale
of such building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and cleaning of the lot,
shall be paid over to the persons lawfully entitled thereto.
(d) Failure to obey order. Any person to whom an order pursuant to section 10-295 is directed who fails,
neglects or refuses to comply with such order and who has not appealed such order under section 10-295 shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be prosecuted in municipal court in addition to any other remedies
available to the city provided herein.
(e) Interference prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee,
contractor or authorized representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest
in the building which has been ordered repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or secured under the
provisions of this article; or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the
provisions of this article, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city,
person having an interest or estate in such building, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating
and repairing, or demolishing, removing or securing any such building pursuant to the provision of this article, or
in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to
this article.
(f) Permit required. Any work of closure, repair, removal or demolition by the property owner or any lienholder
or mortgagee or their agents must be performed pursuant to valid unexpired permits issued by the city. All
permits issued pursuant to an order of the board shall expire upon expiration of the time for compliance set
forth in the order.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-68; Ordinance 200167, sec. 8, adopted 7/17/01)
Sec. 10-297. Performance of work by the city.
(a) Procedure. When any work of repair, removal, demolition or securing is to be performed by the city
pursuant to the provisions of any order of the board, the work may be accomplished by city personnel or by
private contract as may be deemed necessary. Rubble and debris shall be removed from any premises and the
lot cleaned if removal or demolition is ordered. The building or building materials may be sold if removal or
demolition is ordered, and the proceeds shall be used to offset other costs of the work.
(b) Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from city funds and shall constitute a special assessment and
a lien against such property to secure payment thereof, together with ten percent interest on such amount from
the date on which the work is performed.
(c) Repair to minimum standards only. The city may repair the building at its own expense and assess the
expenses on the land on which the building stands or is attached to only to the extent necessary to bring the
building into compliance with minimum standards.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-69; Ordinance 200167, sec. 10, adopted 7/17/01)
Sec. 10-298. Recovery of cost of securing, repair, removal or demolition.
(a) Itemized account and notice of lien. The building official shall keep an itemized account of the expenses
incurred by the city in the securing, repair, removal or demolition of any building pursuant to this article. Upon
completion of the work, the building official shall prepare and file with the city secretary a sworn account and
notice of lien containing the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with reasonable
effort;
(2) A legal description of the real property on which the building is or was located;
(3) The type of work performed; and
(4) The amount of expenses incurred by the city in performing the work and the balance due.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/554
(b) Notice filed in county records. The city secretary shall file the notice of lien along with a copy of the order
of abatement issued by the board in the deed records of the county in which the premises are located.
(c) Personal obligation of property owner. The expenses incurred by the city as set forth in the sworn account
of the building official shall be a personal obligation of the property owner in addition to a priority lien upon the
property. The city attorney may bring an action in any court of proper jurisdiction against the owner or property
to recover the costs incurred by the city.
(d) Lien shall be valid and privileged. Upon filing of the notice of lien in the deed records of the county, the
lien shall be valid against the property so assessed. The lien shall be privileged and subordinate only to tax
liens, existing special assessment liens, and shall be paramount to all other liens. The lien shall continue until
the assessment and all interest due and payable thereon has been paid.
(e) Assessment must be paid. No utility service, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be allowed
on any such property until the assessment is paid and such lien is released by the city.
(f) Release of lien. After the expenses incurred by the city, as set forth in the sworn account of the building
official, have been fully paid with interest often percent annum from the date the work was performed, the
building official shall execute a release of lien which shall be filed in the deed records of the county.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-70; Ordinance 200167, sec. 11, adopted 7/17/01)
Sec. 10-299. Additional authority to secure certain substandard buildings prior to public hearing and
secure, demolish, repair or remove certain dangerous buildings.
(a) Securing of unoccupied, substandard building. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the city
may secure a building if the building official determines:
(1) The building violates the minimum standards set forth in section 10-292; and
(2) The building is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have the right of
possession to the building.
(b) If building creates immediate danger. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, if the city council
finds that a building is likely to immediately endanger persons or property, the city council may:
(1) Order the owner of the building, the owner's agent, or the owner or occupant of the property
on which the structure is located to repair, remove, or demolish the structure, or the dangerous part
of the structure, within a specified time; or
(2) Repair, remove or demolish the structure, or the dangerous part of the structure, at the
expense of the municipality, on behalf of the owner of the structure or the owner of the property on
which the structure is located, and assess the repair, removal, or demolition expenses on the
property on which the structure was located.
(c) Notice to the owner. Before the 11th day after the date the building is secured pursuant to subsection (a)
of this section, or action is ordered pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section, or the building is repaired,
removed or demolished pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section, the building official shall give notice to the
owner by:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice;
(2) Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post
office address;
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county in which the building is located, if personal service cannot be obtained and
the owner's post office address is unknown; or
(4) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be
obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/554
In addition to the requirements of this subsection, depositing notice in the United States mail to all lienholders
and mortgagees who can be determined from a reasonable search of instruments on file in the office of the
county clerk.
(d) Contents of notice. The notice must contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of the minimum standards present in the building;
(3) A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building, or that
the city has taken or will take the action ordered pursuant to subsection (b) of this section;
(4) An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the
city's securing, removing, demolishing or repairing of the building.
(e) The city council shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written
information about any matter relating to the city's securing, repairing, removing or demolishing of the building, if,
within 30 days after the date the city has taken action pursuant to subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section, the
owner files with the city a written request for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted within 20 days after
the date the request is filed.
(f) If the city incurs expenses under this section, such expenses incurred shall be a personal obligation of the
property owner in addition to a priority lien upon the property, and costs shall be recovered as provided by
sections 10-297 and 10-298
(g) It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with an order issued pursuant to this section.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-71; Ordinance 200167, sec. 12, adopted 7/17/01)
Sec. 10-300. Civil penalty.
(a) Civil penalty authorized. In addition to any other enforcement authority provided for by law, the board
may, by order, at an administrative hearing assess a civil penalty against a property owner as provided for
herein for failure to comply with an order issued by the board pursuant to section 10-295
(b) Showing required. The civil penalty may be assessed if it is shown at the administrative hearing that:
(1) The property owner was notified of the contents of the order issued pursuant to section 10-
295; and
(2) The property owner committed an act in violation of the order or failed to take an action
necessary for compliance with the order.
(c) Amount of penalty. The civil penalty may be assessed in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 a day for
each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to
exceed $10.00 a day for each violation.
(d) Notice of administrative hearing. Not less than ten days prior to the date on which the administrative
hearing is set, the property owner shall be sent a notice of the hearing by certified mail/return receipt requested.
The notice shall contain:
(1) A copy of the order issued by the board pursuant to section 10-295
(2) A statement that the building official has determined that the property owner committed an act
in violation of that order, or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with that order;
(3) A statement that at the administrative hearing, the board may assess a civil penalty not to
exceed $1,000.00 a day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's
lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed $10.00 a day for each violation; and
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/554
(4) The notice of the time and place of the hearing.
(e) Copy of order filed with district clerk. After the civil penalty is assessed, the city secretary shall file with
the district clerk of the county in which the property is located, a certified copy of the order assessing the civil
penalty stating the amount and duration of the penalty.
(f) Enforcement. The civil penalty may be enforced by the city in a suit brought by the city in a court of
competent jurisdiction for a final judgment in accordance with the assessed penalty. A civil penalty under this
subsection is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in any suit.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-72; Ordinance 200167, sec. 13, adopted 7/17/01)
Sec. 10-301. Authority not limited.
Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, nothing herein shall be deemed a limitation on the duty of the
city to summarily order the demolition or repair of any building or structure where it is apparent that the
immediate demolition of such building or structure is necessary to the protection of life, property or general
welfare of the people in the city. (1998 Code, sec. 30-73; Ordinance 200167, sec. 14, adopted 7/17/01)
Secs. 10-302–10-320. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. MOBILE HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOMES*
Sec. 10-321. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Habitable, as applied to manufactured housing, is limited to and means that:
(1) There is no defect, damage or deterioration to the home which creates a dangerous or unsafe
situation or condition;
(2) The plumbing, heating, and electrical systems are in safe working order;
(3) The walls, floor and roof are free from any substantial openings not designed and are
structurally sound; and
(4) All exterior doors and windows are in place.
HUD code manufactured home.
(1) The term “HUD code manufactured home” means a structure, constructed on or after June 15,
1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development,
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in
width or body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems.
(2) The term “HUD code manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle as that term
is defined by 24 CFR 3282.S(g).
Manufactured housing or manufactured home means a HUD code manufactured home or a mobile home and
collectively means and refers to both.
Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or,
when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/554
(1998 Code, sec. 30-91; Ordinance 970144, sec. 1(9-40), adopted 11/18/97)
Sec. 10-322. Mobile homes prohibited.
No mobile home shall be located within the city. This prohibition shall not apply to a mobile home legally
permitted and used or occupied as a residential dwelling within the city prior to November 1, 1997. (1998 Code,
sec. 30-92; Ordinance 970144, sec. 1(9-41), adopted 11/18/97)
Sec. 10-323. Approval required for installation of manufactured housing.
A manufactured home shall not be installed in any location within the corporate city limits of the city unless the
owner of the manufactured home has filed an application with the city on the form promulgated by the city, and
the city has approved the application. An application to install a manufactured home is deemed approved and
granted unless the city denies the application in writing, setting forth the reason for the denial, within 45 days
from receiving the application. The city may deny the application if it:
(1) Does not include a true and correct name and address of the owner of the manufactured
home;
(2) Does not include the intended location for installation of the manufactured home; or
(3) Requests permission to install the manufactured home in a location that is not zoned for
manufactured homes.
The city may also deny the application if it determines that the manufactured home is not habitable, or if it lacks
a certificate required by the state.
(1998 Code, sec. 30-93; Ordinance 970144, sec. 1(9-42), adopted 11/18/97)
Sec. 10-324. Nonhabitable manufactured housing.
Manufactured housing which is not habitable shall not be moved onto any private property in the city unless
such property is zoned and permitted for repair, remanufacture or salvage of such manufactured housing. (1998
Code, sec. 30-94; Ordinance 970144, sec. 1(9-43), adopted 11/18/97)
CHAPTER 12
BUSINESS REGULATIONS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 12-1. Bond or liability insurance required for amusement rides.
No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any Ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement
ride operated for hire, or for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first filing
with the city secretary a bond or certificate of liability insurance, in an amount as provided by the state torts
claims act, indemnifying the public against damages sustained by reason of the operation of such ride. Such
bond or certificate of insurance shall be subject to approval by the city attorney. This section shall apply to all
persons, whether or not a license is required by any other provision of this Code. (1976 Code, sec. 6-1; 1998
Code, sec. 18-1)
State law reference–Texas Torts Claims Act, Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 101.001 et seq.
Secs. 12-2–12-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TEMPORARY, PORTABLE BUSINESSES*
Sec. 12-21. Definitions.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/554
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the meanings hereinafter designated:
Beverage means a liquid for drinking, including water.
Change of ownership means a change of owner or operator of the business, and does not refer to a change of
owner of the building where the business is located.
Commercially manufactured vehicle.
(1) The term “commercially manufactured vehicle” means a vehicle originally manufactured as a
mobile food vehicle to be used for the preparation of open potentially hazardous food, which was
manufactured by a person regularly in the business of manufacturing mobile food vehicles for sale.
(2) The term “commercially manufactured vehicle” does not include any vehicle that is converted
or retrofitted to be a mobile food unit or vehicle.
Commissary means a fixed food service establishment permitted and regularly inspected for compliance with
health regulations. Note: The city does not recommend nor regulate commissaries.
Employee means any person manufacturing, packaging, producing, processing, storing, selling, offering for
sale, vending, preparing, serving, or handling any food in a food establishment.
Fixed vending unit means a food service operation that is movable but remains on the premises during the
entire time such permit is valid. Examples of this include, but are not limited to, the following: a snack bar, snow
cone stand, and beverage stand.
Food means any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for
use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption, or chewing gum.
Food establishment.
(1) The term “food” means any place where food is manufactured, packaged, produced,
processed, transported, stored, sold, commercially prepared, vended or otherwise handled. The
term “food” includes any such place regardless of the duration of the permit or whether there is a
charge for the food.
(2) The term “food” does not include private homes where food is prepared or served for guests
and individual family consumption.
Food handler means any person who prepares, serves, packages or handles open food or drink, or who
handles clean utensils, pots, pans or single-service items.
Food operations means manufacturing, packaging, producing, processing, transporting, storing, selling,
commercially preparing, or otherwise handling food, ice or drinks, whether offered for sale, given in exchange
or given away for use as food or offered for human consumption.
Health department means the county health department.
Mobile food solicitor means a mobile food service unit powered either by human beings or a motorized means
and does not remain at any location longer than 60 minutes. Examples of this include, but are not limited to, ice
cream trucks, ice cream carts, and favored ice carts.
Mobile food unit means a vehicle-mounted food service operation designed to be readily movable and remains
on the premises only during the operating hours. Examples of this include, but are not limited to, barbecue
vendors, roasted com vendors, fruit and produce vendors, and lunch wagons.
Nonpotentially hazardous food means all food that is not potentially hazardous food. The following list is
exemplary of such food and shall not be construed to be exclusive of any other nonpotentially hazardous food:
(1) Popcorn;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/554
(2) Shelled, unshelled, raw or roasted nuts; and
(3) Pretzels.
Potentially hazardous food means a food that is natural or synthetic and that requires temperature control
because it is in a form capable of supporting the rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic
microorganisms; the growth and toxin production of Clostridium botulism; or in raw shell eggs, the growth of
Salmonella enteritidis.
Produce vendor means any person vending unprocessed fresh fruits, vegetables or other produce.
Pushcart means a mobile food unit powered by human beings only.
Seasonal food establishment means an establishment that operates more than 14 consecutive days but less
than 180 days each year, and not associated with a special event, at a fixed location in a temporary building;
i.e., snow cone stands, snack bar stands or beverage stands.
Single-service articles means tableware, carry-out utensils, and other items such as bags, containers,
placements, stirrers, straws, toothpicks and wrappers that are designed and constructed for one time, one
person use.
Temporary food service establishment means a food establishment that operates at a fixed location for not
more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration.
Utensil means any food-contact implement or container used in the storage, preparation, transportation,
dispensing, sale, or service of food, such as kitchenware or tableware that is multiuse, single-service, or singleuse;
glove used in contact with food; and food temperature measuring devices.
(1976 Code, sec. 10-31; 1998 Code, sec. 34-31; Ordinance 2010-02-001, sec. 2(34-31), adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 12-22. Permits.
(a) No person shall operate a food establishment without a current, valid food establishment permit issued by
the planning department.
(b) Permits issued under the provisions of this article are not transferable. A permit shall be valid for the
period of time shown on the face of the permit, unless earlier suspended or revoked by the planning
department.
(c) The application for a new or a renewed permit shall be made on an application form provided by the
planning department.
(d) The application for a food establishment shall require the following information:
(1) Applicant's name;
(2) Type of business organization;
(3) The name and address of the owner or principal officer of the business;
(4) The nature of the business;
(5) The location of the business; and
(6) Such other information as the planning department deems necessary.
(e) Applicant for permits for mobile food units, seasonal food establishments, pushcart operators, produce
vendors, or temporary event establishments which operate from a fixed location shall be required to produce a
notarized statement from the primary business owner/operator stating that the use of the restroom facilities will
be available during the hours of operation for all employees as well as to customers should the applicants not
be able to provide restroom facilities. The statement from the primary business owner/operator needs to include
language stating that he understands that should the vending unit be operating during preparation and/or
vending without access to a restroom that the premises owner/operator shall be committing an offense.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/554
(f) Applicant for permits for any vending unit which operates from a fixed location shall be required to produce
a notarized statement from the primary business owner/operator stating that the applicant has permission to
utilize the premises during the vending unit's operating hours.
(g) Should the applicant wish to change locations during the valid permitted time of operation, then the
applicant shall re-apply for a new permit with the address of the new location. No permit fee shall be required
for newly issued permit with a location change but the new permit shall expire at the same time as the old
permit.
(h) No permit shall be issued, new or renewal, without the owner or operator of the food establishment
providing proof of compliance with current minimum health department requirements as determined by the
county health department.
(i) Permit shall be denied if an applicant fails to provide a valid vehicle registration, motor vehicle operator's
license, proof of vehicle liability insurance, and a state sales tax permit.
(j) Owner/operators, employees, and food handlers must obtain a food handler's certification from the health
department.
(k) The owner or operator of a food establishment shall post and maintain the current permit in a
conspicuous public place in the establishment for which the permit was issued.
(l) A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates or is in control of a food or vending
establishment and knowingly:
(1) Is operating without a valid food permit;
(2) Fails to post and maintain a permit in accordance with subsection (e) of this section.
(m) The zoning location of any vending unit which operates from a fixed location shall be allowed in Local
Retail (LR), General Business (GB), Light Industrial (LI) or Planned Development (PD) Districts only.
(n) Owner/operators and employees of a mobile food unit, temporary food service establishment, produce
vendors and pushcarts shall obtain a criminal background check and be clear of any offenses classified as
felonies in the last ten years.
(o) No roadside vending shall be allowed within the city limits.
(p) The planning department may deny a permit, or after notice suspend or revoke a permit for failure to
comply with the requirements of this article or any state law adopted by this article. Notice of a permit denial
shall be served upon the owner or operator of the food establishment either in person or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, at the mailing address specified in the permit application.
(1976 Code, sec. 10-32; 1998 Code, sec. 34-32; Ordinance 2010-02-001, sec. 2(34-32), adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 12-23. Plan reviews.
(a) When a food establishment is classified as a fixed vending unit then a plot plan or survey of the property
depicting the location of all structures currently on the property and the proposed location of the vending unit
shall be submitted to the planning department. The plan must show all required setbacks, building lines and
distances between all structures, and must depict commercially plumbed restroom facility locations.
(b) All fixed vending units shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, light, and
ventilation requirements of the currently adopted International Building Code as necessary to ensure the health,
safety and general welfare of the general public.
(Ordinance 2010-02-001, sec. 2(34-33), adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 12-24. Fees.
The city council shall adopt a schedule of fees for food establishment permits, including an additional fee for the
reissuance of a permit after its expiration. (Ordinance 2010-02-001, sec. 2(34-34), adopted 2/2/10)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/554
Sec. 12-25. Mobile vending units.
The following are general requirements for mobile vending units:
(1) Mobile barbecue trailer cooking surfaces shall be tightly enclosed and constructed in such a
way as to protect all food contact surfaces from possible contamination both in transit and during
use.
(2) All mobile food units and pushcarts handling open potentially hazardous foods is
recommended to operate from a commissary or other fixed food service establishment that are
regularly inspected by a regulatory health agency and should service and clean the unit at least
once a day.
(3) All mobile food units handling open potentially hazardous foods shall be commercially
manufactured. This shall not apply to snow cone vendors, prepackaged ice cream, com roasters, or
other foods as determined by the planning department.
(4) All mobile food units handling open foods shall have a servicing area which shall have
overhead protection. a location for draining and flushing liquid wastes, and a location for the loading
and unloading of food and related supplies.
(5) All liquid waste containers shall be thoroughly flushed and drained daily. Flushing and draining
activities shall not be performed on public streets, on any private or public property, or any area
other than a servicing area of a commissary.
(6) Liquid waste retention tanks shall have a minimum capacity that is at least 15 percent larger in
capacity than the fresh water supply tank.
(7) All mobile food units handling open potentially hazardous foods shall provide not less than 15
gallons of hot/cold water under pressure at all times for the use in utensil cleaning. sanitizing and
handwashing. A single water inlet shall be located so as not to be contaminated by waste discharge.
Such inlet shall be capped at all times except when being filled, and shall contain only potable water.
Connections or direct water hookup sources other than those on the vending unit shall not be
allowed unless approved by the building official.
(Ordinance 2010-02-001, sec. 2(34-35), adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 12-26. Pushcarts.
The following are general requirements for push cart vending:
(1) Each pushcart vending open food shall have a conveniently accessible supply of paper towels,
soap and detergent.
(2) Pushcarts shall provide only single service articles for use by consumers.
(3) A cleanable canopy shall extend over the pushcart and cover its top surface.
(4) Separate space shall be set aside from areas where food is served or prepared for non-foodrelated
items which are displayed on pushcarts.
(5) Each pushcart shall have a stainless steel handwash lavatory and a stainless steel sink with a
minimum of two compartments when utensil washing is required on the pushcart. Both will have
adequate amounts of hot and cold water under pressure. Each pushcart shall also have adequate
drainboard space. This subsection does not apply to pushcarts vending only prepackaged food
products.
(6) Each pushcart employing butane or propane tanks shall comply with any and all applicable fire
department regulations and obtain an inspection from the fire marshal. Ground fault interrupters may
be required by the fire department as a safety feature to prevent electrical shock. Each pushcart
shall be equipped with an approved fire extinguisher with a 2A 10BC rating.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/554
(7) Foods must be stored, displayed and served in a flyproof and rodentproof manner. Properly
installed sneeze guard shields shall be used during food preparation. Scooped ice cream sellers
shall have a running water dipper well.
(8) All food and condiments shall be dispensed in a sanitary manner.
(9) Pushcart operators shall not cook on or adjacent to a pushcart.
(10) Pushcarts which stock and sell potentially hazardous food shall maintain each compartment
or area used for storage, display or service of potentially hazardous food shall be maintained at
proper temperatures for the food item stored therein. Hot foods shall be kept at 140 degrees
Fahrenheit or above; cold foods shall be kept at 41 degrees Fahrenheit or below; and frozen foods
shall be maintained frozen.
(Ordinance 2010-02-001, sec. 2(34-36), adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 12-27. Produce vendors.
The following are general requirements for produce vendors:
(1) Fresh fruits, vegetables or other produce displays shall be confined to the bed of a vehicle or
to tables that are at least six inches above the ground.
(2) Fresh produce shall not be cut or sliced.
(Ordinance 2010-02-001, sec. 2(34-37), adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 12-28. Other general requirements for all vendors.
The following are general requirements for all vendors:
(1) Vendors shall provide a sanitary restroom facility built in the mobile unit or have access to the
primary business owner's commercially plumbed restroom that provides hot and cold running water
through a mixing valve or combination faucet and is within 300 feet of the unit and that shall be
accessible during the hours of operation for the vending unit.
(2) Food and nonfood items shall not be sold from the same vending unit.
(3) No on-site dining shall be allowed.
(4) The owner or operator of a vending unit commits an offense if the unit is operated in violation
of any provisions of this section.
(5) Solid waste shall be contained in an easily cleanable, self-closing, lidded trash receptacle
which shall be kept on or near the food establishment unit at all times. The area around the unit shall
be kept clean and free from litter, garbage, and debris in a radius area of 25 feet from the vending
unit
(6) All evidence of a vending unit must be removed from the premises each day after operations
have ceased.
(7) Hours of operation are limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily.
(8) No mobile vending unit may operate within 50 feet from a single-family or multifamily
residential use. The term “single-family or multifamily residential use” does not include a residence
that is part of a business or a mixed-use structure.
(9) All mobile vending units must park on an improved surface.
(10) No mobile vending unit may be located on a vacant lot or on a lot if the primary business
does not have a valid certificate of occupancy.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/554
(11) No mobile vending unit, displays of merchandise, seating or temporary shelters may obscure
traffic.
(12) No mobile vending unit shall be allowed to sell merchandise, sell, or serve food on any public
street. sidewalk, or other public right-of-way.
(13) All mobile vending units handling or selling potentially hazardous food products must be a
commercially manufactured vehicle as defined in this article.
(14) No more than one mobile vending unit per individual tract, parcel or platted lot shall be
allowed
(15) No off-site signage shall be allowed.
(Ordinance 2010-02-001, sec. 2(34-38), adopted 2/2/10)
Secs. 12-29–12-59. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. JUNK DEALERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Sec. 12-60. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them by this section:
Junk dealer is used in its ordinary and usual accepted meaning, and also means and includes any person
engaged in the following: collecting, handling, buying and selling of scrap metal, secondhand mechanical and
garden tools and utensils, used or secondhand plumbing fixtures, appliances, fittings, pipes and supplies,
electrical fixtures, fittings, appliances and supplies, gas fixtures, fittings, appliances and supplies, used or
secondhand water heaters, fixtures, fittings, used or secondhand doors, windows, used or secondhand
automobiles purchased for the purpose of being dismantled, and all automobile parts other than tires.
Secondhand dealer, is used in its ordinary and usual trade acceptance meaning, and also means and includes
any person engaged in any of the following: collecting, handling, buying, trading, selling or engaging in the sale
or trafficking in any of the following: used or secondhand wearing apparel consisting of hats, shoes, overcoats,
raincoats and any and all kinds of clothing; used or secondhand watches, jewelry, diamonds, coins, precious
metals, tableware, luggage, musical instruments, shotguns, rifles, revolvers and all other kinds of firearms; and
any and all kinds of used goods, wares and merchandise which are handled by pawnbrokers and secondhand
dealers in the usual course of trade.
(1976 Code, sec. 10-50; 1998 Code, sec. 34-61)
Sec. 12-61. Hours of business regulated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business of a secondhand dealer or junk dealer between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. (1976 Code, sec. 10-51; 1998 Code, sec. 34-62)
Sec. 12-62. License requirements.
No junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall transact or engage in business within the city unless or until he shall
have obtained an annual license therefor, which license may be procured by complying with the following
provisions:
(1) Application; information to be shown. An applicant for a license shall make request therefor in
writing addressed to the city secretary, which application shall contain the name, residence, and
street number and such other reasonable information as will identify such applicant, together with
the classification of such applicant, in case of a firm or corporation, in which event the application
shall show the individual members of the partnership and officers of the corporation.
(2) Application to contain provision relative to compliance with ordinances. The license hereby
applied for shall be subject to all the provisions and regulations of this Code and other ordinances of
the city related to junk, junk dealers and secondhand dealers.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/554
(3) License fees. The annual license fee for licenses under this section shall be as established by
the city council.
(4) Application to be signed and sworn to. Such application shall be signed and sworn to by the
person applying therefor before some officer authorized by law to administer oaths.
(5) Issuance of license. Each application shall be presented to the city secretary, who shall issue
a license to the applicant upon compliance of the applicant with the terms of this article.
(1976 Code, sec. 10-52; 1998 Code, sec. 34-63)
Sec. 12-63. Posting of license.
Every junk dealer and secondhand dealer, while engaged in the prosecution of his business, shall have posted
and available for inspection at all times his license to engage in such business. (1976 Code, sec. 10-53; 1998
Code, sec. 34-64)
Sec. 12-64. Use of license by others prohibited.
No junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall assign or knowingly permit his license to be used by another, and no
person shall use the license of any such dealer except his own, in disposing of junk or merchandise as
enumerated in this article. (1976 Code, sec. 10-54; 1998 Code, sec. 34-65)
Sec. 12-65. Cancellation of license for violation.
Conviction for violating any of the provisions of this article shall be sufficient cause for the cancellation of the
license within the discretion of the city council. (1976 Code, sec. 10-55; 1998 Code, sec. 34-66)
Sec. 12-66. Records required.
(a) All junk dealers and secondhand dealers as defined in this article, doing business or offering to do
business in the city, shall at all times keep on hand record books in which shall be legibly written by the dealer
at the time of any such transaction:
(1) An accurate description in the English language of the article purchased by or deposited with
the junk dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker;
(2) The amount of money paid for same or loaned thereon;
(3) The date and time of purchase or deposit;
(4) The name, age, sex, signature, residence and race of the person selling or depositing such
article; and
(5) The source and place from which such article came or was obtained by the seller or depositor,
as reported by the seller or depositor, together with the name of the state issuing the license and the
number of the license of the automobile in which such article was delivered to such dealer.
(b) A junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall obtain from each seller or depositor of any property and insert in
the registration book the number of the current state drivers license of such person and the date it expires. If,
for any reason, the seller does not possess a current state driver's license, other identification and the reason
for not possessing a state driver's license shall be set forth in the registration book together with the seller's or
depositor's thumbprint plainly and clearly in ink opposite his name in the records of the dealer.
(c) The taking of a thumbprint shall not be applicable to transactions wherein a licensee shall purchase from
a person having a valid license or permit to transact and engage in a lawful business or occupation, whether
such license or permit be issued by the city, the state or the United States of America, including a limited sales
tax permit from the state, and in such transaction the identification of the seller of the junk or merchandise shall
be deemed sufficient if the licensee shall make a notation of the type and number of such license or permit.
(1976 Code, sec. 10-56; 1998 Code, sec. 34-67)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/554
Sec. 12-67. Identification of merchandise.
Each lot, sack, barrel, box or other container of junk or other merchandise purchased by or deposited with
licensee hereunder shall be kept intact and have written or stamped in a conspicuous place either on the
container thereof, or if no container on one of the articles, the serial number of the report made as set out in
section 12-66, which number shall at all times be kept plain and legible. Such number shall be affixed on each
secondhand article by means of a tag on which is legibly printed the corresponding serial number of the report
of sale and purchase required by the section 12-66. (1976 Code, sec. 10-57; 1998 Code, sec. 34-68)
Sec. 12-68. Period articles to be held before resale.
Each lot of junk and each secondhand article shall be retained in its original form, shape and condition for a
period of ten days after such purchase or deposit, during which time no part of such junk or other merchandise
shall be sold or permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of business of such dealer. (1976 Code,
sec. 10-58; 1998 Code, sec. 34-69)
Sec. 12-69. Purchase of articles from which identifying marks have been removed.
No junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall purchase or receive for deposit or have in his possession any article
of junk or secondhand article, except small metal articles bought in bulk with other scrap metal, from which the
manufacturers serial number or brand has been removed or obliterated. (1976 Code, sec. 10-59; 1998 Code,
sec. 34-70)
Sec. 12-70. Inspection of purchased items.
Each article purchased by or deposited with any junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall at all reasonable times
be open to inspection by any member of the police force of the city. (1976 Code, sec. 10-60; 1998 Code, sec.
34-71)
Sec. 12-71. Purchases from minors.
No junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall purchase or receive in pledge or on deposit for any purpose any
article from any minor or which may be owned or claimed by or in the possession of or control of any minor
unless the parent or guardian of the minor shall state in writing that such transaction took place with such
parent's or guardian's full knowledge and consent, which written statement shall be signed by the parent or
guardian and have thereon the address and telephone number, if any, of such parent or guardian. (1976 Code,
sec. 10-61; 1998 Code, sec. 34-72)
Secs. 12-72–12-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. FLEA MARKETS/PUBLIC MARKETS*
Sec. 12-101. Purpose.
The purpose of the market regulations are:
(a) To better enhance the shopping experience of residents and visitors;
(b) To enhance the visual image of the city, including the Mansfield Highway corridor;
(c) To maximize traffic and pedestrian safety; and
(d) To deter and exclude the sale of stolen property and contraband at markets.
(Ordinance 2015-07-002 adopted 7/7/15; Ordinance 2019-05 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 12-102. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/554
City enforcement personnel: Shall mean any city employee whose duties include enforcement of any
ordinances or codes of the city. The city manager may designate which employees' duties include enforcement
duties, but shall include police officers, code enforcement officers, and building inspectors.
Licensee: Shall mean the owner and/or operator of a market.
Manager: Shall mean the individual who is in charge at any given time at a market, which may or may not be
the owner or the operator.
Market: Shall include but is not limited to indoor flea markets, outdoor flea markets, public markets, and farmers
markets as defined in the comprehensive zoning ordinance for the city. Markets shall also include any other
market that invites vendors to sell or display goods, wares, produce, plants, food, and similar items whether the
items be secondhand or new.
Market operator: Shall mean an individual, limited partnership, corporation, etc. which operates said market.
Market owner: Shall mean an individual, limited partnership, corporation, etc. which has ownership of a market
and may or may not operate said market.
Participant map locator: Shall mean a current map with letter and number coordinates, similar to those used on
roadmaps, to allow for the reasonable identification of participant location within the property.
Stall: Shall include but is not limited to all selling areas in a market commonly referred to as stalls, booths,
tables or other similar arrangements, vendor space, wall space allotted to different vendors, and food court
spaces.
Vendor: Shall include any individual, company, corporation, or partnership that sells merchandise at a market.
(Ordinance 2015-07-002 adopted 7/7/15; Ordinance 2019-05 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 12-103. Exemption from provisions of article III.
Those vendors displaying and selling merchandise in a licensed market shall be exempt from the provisions of
article III entitled “Junk Dealers and Secondhand Dealers” of this chapter which generally pertains to business
such as pawn shops, etc. so long as they comply with the provisions of this article and are not buying, trading,
or purchasing items for resale from customers. (Ordinance 2015-07-002 adopted 7/7/15; Ordinance 2019-05
adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 12-104. Annual license required.
(a) No market shall be in operation within the city without obtaining an annual license by March 31 of each
calendar year. A valid flea market/public market license shall exempt that business from the requirement of
obtaining an annual business permit under article IX of this chapter. Said license shall include the following
provisions:
(1) Written application. An application for a license shall be in writing and shall contain at a
minimum the following information:
a. The address within the city upon or from which the business is operated;
b. The legal description of the premises on which the business is located;
c. The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the owners thereof;
d. The names, addresses, and phone number of the manager(s) operating the business, if
different from the owner;
e. The number of stalls at said location;
f. The business's state sales tax identification number as per rule 3.286 of the State and
Local Sales and Use Taxes of the Texas Administrative Code if applicable for sales;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/554
g. Application shall be signed by owner/operator and managers and shall be notarized by a
notary public.
(2) License fees. The annual license fee for licenses under this section shall be defined by the
annual business permit fee as required by applicable city ordinances.
(3) Responsible parties. The owner of the property shall be responsible for any violations of this
article; however, if the owner of the property is leasing or otherwise allowing the land to be used by
the operator or owner of the market, then the market owner and his/her designee, manager, or
operator shall be the responsible parties for any and all violations of this article. The responsible
parties may be jointly and severally liable as parties for violations of this article.
(4) Documents required as part of application. Applicant shall provide the following documents
with the written application for license:
a. Copy of Texas sales tax certificate.
b. Map of the market with each stall clearly numbered.
c. Property owner permission in writing to operate a flea market on premises; submitted with
annual business license paperwork.
(b) It is an offense for a person to operate a flea market/public market without first obtaining an annual
business license.
(c) It is an offense for a person to submit false information on an application. False information in an
application shall invalidate any license issued and any further operation of the business shall be deemed as
operating without a license.
(Ordinance 2015-07-002 adopted 7/7/15; Ordinance 2019-05 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 12-105. Reserved for future expansion.
Sec. 12-106. Scope and limitation of license.
A license issued under this article shall not entitle the holder thereof to engage in the sale or purchase of used
merchandise, but shall only authorize the operation of a market. A sales and use permit is required if an
owner/operator of a market intends to directly sell items at the market. (Ordinance 2015-07-002 adopted 7/7/15;
Ordinance 2019-05 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 12-107. Vendor logs required.
A participant locator map list shall be kept current for each day of operation. This log will be made available to
emergency services personnel upon request. (Ordinance 2015-07-002 adopted 7/7/15; Ordinance 2019-05
adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 12-108. Reserved for future expansion.
Sec. 12-109. Inspection of merchandise.
(a) All merchandise offered for sale on the premises of a market shall be subject to inspection during regular
business hours by city officials or employees, including but not limited to city enforcement personnel to the
extent that such inspection is directly within their jurisdictional boundaries.
(b) A person commits an offense if he or she refuses to permit an inspection of merchandise and the
inspection is requested at a reasonable time.
(Ordinance 2015-07-002 adopted 7/7/15; Ordinance 2019-05 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 12-110. Display of merchandise from which identifying marks have been removed.
(a) No merchandise shall be displayed for sale at a market from which the manufacturer's seal, number or
brand has been removed or obliterated. A vendor commits an offense if the vendor offers for sale any
merchandise that violates this subsection.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/554
(b) A market owner/operator commits an offense if the owner/operator knowingly permits the sale of
merchandise that violates this section.
(c) This section shall not apply to obliteration that occurs as the result of normal wear and tear due to aging
or normal use.
(Ordinance 2015-07-002 adopted 7/7/15; Ordinance 2019-05 adopted 8/20/19)
Secs. 12-111, 12-112. Reserved for future expansion.
Sec. 12-113. Additional requirements for market owners/operators and vendors.
All markets owners/operators shall abide by the following requirements and require all vendors to adhere to the
following regulations as applicable:
(a) Vendors shall not sell out [of] any passenger compartment, cab or trunk of any vehicle. This
shall not apply to food trucks that have a food vendor permit from the City of Forest Hill Permit
Department.
(b) Vendors shall not sell animals of any kind, unless licensed specifically for such sales by the
State of Texas.
(c) Vendors shall not sell prohibited weapons as defined by the Texas Penal Code.
(d) Vendors may sell fire arms as defined by the Texas Penal Code.
(e) All food vendors must obtain a vendor's permit from the permit's department on an annual
basis and shall adhere to all regulations related to said vendors.
(f) Shall display Texas Sales Tax Certificate.
(Ordinance 2015-07-002 adopted 7/7/15; Ordinance 2019-05 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 12-114. Additional enhancement regulations for market owners.
All market owners shall provide the following enhancements as applicable to their individual market.
Subsections (a) and (b) shall only apply to market owner/operators who begin operations in the city on or after
August 6, 2019. Owner/operators who purchase an existing flea market facility after the date of the ordinance
from which this section derives shall not be exempt from subsections (a) and (b):
(a) Landscaping:
(1) Markets shall establish a landscaping strip of at least five (5) feet wide across the entire
length of the market's property that abuts a street.
(2) Said landscaping strip shall be maintained in an aesthetically pleasing manner and
owner shall not allow for any dead or dying vegetation.
(3) Should landscaping strip be required at any intersection then landscaping must not block
drivers' view of street or oncoming traffic.
(4) Markets that have a paved surface out to the abutting street must install a planter box at
least three (3) feet wide abutting the entire length of the market.
(5) Each landscaping strip or planter box shall contain two or more of the following
elements: grass, groundcover, berms, trees, shrubs, flowering and non-flowering plants,
stonework, and water features. The use of native and adapted, drought tolerant plants is
encouraged to meet the requirements of this article.
(6) It is an affirmative defense to this requirement that watering restrictions have been
placed on homeowners and business owners due to drought conditions.
(b) Paving requirements:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/554
(1) Any parking area or portion of property used for parking shall be paved with concrete,
asphalt, crushed stone, crushed asphalt, or a similar material approved by the city. Parking
area must not allow potholes in paved surface in excess of 10 inches in circumference.
(2) All outdoor vendor areas and walking areas shall be paved in a material as specified
above.
(c) Stall requirements:
(1) Any market that allows for outdoor vendors shall provide stalls. Stalls may be covered by
awnings and each stall shall be clearly marked for identification that matches the map provided
to the city. Awnings must meet current building code standards and be maintained as such.
(2) Any market that allows for indoor vendors shall clearly define each stall's area and mark
each stall for identification that matches the map provided to the city.
(d) Restroom facilities:
(1) All markets shall provide restroom facilities for their vendors and customers which may
be indoor restrooms, outdoor restrooms or portable restrooms commonly referred to as port-opotties.
Construction of all restroom facilities, with the exception of portable restrooms, shall
adhere to the requirements stated in the comprehensive zoning ordinance and applicable
building codes.
(Ordinance 2015-07-002 adopted 7/7/15; Ordinance 2019-05 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 12-115. Enforcement and penalties for violation.
This article may be enforced by the city manager and/or his or her designees and city enforcement personnel.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each
day such violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state, unless specifically
referred to in the body of the ordinance from which this article derives, is not required for the proof of an offense
defined by this section. (Ordinance 2015-07-002 adopted 7/7/15; Ordinance 2019-05 adopted 8/20/19)
Secs. 12-116–12-133. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. RENTAL PROPERTIES
Sec. 12-134. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as
specified in this article or as specified in the zoning ordinance or building code, as adopted and as amended.
Where a conflict exists, the zoning ordinance, then the building code controls. Where terms are not defined,
they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Merriam-Webster
Dictionary, Unabridged, Copyright 1998, shall be considered as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Terms
in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Terms used in the masculine gender include the
feminine and the feminine the masculine. Whenever the terms “dwelling,” “dwelling unit,” “premises,” and
“structure” are used herein, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the term “or any part
thereof.”
Apartment complex means a building or group of buildings located on a single premises and containing three or
more dwelling units that are leased or offered for lease to occupants.
Building code means the latest version of the International Building Code, existing building code, residential
code, property maintenance code, fire code, plumbing, Mechanical and National Electrical Code, as adopted by
the city council, as it may be amended, and as amended by regional and local amendments.
Code official means the official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this article or any
duly authorized representative, including but not limited to the chief building official, fire chief or their designee.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/554
Critical violation means a violation of this article, the building code, state or federal law that results in imminent
threat of death or injury to persons on the premises of a dwelling unit.
Dwelling unit means a structure or a part of a structure, which is used as a home, residence, or sleeping place
by one or more persons maintaining a common household to the exclusion of all others. It may also mean a
building or portion of a building designed to provide independent living facilities for not more than one family
and that contains bathroom facilities and not more than one kitchen.
Licensee means any person who has been issued a license under this article.
Life safety violation means a violation of this article, the building code, state or federal law that results in
imminent threat of death or injury to persons on the premises of a dwelling unit.
Minor violation means any departure from the building code standards having no or an insignificant impact on
the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of the dwelling unit.
Owner.
(1) The term “owner” means the person or entity claiming or in whom is vested, the ownership,
dominion or title of real property, including but not limited to:
a. The holder of a fee simple title;
b. The holder of a life estate;
c. The holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five years or more;
d. The buyer in a contract for deed;
e. A mortgagee, receiver, executor or trustee in control of real property.
(2) The term “owner” does not include a holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for an initial term
of less than five years.
Owner occupied property means a dwelling unit where the owner resides on the property as principal
residential dwelling with persons affiliated with said person by blood or marriage.
Rent means the offering or leasing of a dwelling unit to an occupant other than the owner and involves the
payment of a rental amount, through consideration, either as monetary compensation or barter exchange
transaction.
Rental inspection means an inspection of a rental unit to determine compliance with all applicable standards set
for the city building, housing, property maintenance, electrical, plumbing, health and zoning codes, and any
other applicable state or local laws.
Rental unit means a single-family dwelling unit, a duplex dwelling unit, a townhome dwelling unit, a
condominium dwelling unit, a manufactured home dwelling unit, or an individual multifamily dwelling unit,
apartment complex dwelling unit or a portion thereof, that is rented or offered for rent as a residence.
Residential rental license means a license issued by the code official or designee pursuant to this article and
referred to as a license herein.
Residential rental property means any building or portion thereof, which is rented, leased or let to be occupied
for compensation as one or more dwelling units, or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by one
or more families, or one or more person, living in independent dwelling units.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-150; Ordinance 200895, sec. 2(34.150), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 12-135. Scope, purpose and authority.
(a) Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all residential buildings and structures or portions
thereof intended or used for human habitation and occupation, as residential rental properties, which exist on
the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or used or constructed thereafter.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/554
(b) Purpose. To protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by establishing licensing
standards and inspections for residential rental properties.
(c) Authority.
(1) The code official or designated representative, shall implement, interpret and enforce this
article.
(2) The code official shall have the authority to review and issue licenses, to deny, revoke or
determine not to renew a license and may issue citations for violations contained herein.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-151; Ordinance 200895, sec. 2(34.151), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 12-136. Registration required and application information.
(a) The owner of each rental unit or residential rental property within the city shall register such rental unit or
residential rental property with the code official, and thereafter shall renew the registration annually on the date
prescribed by the code official as set forth in this article.
(b) The owner of each rental unit within the city shall make application for registration within 30 days of
acquiring ownership of such rental unit or from converting the property from an owner occupied property to a
rental property.
(c) The code official, by administrative order, may establish annual renewal dates that will assist with the
orderly administration of this article. Such administrative order shall be maintained in the office of the city
secretary and shall be made available to the public during regular business hours.
(d) Application for rental registration shall be made upon a form provided by the city for such purpose and
shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) Street address of the rental unit, or in the case of multifamily dwelling complexes, of the
complex;
(2) Number of persons occupying the rental unit;
(3) Owner's name, if the owner is a:
a. Person, the mailing address, physical address, work telephone number, home telephone
number, driver license number or identification card number, and state of issuance of such
driver's license or identification card;
b. Partnership, the name of all partners, the principal business address and telephone
number of each partner;
c. Corporation, the state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent, the
names of all officers, and the contact information of any local office of such corporation.
(4) The name and address of the property manager, if any;
(5) Whether there has been a change of occupancy or an additional tenant of the rental unit since
the date of the last registration license application;
(6) Signature of the owner or the owner's agent;
(7) In the case of a multifamily dwelling or apartment complex, only one application shall be
required for the complex; however, the application shall set forth the total number of individual
dwelling units within the complex;
(8) All residential rental properties must comply with applicable state, federal and local laws that
may govern the use and occupancy of the residential rental property.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-152; Ordinance 200895, sec. 2(34.152), adopted 8/19/08)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/554
Sec. 12-137. Issuance of license.
(a) A rental registration license shall issue upon proper submittal of a rental registration application and
payment of an annual fee in the amount specified in a resolution adopted by the city council establishing a
schedule of fees.
(b) The rental registration license is not assignable or transferable.
(c) The rental registration license shall be valid for one year.
(d) Within 30 days of the date the city receives a completed license application, the city will issue a license or
notify the applicant that it refuses to issue a license.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-153; Ordinance 200895, sec. 2(34.153), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 12-138. License display and replacement.
(a) The rental registration license issued pursuant to this article must be displayed at all times inside the unit
in a place designated by the code official.
(b) A replacement rental registration license may be issued for one lost, destroyed or mutilated upon
application for such replacement license with the code official. The fee for such replacement rental registration
license shall be in the amount specified in a resolution adopted by the city council establishing a schedule of
fees.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-154; Ordinance 200895, sec. 2(34.154), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 12-139. Inspections.
(a) On application or renewal of a license, the city will inspect the exterior of the single family dwelling unit to
determine and ensure that the dwelling unit is not a public nuisance or substandard and that the rental unit
meets all zoning, health and safety requirements of the building code.
(b) The code official may inspect a rental unit to determine compliance with applicable state and local laws:
(1) On at least a biannual basis and on periodic basis, such as every 30 days, when needed to
ensure the correction of critical and/or life safety violations as noted in subsections (c) and (d) of this
section;
(2) If the renewal of a registration for a rental unit, or other evidence indicates that a change of
occupancy of one or more tenants has occurred at a rental unit;
(3) The code official notes an exterior code violation that indicates a potential critical or life safety
violation;
(4) As necessary, when the code official or EMS personnel note interior code violations during
calls for service based upon emergency or medical need and which forms the basis for documented
reasonable belief that specific life safety or critical violations exist. An administrative search warrant
may, but is not required to be utilized, during the on-going inspection of life safety and/or critical
violations;
(5) When requested by the occupant; and/or
(6) At any other time when authorized by law.
(c) The code official may enter a single-family dwelling unit at reasonable times to inspect the dwelling unit to
ensure compliance with the building code if the code official obtains:
(1) The consent of an adult, over the age of 18, lawfully occupying the dwelling unit;
(2) The consent of the license holder for an unoccupied dwelling unit; or
(3) An administrative search warrant to inspect the dwelling unit.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/554
(d) The code official is authorized to obtain an administrative search warrant to conduct an inspection
permitted by this article when probable cause exists to believe that a fire or health hazard, code violation or
unsafe building condition is present on the premises sought to be inspected. A search warrant is not authorized
based solely on the failure of an owner to allow an inspection under this section.
(e) Business records for the rental property shall be made available to the code official at the time of the
inspection or upon reasonable written request during regular business hours. Business records include but are
not limited to:
(1) Any state or federal license required;
(2) All rental agreements;
(3) Evidence of utility bills and ad valorem taxes paid;
(4) Any notices of violations issued by appropriate governmental agencies;
(5) Evidence of maintenance and repair of the rental unit or residential rental property.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-155; Ordinance 200895, sec. 2(34.155), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 12-140. Violations.
(a) It shall be unlawful to falsify or omit any material information on the rental registration license application.
The rental registration license application is a government record and as such, falsification, tampering, and
other offenses may be prosecuted as provided by state law.
(b) It shall be unlawful to rent or lease a rental unit within the city, without a current and valid rental
registration license for such unit.
(c) It shall be unlawful to fail to update any material information on the rental registration license application
upon renewal.
(d) It shall be unlawful to fail or refuse to have rental inspections done in accordance with this article.
(e) It shall be unlawful to assign or transfer the rental registration license.
(f) It shall be unlawful to complete fail to complete repairs in accordance with section 12-141
(g) It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations or ordinances
that apply to the use and operation of the residential rental property.
(h) It shall be a violation to maintain the residential rental property in a manner that constitutes a public
nuisance under the building code or city ordinances.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-156; Ordinance 200895, sec. 2(34.156), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 12-141. Repairs.
(a) Violations noted during an inspection must be completed as follows:
(1) Life safety violations must be corrected within 24 hours of notice. Life safety violations that
have been safely isolated from occupants may be repaired by the date given in the notice.
(2) Critical violations must be corrected within 72 hours of notice.
(b) To pass reinspection, all repairs must be performed in a workmanlike manner, to current industry
standards, utilizing materials and methods commonly associated with repairs of similar nature and comply with
this article, the building code, and state and federal law.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-157; Ordinance 200895, sec. 2(34.157), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 12-142. Denial, revocation or nonrenewal.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/554
(a) Revocation.
(1) A license may be revoked by the code official due to the following:
a. Failure to permit an inspection required under this article.
b. Repeated violations of this article or the building code.
c. Maintaining the residential rental property in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance.
d. Repeated calls for service to the residential rental property due to alleged criminal activity.
(2) To revoke a license, the city must send written notice of the city's intent to revoke the license
not less than 30 business days prior to the date of revocation. The notice shall include:
a. A clear statement of the reason the city intends to revoke the license;
b. The date the revocation will become effective, which will not be less than 30 business
days from the date written; and
c. A statement that the license holder may file a written appeal of the proposed revocation to
the city council within five business days of the date of the notice in accordance with section
12-143
(b) Denial.
(1) A license may be denied by the code official due to the following:
a. Failure to permit an inspection required under this article.
b. Repeated violations of this article or the building code.
c. Maintaining the residential rental property in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance.
d. Failure to pay all applicable taxes and utility bills.
e. Repeated calls for service to the residential rental property due to alleged criminal activity.
(2) If the city refuses to issue a license, the city will give written notice of the denial to the
applicant as soon as reasonably possible, but not more than five business days after the decision is
made to deny the license. The written notice will include:
a. A clear statement of the reason for the city's denial; and
b. A statement that the applicant may appeal the denial of the license to the city council by
filing a written notice of appeal in accordance with section 12-143
(c) Nonrenewal.
(1) A license may be denied by the code official due to the following:
a. Failure to permit an inspection required under this article.
b. Repeated violations of this article or the building code.
c. Maintaining the residential rental property in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance.
d. Failure to pay all applicable taxes and utility bills.
e. Repeated calls for service to the residential rental property due to alleged criminal activity.
(2) If the city refuses to renew a license, the city will give written notice of the intention to not
renew within 30 calendar days of the date of the expiration of the license, or no later than five
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/554
business days after the date the application is submitted for renewal. The written notice will include:
a. A clear statement of the reason for the city's determination not to renew the license; and
b. A statement that the applicant may appeal the nonrenewal of that license by filing a
written notice of appeal in accordance with section 12-143
(1998 Code, sec. 34-158; Ordinance 200895, sec. 2(34.158), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 12-143. Appeals.
(a) An owner may appeal the denial, revocation or nonrenewal of a rental registration license by filing a
written request for a hearing with the city secretary within five calendar days following the denial, nonrenewal or
revocation of such license. If a request for a hearing is received, a hearing shall be held within 20 calendar days
of the city's receipt of that request.
(b) The hearing shall be held before the city council.
(c) The city, the person appealing, and any other interested party, may present evidence and argument.
(d) After completion of the hearing, the city council will render a written decision on the appeal that includes a
summary of the evidence that supports the decision. A copy of the written decision will be provided to the
person filing the appeal and shall be a public record subject to the Public Information Act.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-159; Ordinance 200895, sec. 2(34.159), adopted 8/19/08)
Sec. 12-144. Defenses.
(a) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that the single-family dwelling unit was rented for a period of
less than six months to a person who was the immediate past owner of the dwelling unit or who will be the
immediate next owner of the dwelling unit.
(b) It is an affirmative defense that the dwelling unit is owner occupied and the owner of the property rents a
single room to a solitary person unaffiliated by blood or marriage.
(c) It is an affirmative defense that within the proceeding five years, the apartment complex or multifamily
dwelling unit was constructed and issued a certificate of occupancy that has not been revoked.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-161; Ordinance 200895, sec. 2(34.161), adopted 8/19/08)
Secs. 12-145–12-173. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. GARAGE SALES
Sec. 12-174. Garage sales.
No resident of the city shall conduct a garage sale in the city except in accordance with the rules, regulations
and restrictions in this article. (1998 Code, sec. 34-200; Ordinance 2010-02-002, sec. 2(34-200), adopted
2/2/10)
Sec. 12-175. Definitions.
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Garage sale means the sale of tangible personal property or used or unwanted household items which is
conducted on the premises of a residentially owned property and held completely within the confines of the
garage, yard, patio, or driveway of said premises. The term “garage sale” may include but is not limited to the
following terms: yard sale, estate sale, moving sale, patio sale, rummage sale, occasional sale, temporary sale
and other similar terms.
Household items means property which is used, acquired and/or maintained in the normal course of living in or
maintaining a residence.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/554
Prohibited items means new merchandise which was acquired solely for the purpose of resale or obtained on
consignment; this is to include the selling of prepared food or food items.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-201; Ordinance 2010-02-002, sec. 2(34-201), adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 12-176. Permit required and application.
(a) A permit shall be required to conduct a garage sale. The permit shall only be issued to the property owner
and/or the occupant of the premises once a written application has been submitted to the permit department.
The permit shall be posted during the entire course of the garage sale.
(b) Any person who desires to conduct a garage sale shall make a written application to the permit
department and shall contain the following information:
(1) Name of the applicant.
(2) Address the garage sale is to be conducted.
(3) The beginning and ending dates of the garage sale.
(4) The hours of operation the garage sale shall be conducted.
(5) List names and addresses of other participants in garage sale.
(6) Proposed “rain-out” dates for another garage sale should the permitted garage sale be
cancelled due to inclement weather.
(7) An affirmative statement that the items to be sold at the garage sale are personal property
owned by the applicant and was not acquired for the purpose of resale.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-202; Ordinance 2010-02-002, sec. 2(34-202), adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 12-177. Regulations on garage sales.
(a) Number and duration of sales. No more than two garage sales shall be permitted at any one location or
address during a 12-month calendar year starting January I to December 31. No sale shall last more than three
consecutive days. All sales must start and end on the days listed on the written application.
(b) Deferment of garage sale. Only one garage sale per year may be deferred to the next weekend of the
scheduled sale per the application at the discretion of the applicant with written notification to the permit
department.
(c) Number of garage sale participants. No more than two extra persons may participate in the garage sale
with the applicant. At the time of application, the applicant must list the names and addresses of the persons
participating in the garage sale with the applicant. All persons involved in the garage sale, the applicant, as well
as, the other participants must be a person who does not hold himself out as engaging in, or does not habitually
engage in, the business of selling such property at retail.
(d) Inclement weather. Should rain or inclement weather affect two or more of the dates on the garage sale
application then a new permit shall be issued for the rain-out dates on the initial garage sale permit at no cost to
the applicant. A rain-out permit will only be issued for the dates selected by the applicant at the time the original
garage sale permit was issued.
(e) Garage sale signs. Only three signs advertising the sale are allowed per garage sale and the following
regulations must be adhered to:
(1) All signs to be used for a garage sale shall be those signs issued by the city at the time of
permitting. One sign shall be issued with the permit. Up to two additional signs may be purchased
for an additional charge as approved in the fee schedule. No other garage sale signs shall be
permitted.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/554
(2) Signs shall have the permit number clearly and legibly marked on each sign in one-inch
lettering.
(3) One on-premises sign and two off-premises signs are allowed per garage sale.
(4) Such signs may not be placed so as to impair the comer visibility of intersections of streets,
driveways and alleys pursuant to section 44-4(b).
(5) Such signs shall not be placed within the public right-of-way.
(6) Such signs shall not be placed on public property including but not limited to parks, public
facilities and public open spaces.
(7) The sign area shall not exceed six square feet.
(8) The height of such signs shall not exceed three feet
(9) All such signs must be placed on private property only, with written consent of the property
owner.
(10) Only one sign for every 50 feet of linear frontage of private property shall be permitted.
(11) Such signs shall not be affixed to utility poles, official signs, or vehicles parked on a city
street.
(12) Signs may be placed 24 hours prior to the commencement of the sale and must be removed
within 24 hours after the conclusion of the sale.
(13) Any and all garage sale signs not in compliance with the rules, regulations and restrictions of
this section shall be subject to removal and/or fine.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-203; Ordinance 2010-02-002, sec. 2(34-203), adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 12-178. Miscellaneous regulations for garage sales.
(a) Citywide garage sales. During the weekend of the citywide garage sale, each property must apply for a
permit in writing and obtain a permit at no cost to the applicant. Choosing to participate in the citywide garage
sale does not lessen the number of allowable garage sales per year.
(b) Churches conducting garage sales. The congregation for churches in residentially zoned portions of the
city may conduct two garage sales per calendar year provided that all the rules, regulations, and restrictions in
this article are adhered to.
(c) Properties not in residentially zoned districts. Any property that is not in a residentially zoned district may
not conduct a garage sale at any time. Residentially zoned districts are to include single-family residential, twofamily
residential and multifamily residential districts only.
(d) Right to refuse permit. Should any person be cited or warned for violations of this article two or more
times during any 12-month period, the city may refuse to issue that individual a permit to conduct a garage sale
anytime during the subsequent 12-month period whether or not said person resides at the same property where
the violation occurred.
(1998 Code, sec. 34-204; Ordinance 2010-02-002, sec. 2(34-204), adopted 2/2/10)
Secs. 12-179–12-209. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. PEDDLERS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 12-210. Definition.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/554
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Peddler means any person, whether a resident of this city or not, traveling from house to house, or from street
to street, for the purpose of selling, or soliciting for sale, goods, wares, merchandise or services, and shall also
mean and include any person transacting a temporary business within the city at an established place of
business. The term “peddler” includes the term “solicitor,” “transient or itinerant merchant or vendor,” or
“transient or itinerant photographer.”
(1976 Code, sec. 22-1; 1998 Code, sec. 94-1)
Sec. 12-211. General exceptions to article.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
(1) Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual
course of business.
(2) Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public
officers selling goods, wares and merchandise according to law.
(3) Vendors registered and displaying within the confines of a licensed flea market as defined in
article IV of this chapter, or vendors at residential garage sales with appropriate permits.
(4) Solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations
which have their principal place of activity within this city.
(1976 Code, sec. 22-2; 1998 Code, sec. 94-2)
Sec. 12-212. Limited exemptions to article.
Solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations which have a
principal place of activity in the county and no such principal place of activity within this city shall be exempt
from sections 12-248 and 12-249 and shall be exempt from section 12-246(2). Such limited exemption shall
apply only to members of the organization for which the sales, solicitations or distributions are being made, and
each member actively engaged in such activities within this city shall be subject to the remaining provisions of
this article. (1976 Code, sec. 22-2.1; 1998 Code, sec. 94-3)
Sec. 12-213. Refusing to leave.
Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises
after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises or his agent to leave the same and not
return to such premises shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1976 Code, sec. 22-3; 1998 Code, sec. 94-
4)
Sec. 12-214. Entrance to premises restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises when the same are posted with a sign
stating “No Peddlers Allowed” or “No Solicitations Allowed” or other words to such effect. (1976 Code, sec. 22-
4; 1998 Code, sec. 94-5)
Sec. 12-215. Misrepresentation.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality or nature of
his goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. (1976
Code, sec. 22-5; 1998 Code, sec. 94-6)
Sec. 12-216. Hours of operation.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the city between the hours of
one-half hour before sunset and 8:00 a.m. the following morning, or at any time on Sundays, except by specific
appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer. (1976 Code, sec. 22-6; 1998 Code, sec. 94-7)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/554
Sec. 12-217. Selling on public right-of-way.
No person, firm or corporation shall sell or attempt to sell any merchandise on any public street or right-of-way.
(1976 Code, sec. 22-7; 1998 Code, sec. 94-8)
Sec. 12-218. Soliciting donations or distributing literature in roadways prohibited.
No person shall go onto any public roadway for the purpose of soliciting donations or distributing literature of
any kind to a person in an automobile using such public roadway. Police officers issuing citations or obtaining
information and operators and attendants of emergency vehicles and wreckers at the scene of an actual
emergency or wreck are exempted from the provisions of this section. (1998 Code, sec. 94-9; Ordinance
970137, sec. 1, adopted 11/4/97)
Secs. 12-219–12-244. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
Sec. 12-245. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler within this city without first obtaining a
permit so to do. (1976 Code, sec. 22-18; 1998 Code, sec. 94-31)
Sec. 12-246. Application.
The application for a permit required by the provisions of this article shall state or contain the following:
(1) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime or
misdemeanor or violation of any state or federal law or municipal ordinance or code; the nature of
the offense; the punishment or penalty assessed therefor, if previously convicted; and the place of
conviction.
(2) The information contained on the applicant's state driver's license, or, if the applicant does not
have such a license, the information contained on his state or federally issued identification card, all
of which shall be verified by examination of such license or card by the officer who issues peddler's
permits.
(3) Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept or receive payment or
deposit of money in advance of final delivery.
(4) The period of time the applicant wishes to engage in business within this city.
(5) The local and permanent address of the applicant.
(6) The local and permanent address and the name of the person, if any, that the applicant
represents.
(7) The kind of goods, wares, merchandise or services in which the applicant wishes to engage in
such business within the city.
(8) The last five cities or towns wherein the applicant has worked before corning to this city.
(9) Such other relevant information as may be required for the investigation of the applicant.
(1976 Code, sec. 22-19; 1998 Code, sec. 94-32)
Sec. 12-247. False information.
It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with his application
for a permit required by this article. (1976 Code, sec. 22-21; 1998 Code, sec. 94-33)
Sec. 12-248. Fee.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/554
Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall pay a fee as
established by the city council. (1976 Code, sec. 22-23; 1998 Code, sec. 94-34)
Sec. 12-249. Bond required.
The application for a permit required by the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by a bond in the
penal sum of $1,000.00 signed by the applicant and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to
do business in the state, conditioned for the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise or services in
accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery, and also conditioned to indemnify any and all
purchasers or customers for any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by
the principal of such bond, at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer
within 30 days after delivery, and which bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons that may make any
purchase or give any order to the principal on such bond or to an agent or employee of such principal. (1976
Code, sec. 22-24; 1998 Code, sec. 94-35)
Sec. 12-250. Service of process.
Before any permit shall be issued under this article, there shall also be filed with the city secretary an
instrument in writing, signed by the applicant under oath, nominating and appointing the city secretary his true
and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of
such applicant, and service of summons in any action brought upon the applicant's bond shall be deemed
made when served on the city secretary. (1976 Code, sec. 22-25; 1998 Code, sec. 94-36)
Sec. 12-251. Issuance.
No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article until the applicant shall have complied with all the
provisions and requirements of this article. (1976 Code, sec. 22-26; 1998 Code, sec. 94-37)
Sec. 12-252. Permits to be issued only to individual persons; permit required for each individual
engaging in business.
No peddler's permit shall be issued to a corporation, partnership or other impersonal legal entity, but each
individual person engaging in the business of peddling within the city shall be required to have a permit,
whether acting for himself or as an agent or representative of another. (1976 Code, sec. 22-27; 1998 Code,
sec. 94-38)
Sec. 12-253. Contents of permit.
Each permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be signed by the city secretary, shall be dated as of
the date of its issuance, and shall state the duration or term of such permit on the face thereof. Any permit not
dated and signed as herein provided, or which was issued in violation of this section, shall be void. (1976 Code,
sec. 22-28; 1998 Code, sec. 94-39)
Sec. 12-254. Display.
Every peddler having a permit issued under the provisions of this article and doing business within the city shall
display his permit upon the request of any person, and failure so to do shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (1976
Code, sec. 22-29; 1998 Code, sec. 94-40)
Sec. 12-255. Duration.
Every permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for the period of time stated therein, but in
no event shall any such permit be issued for a period of time in excess of 12 months. (1976 Code, sec. 22-30;
1998 Code, sec. 94-41)
Sec. 12-256. Revocation.
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked for the violation by the permittee of any
applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance. Upon such revocation, such permit shall
immediately be surrendered to the city secretary, and failure to do so shall be a misdemeanor. (1976 Code, sec.
22-31; 1998 Code, sec. 94-42)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/554
Secs. 12-257–12-275. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. POOL AND BILLIARD ROOMS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 12-276. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in this section:
Billiard table means any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion with or without pockets upon which balls are
impelled by a stick or cue.
Licensee means any person holding a pool hall license issued under the provisions of this article.
Pool hall means any place or establishment which is required by state law to pay an occupation tax to the state
for owning and operating one or more billiard tables.
(1976 Code, sec. 6-53; 1998 Code, sec. 18-31)
Sec. 12-277. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to private clubs, societies or corporations not operated for private
profit although a charge is made for playing, where use of the pool or billiard tables is restricted to members of
the society, club or corporation and their invited guests, and from which the general public is excluded. (1976
Code, sec. 6-54; 1998 Code, sec. 18-32)
Sec. 12-278. Age restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for the operator or operators of any pool hall to permit persons under the age of 17 years to
engage in or play pool, billiards or other games on the premises of such pool hall unless such persons under
the age of 17 years shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian or shall have obtained written and signed
permission to play from a parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for the operator or operators of any pool hall to
allow any persons attending elementary, junior high or senior high school to engage in or play pool, billiards or
other games on the premises of such pool hall before 4:00 p.m., except during official school holidays. (1976
Code, sec. 6-55; 1998 Code, sec. 18-33)
Sec. 12-279. Gambling.
The operator or operators of a pool hall shall not permit gambling, betting or wagering of any kind or character
to take place on the premises of such pool hall. (1976 Code, sec. 6-56; 1998 Code, sec. 18-34)
Sec. 12-280. Prostitutes, vagrants, etc.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a pool hall to permit any prostitute, male or female procurer or vagrant to
be present at such pool hall. (1976 Code, sec. 6-57; 1998 Code, sec. 18-35)
Sec. 12-281. Inspections.
Any pool hall within the city shall be subject to inspection by members of the health department and the police
department at any time. (1976 Code, sec. 6-58; 1998 Code, sec. 18-36)
Secs. 12-282–12-310. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 12-311. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pool hall in the city without first obtaining a license therefor from
the city tax assessor and collector. (1976 Code, sec. 6-6; 1998 Code, sec. 18-51)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/554
Sec. 12-312. Application.
Any person desiring a license to operate a pool hall, as herein defined, shall file with the chief of police a written
application for such license, duly verified under oath, which application shall contain the following information:
(1) The location by street and number of the place which is to be used for such purpose, the size
thereof, the number of pool or billiard tables proposed to be used, and the name and address of the
applicant.
(2) If the applicant is an individual, a statement that he is a bona fide resident of the state, the
length of such residence therein, and whether or not he has ever been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor, and, if so, the nature of the offense, and in this connection he may be required to
submit to fingerprinting by the police department of the city.
(3) If the applicant is a firm, association or partnership, all of the information prescribed in
subsection (2) of this section shall apply to each individual composing the firm, association or
partnership.
(4) If the applicant is a corporation, a statement that the applicant is organized and chartered
under the laws of the state, or if a foreign corporation, that such corporation is licensed to do
business in the state, and the same information with reference to the operator or person in charge of
such pool ball shall be given as prescribed in subsection (2) of this section; in addition thereto a list
of the officers, directors and stockholders of such corporation shall be given.
(5) Occupation or employment of the applicant for a period of five years next preceding the filing
of his application.
(1976 Code, sec. 6-66; 1998 Code, sec. 18-52)
Sec. 12-313. Misrepresentations.
It shall be unlawful to misrepresent the kind and character of the pool hall to be operated or any other fact or
statement made in such application. Any misrepresentation of any applicant for the purpose of avoiding the
provisions of this article shall, in addition to the other penalties prescribed by law, be cause for the revocation or
denial of the license. (1976 Code, sec. 6-67; 1998 Code, sec. 18-53)
Sec. 12-314. Investigation of premises.
No license shall be granted under the provisions of this article unless it shall appear, upon investigation by the
chief of police and the building commissioner, that the premises desired to be used as a pool hall comply with
all ordinances of the city and laws of the state. (1976 Code, sec. 6-68; 1998 Code, sec. 18-54)
Sec. 12-315. Amount of fee.
The fee to be charged and collected for any license issued under the provisions of this article shall be as
established by the city council. (1976 Code, sec. 6-69; 1998 Code, sec. 18-55)
Sec. 12-316. Proration of fee; refunds.
The fee for any license issued under the provisions of this article after January 1 of any year shall be prorated
on the basis of the effective duration of the license. There shall be no refund of any license fee paid hereunder
for any cause whatsoever. (1976 Code, sec. 6-70; 1998 Code, sec. 18-56)
Sec. 12-317. Denial.
No license to operate a pool hall shall be issued under the provisions of this article if the applicant:
(1) Has had a license revoked during the past two years;
(2) Has had a license denied during the past 12 months; or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/554
(3) Has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude or any offense involving immoral acts,
lewd or indecent conduct or narcotics; unless the premises to be used meet the sanitary provisions
of this Code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations.
(1976 Code, sec. 6-71; 1998 Code, sec. 18-57)
Sec. 12-318. Right of appeal where refused.
In the event the chief of police shall refuse to grant a license to any applicant under the provisions of this article,
such applicant shall have the right of appeal to the city council by giving to the council, within ten days after
refusal, written notice of intention to appeal such refusal and by requesting a hearing by the council upon the
application. In the event of such appeal, a hearing shall be had before the council, within 30 days after notice is
given, to determine the correctness of the action of the chief of police on such application. The determination of
the city council on such appeal shall be final. (1976 Code, sec. 6-72; 1998 Code, sec. 18-58)
Sec. 12-319. Issuance.
The license required by this article shall be issued by the assessor and collector of truces when the conditions
of this article have been complied with and when application for license has been approved by the chief of
police or the city council. (1976 Code, sec. 6-73; 1998 Code, sec. 18-59)
Sec. 12-320. Contents.
The license provided for by this article shall state on its face to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the
address and location of such pool hall, and the number of pool tables permitted, and shall be signed and sealed
by the assessor and collector of taxes. (1976 Code, sec. 6-74; 1998 Code, sec. 18-60)
Sec. 12-321. Expiration.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on December 31 of each year, and shall be
renewable annually. (1976 Code, sec. 6-75; 1998 Code, sec. 18-61)
Sec. 12-322. Display.
Each license issued under the provisions of this article shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place
at or near the entrance to such pool hall in such a place and position that it may be easily read at any time.
(1976 Code, sec. 6-76; 1998 Code, sec. 18-62)
Sec. 12-323. Transfer.
No license issued under the provisions of this article may be transferred to any other location or person. (1976
Code, sec. 6-77; 1998 Code, sec. 18-63)
Sec. 12-324. Cancellation.
(a) If any licensee under the provisions of this article violates said provisions or other ordinances of the city or
laws of the state, the chief of police may at any time give notice in writing to such licensee or operator of such
pool hall of a hearing to be held for the purpose of determining if the license should be cancelled, and upon
such hearing the chief of police may cancel such license for any of the causes set forth in this article, which
action shall become final at the end of ten days after such hearing.
(b) The licensee shall have the right of appeal to the city council, within such ten-day period, and if such
appeal is taken, then the city council shall conduct a hearing on such cancellation and may cancel such license
for any of the causes so shown, which action shall be final.
(1976 Code, sec. 6-78; 1998 Code, sec. 18-64)
Secs. 12-325–12-360. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. ANNUAL BUSINESS PERMIT AND INSPECTIONS
Sec. 12-361. Required.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/554
It shall be unlawful to operate any business, whether retail, home occupation, wholesale, manufacturing,
industrial or otherwise, from or upon any premises located in any zoning classification within the city, without
first obtaining a permit from the permits department. It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false
statement in order to obtain a permit. (Ordinance 2012-07-002, sec. 2(34-300), adopted 7/17/12)
Sec. 12-362. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to enable the city and its officials to know of the existence, location, ownership,
and nature of each business operated from and upon premises within the corporate limits of the city, to be more
able to ascertain whether the operation thereof is in compliance with other ordinances of the city or applicable
state laws, and to allow for an inspection to be performed annually by the building official, code enforcement
officer, and the fire department for compliance with building, zoning, code, fire, and life safety regulations.
(Ordinance 2012-07-002, sec. 2(34-301), adopted 7/17/12)
Sec. 12-363. Renewal; fee.
(a) Each permit issued hereunder shall be valid for one year from the anniversary date of the original
certificate of occupancy and shall be renewed each and every year before said date. However, the issuance of
said permit shall not exempt a commercial establishment from re-inspection or issuance of citations for
violations occurring during the period of time between permits.
(b) A fee shall be paid annually and the amount of said fee shall be based on the number of square feet of
floor space owned or occupied by said business owner by the following table:
Number of Square Feet of Floor Area in Building or
Business
Base Fee
Less than 5,000 $60.00
5,001 to 10,000 70.00
10,001 to 25,000 80.00
25,001 to 50,000 90.00
50,001 to 75,000 100.00
75,001 to 100,000 110.00
Greater than 100,000 110.00
plus $20.00 for each additional 50,000 sq. ft. or portion thereof
(c) An additional fee of $10.00 per floor shall be added to the base fee of the permit fee for multiple story
buildings for each floor above street level.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/554
(Ordinance 2012-07-002, sec. 2(34-302), adopted 7/17/12)
Sec. 12-364. Business permit; certificate of inspection.
(a) A business permit shall be issued by the building/permits department once the annual application, fees,
and inspections procedures have been satisfied. Each building owner and/or tenant shall maintain and display
a current business permit on the premises at all times.
(b) A certificate of inspection shall be issued by the fire department after all fire and life safety inspection
procedures have been completed. Each building owner and/or tenant shall maintain and display a current
certificate of inspection on the premises at all times. Hereinafter a certificate of inspection shall also be implied
when speaking of a business permit.
(Ordinance 2012-07-002, sec. 2(34-303), adopted 7/17/12)
Sec. 12-365. Application.
An application for a permit under this article shall be in writing and shall contain the following information:
(1) The address within the city upon or from which the business is operated;
(2) The legal description of the premises on which the business is located;
(3) The names and addresses of the owners thereof;
(4) The names and addresses of the manager operating the business, if different from the owners;
(5) The name or names under which the business will be operated;
(6) The date the business obtained a certificate of occupancy from the city;
(7) A full and complete description of the nature of the business, that is, retail, wholesale,
manufacturing, home occupation, service, or otherwise, including information as to the nature of the
products manufactured, sold, stored, and/or distributed by or through the business;
(8) The business's state sales tax number.
(Ordinance 2012-07-002, sec. 2(34-304), adopted 7/17/12)
Sec. 12-366. Exempt businesses.
(a) The following businesses are expressly exempt from the provisions of this article:
(1) Any business that shall hereafter be required to obtain a permit or license from the city for its
operation with the city under any other ordinance of the city;
(2) Any business that involves only distribution with the city such as by street delivery, through the
mail, or otherwise, without the location of a business office, headquarters, warehouse, store, shop,
etc., upon identifiable premises with the city;
(3) Any business for which a permit or license is required under state or federal law, but only if the
licensing or permit legislation of the state and/or federal government is of such a nature as to
constitute a preempting of the field to the extent that a registration permit requirement by the city
would be deemed unlawful interference with the state or federal regulations of the particular
business.
(b) Those businesses that are exempt with either subsection (1) or (2) of this section are exempt from the
registration portion of this article, but are not exempt from the building, code, fire, and life safety inspections that
shall be done on an annual basis.
(Ordinance 2012-07-002, sec. 2(34-305), adopted 7/17/12)
Sec. 12-367. Home occupations.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/554
Home occupation business owners shall register with the city and obtain a business permit as a registered
business conducting business within the incorporated city limits. Said permit shall be for registration purposes
only and the inspection language of this article shall not apply to home occupations. However, the issuance of
said permit shall not be construed to constitute municipal approval of the business, and shall not be deemed to
authorize the conduct of the business in violation of any federal, state, or municipal law or regulation or to stop
the city from complaining of the violation by the business of any other valid ordinance or regulation, either
federal, state, or municipal. The fee for home occupation business permits shall be $15.00. (Ordinance 2012-
07-002, sec. 2(34-306), adopted 7/17/12)
Sec. 12-368. Issuance of permit.
Applications shall be made to the permits department and it shall be the duty of the permit technician to issue
said permit to any business upon the submission of a proper application, payment of fee, and performance of
annual various inspections, without any duty to pass upon the legality of the business or its operation. The
issuance of a permit shall be evidence only that the business has registered with the city, for identification and
disclosure of its existence and operation. Issuance of such permit shall not be construed to constitute municipal
approval of the business, and shall not be deemed to authorize the conduct of the business in violation of any
federal, state, or municipal law or regulation or to stop the city from complaining of the violation by the business
or any other valid ordinance or regulation, either federal, state, or municipal. (Ordinance 2012-07-002, sec.
2(34-307), adopted 7/17/12)
Sec. 12-369. Multiple story and single story multiple tenant buildings.
The city manager or his/her designee reserves the right to require a separate business permit for tenants in
buildings with single or multiple stories. The building owner shall also be required to maintain a separate
certificate of inspection and business permit for the annual inspections of the building and common areas.
(Ordinance 2012-07-002, sec. 2(34-308), adopted 7/17/12)
Sec. 12-370. Transfer of permit.
A business permit shall not be transferred when a change in occupancy, use, or ownership occurs. Should a
change in use, occupancy, or ownership occur then a new application shall be made for said permit and new
fee shall be paid. (Ordinance 2012-07-002, sec. 2(34-309), adopted 7/17/12)
Sec. 12-371. Revocation of permit.
Any permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked when a determination has been made by the
city manager or his/her designee that one or more of the following has occurred:
(1) The business permit is being used by someone other than the person it was issued to.
(2) Conditions or limitations set forth in the permit have been violated.
(3) The possessor of the certificate fails, refuses, or neglects to allow an inspection to be
performed and fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with any order or notice served upon him under
the provisions of this article within the time period provided therein.
(4) False statements or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the plans, specifications,
application, or documentation on which the certificate was based.
(Ordinance 2012-07-002, sec. 2(34-310), adopted 7/17/12)
Sec. 12-372. Penalties for violation.
Any person in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined
of up to but not more than $500.00. (Ordinance 2012-07-002, sec. 2(34-311), adopted 7/17/12)
CHAPTER 14
CABLE TELEVISION*
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/554
Sec. 14-1. Penalty.
Whoever shall violate any provision of section 14-21 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $100.00 for a first offense and not more than $200.00 for a second and every
subsequent offense. The penalties provided in this section shall be enforced by appropriate proceedings
instituted by the city or by a franchised cable television operator. Each day any violation occurs or continues
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable hereunder. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-30; 1998 Code,
sec. 38-28)
Sec. 14-2. Removal or relocation of facilities.
The city shall have the power at any time to order and require any cable television operator to remove and
abate any pole, tower, wire, cable, electronic conductor, or any other structure or facility that is dangerous to life
or property and, in the event the operator, after written notice, fails or refuses to act, the city shall have the
power to remove or abate the same at the expense of the operator, all without compensation or liability for
damages to the operator. When required by the city for reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation
or widening or relocation, installation of sewer mains, water pipes, power lines, signal lights, tracks and
sanitation equipment, or any other type of structures or improvement by public agencies, any cable television
operator within the city shall, at its own expense, partake, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove
from the street or other public place any property of the operator when ordered in writing by the city council of
the city, and the operator shall have no claim for reimbursement of costs or damages against the city. (1976
Code, sec. 10½-2; 1998 Code, sec. 38-2)
Sec. 14-3. Interference with use of public ways or rights of property owners.
All transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment, and facilities erected or maintained by the
operator within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper and intended use
of streets, highways, alleys, utility easements, bridges and other public ways and places, and to cause
minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said
streets, highways, alleys, utility easements, bridges or other public ways or places. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-3;
1998 Code, sec. 38-3)
Sec. 14-4. Underground installation of lines.
In areas of the city having electric utility lines underground, whether required by ordinance or not, all of the
operator's lines, cables and wires shall be underground. Except in areas of underground electric service,
service from a public way to individual homes shall be above ground unless the homeowner agrees to pay the
cost of underground installation as may be determined by the operator. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-4; 1998 Code,
sec. 38-4)
Sec. 14-5. Restoration of pavement or other surfacing.
In the event of any disturbance of any pavement, sidewalk:, driveway or other surfacing, including cultivated
grass turf and any easement adjacent to residential premises, the operator shall at its cost and expense, and at
the time and in the manner prescribed by the city council of the city or its duly designated representatives,
replace and restore all such pavement, sidewalks, driveways or other surface to as good a condition as before
the commencement of the work or activity by the operator disturbing same. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-5; 1998
Code, sec. 38-5)
Sec. 14-6. Temporary removal of wires for building moving.
The operator, upon the written request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, shall
remove, raise, or lower its wires temporarily to permit the moving of houses, buildings, or other bulky structures.
The reasonable expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering shall be paid by the person requesting
the same and the operator may require such payment in advance. The operator shall be given not less than 48
hours' advance notice in writing to arrange for such temporary wire changes. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-6; 1998
Code, sec. 38-6)
Sec. 14-7. Tree trimming.
The operator shall have the authority, to the same extent that the city has such authority, to trim trees upon or
overhanging streets, highways, alleys, bridges or other public ways or places of the city in order to prevent the
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/554
branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, cables, electronic conductors or other facilities or
equipment of the operator. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-7; 1998 Code, sec. 38-7)
Sec. 14-8. Construction, maintenance, and installation of equipment.
The construction, maintenance, and installation of equipment and facilities of any cable television operator,
including connections to subscribers of the operator's service, shall be in accordance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the city, and in accordance with subpart K of technical standards established by
the Federal Communications Commission rules. The cable television system shall be installed and maintained
to conform with the highest current state of the art in the field of closed circuit television transmission to the
effect that the subscribers shall receive the best possible service. Any such operator shall maintain and staff an
office in the city to provide maintenance and repair service. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-8; 1998 Code, sec. 38-8)
Sec. 14-9. Placement of fixtures.
A cable television operator shall not place poles, towers or similar fixtures where the same will interfere with
any gas, electric or telephone fixtures, water hydrant or main, drainage facility or sanitary sewer, and all such
poles, towers or similar fixtures shall be placed as directed by the city and in such manner as not to interfere
with the usual travel or use of streets, highways, alleys or other public ways or places. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-9;
1998 Code, sec. 38-9)
Sec. 14-10. Operator's rules.
Every cable television operator's franchise within the city shall have the authority to promulgate such rules,
regulations, terms, and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to
enable the operator to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this chapter and its franchise, and to
ensure uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers to its service; provided, however, that such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of any such franchise or of this
chapter, or with the laws of the state. A current copy of such rules, regulations, terms and conditions adopted by
the operator shall be on file with the city secretary, as well as in the local office of the operator. (1976 Code,
sec. 10½-11; 1998 Code, sec. 38-11)
Sec. 14-11. Political advertising and religious programming.
The operator shall, unless required to do otherwise by the Federal Communications Commission, charge at
regular commercial rates for political advertising. The operator may charge for carrying religious programming
at lower rates. Churches and other religious program originators shall be entitled to leased time on one
dedicated channel on a first-come, first-served basis, with time of broadcast to be determined by the operator.
(1976 Code, sec. 10½-15; 1998 Code, sec. 38-13)
Sec. 14-12. System requirements.
In order to provide adequate civil defense and disaster service information and to prevent the distribution of
obscene or libelous programs, every operator of cable television servicing the city shall install a system with the
capability, equipment, facilities, and personnel necessary to immediately interrupt signals being distributed on
one channel or on all channels at once, and to transmit other programs or signals in the place of the signal or
program interrupted. Every such operator shall provide at system activation a minimum of 32 active channels,
and full bank FM radio service, and any such cable television operator shall distribute all UHF and VHF
telecasts originating in Dallas or Tarrant Counties, and programming from the three major television networks in
the United States, and distribute weather information service satisfactory to the city. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-16;
1998 Code, sec. 38-14)
Sec. 14-13. Educational and public access channels.
Each cable television operator shall provide at least one educational access channel to Fort Worth Independent
School District. A governmental access channel shall be provided to the city upon request and a public access
channel together with cameras, studio, lights and sound equipment shall be provided on a first-come, firstserved
basis. Should there be no need for any such service as determined by the operator and the city council,
the operator may, with permission of the city council, use such channels for other functions. One channel shall
carry announcements of events and activities. There shall be no charge for local civic events, senior citizen
activities, local school or college events, local athletic league events and local club meetings and events.
Others may be charged as determined by the operator. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-17; 1998 Code, sec. 38-15)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/554
Sec. 14-14. Interconnection with other systems.
Any cable television operator may be required to interconnect its system with any other broadband
communications facility operating in an adjacent territory. The operator may be required to interconnect its
educational, governmental, and/or local access system with such other cable system if permitted by appropriate
federal regulations and subject to payment of reasonable charges. Such interconnection shall be made within
60 days of a request by the city. For good cause, the operator may request and the city may grant reasonable
extension of time to comply with these requirements. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-18; 1998 Code, sec. 38-16)
Sec. 14-15. Extension policy.
Once construction has been completed in the initial service area, the cable television operator shall extend
service in overhead service areas within six months of a request to all areas where the average density is
seven subscribers per quarter mile of aerial cable or greater. In an area where the average density is less than
seven subscribers per quarter mile of cable, or which is served by underground utilities, the system shall bear
its pro rata share of the current aerial construction costs based on the actual number of potential subscribers
per quarter mile divided by seven. The remaining construction costs will be borne on a pro rata basis by each
actual cable television applicant committing to service within the pro rata extension area. In the case of new
subdivisions, developers may elect to bear the remaining cost, and service will be made available to residents
at normal rates. Mileage will be measured from the end of the nearest cable trunk. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-21;
1998 Code, sec. 38-19)
Sec. 14-16. Technical performance standards.
(a) Cable television operators shall comply fully with the technical rules and standards for cable television
operation as adopted by the Federal Communications Commission, 47 CFR 76, subpart K, as amended from
time to time.
(b) The following distortion specifications apply over a temperature range of minus 20 degrees Fahrenheit to
plus 120 degrees Fahrenheit:
(1) The carrier to noise ratio shall be no less than 45.5 dB.
(2) Second order distortion shall be at least 60 dB below visual carrier.
(3) Total harmonic distortion shall be at least 52 dB below visual carrier.
(4) Cross modulation shall be at least 52 dB below visual carrier with synchronous video
modulation.
(5) Hum modulation factor shall not exceed plus or minus two percent (60 to 120 Hz.) tolerance.
(1976 Code, sec. 10½-22; 1998 Code, sec. 38-20)
Sec. 14-17. Testing of system.
The operator shall maintain test equipment capable of demonstrating that the standards established herein are
being met. Upon customer complaint, or where there exists other evidence, which, in the judgment of the city,
casts doubt on the reliability of the quality of any cable television service, the city shall have the right and
authority to test, analyze, and report on the performance of the system. Such test or tests shall be made
consistent with the provisions of 47 CFR 76.609 et seq., as amended. The cost of such testing shall be borne
by the city; but if such testing determines that standards are not being met, the operator may be required to
reimburse the city for the cost of such testing. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-23; 1998 Code, sec. 38-21)
Sec. 14-18. Service to public buildings.
Public buildings shall be connected to the cable system at no charge. Such requests for service are to be
initiated by authorized local government officials. One service drop per facility shall be made at city hall, the
police station, the county subcourthouse, the city service center, the public library, city auditoriums and all
public schools. No monthly charges shall be made for service at these public buildings. (1976 Code, sec.
10½-24; 1998 Code, sec. 38-22)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/554
Sec. 14-19. Compliance with application.
The cable television operator shall provide all services specifically set forth in its application to provide cable
television service to the city. Failure to provide the services promised in any application shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-25; 1998 Code, sec. 38-23)
Sec. 14-20. Other business activities by operators.
The operator shall not engage in the business of selling, repairing or installing television receivers or radio
receivers within the city during the term of the franchise. Local shareholders of operators owning more than ten
percent of the operator's stock shall likewise not engage in such business. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-28; 1998
Code, sec. 38-26)
Sec. 14-21. Theft of services and tampering.
No person, whether or not a subscriber to the cable system, shall willfully, maliciously, or otherwise damage or
cause to be damaged any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment of any cable television operator, or
commit any act with intent to cause such damage or to tap, tamper with, or otherwise connect any wire or
device to a wire, cable, conduit, apparatus, appurtenance or equipment of any cable television operator with the
intent to obtain a signal or impulse from the cable system without authorization from or compensation to such
operator, or to obtain cable television or other communications service with intent to cheat or defraud such
operator of any lawful charge to which it is entitled. (1976 Code, sec. 10½-29; 1998 Code, sec. 38-27)
CHAPTER 15
CIVIC AND CONVENTION CENTER*
ARTICLE I. OFFICIAL RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE FOREST HILL CIVIC AND CONVENTION
CENTER
Sec. 15-1. Purpose and functions.
The Forest Hill Civic and Convention Center serves three basic functions:
(1) To provide facilities for official use;
(2) To provide meeting facilities for individuals, businesses, or organizations;
(3) To provide for private or commercial use by rental clients and their guests.
(Ordinance 2015-07-001 adopted 7/7/15)
Sec. 15-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Banquets shall mean activities including but not limited to conventions, awards banquets, weddings, company
parties, membership drives, social events, bridal showers, baby showers, or similar events.
Civic Center shall mean the actual building and grounds that comprise the Forest Hill Civic and Convention
Center.
Client shall mean the person who signs the facility usage agreement.
Commercial use shall mean a use by an individual or group not representing the city or a nonprofit organization,
and which exhibits at least one of the following characteristics:
(1) Requires an admission fee;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/554
(2) Subjects participants to any sales pitch;
(3) Subjects participants to solicitation of funds for any reason;
(4) Is directly connected with a business venture.
Nonprofit organization shall mean an organization that has its 501(c)(3) article of incorporation on file with the
secretary of state as a nonprofit organization or is a bona fide chapter of a state or national nonprofit
organization.
Official use shall mean a use by the city council; official boards, commissions, or committees; and municipalsponsored
functions.
Private use shall mean a use by, and for, the benefit of the client and their guests and which is attended by
individuals known by the client personally.
Regular nonprofit use shall mean a use by a nonprofit organization for its regular business meeting.
(Ordinance 2015-07-001 adopted 7/7/15)
Sec. 15-3. Authorized uses.
The following are authorized uses of the Forest Hill Civic and Convention Center:
(1) Official use;
(2) Private use;
(3) Regular non-profit use;
(4) Banquets;
(5) Commercial use.
(Ordinance 2015-07-001 adopted 7/7/15)
Sec. 15-4. Client application.
The Forest Hill Civic and Convention Center shall not be used unless a written application is received and
completed in its entirety and contains the following information:
(1) Name of the organization;
(2) Name and type of event;
(3) Dates and times of event;
(4) If the event will be private, open to the public, and if admission will be charged;
(5) The maximum number of people that will be present at any one time in the facility;
(6) Name and contact information of the person filing application;
(7) Meeting room selection, stage and riser selection, and audio/visual equipment selection;
(8) Catering company and contact information;
(9) Applicant and city representative signatures;
(10) A copy of client's state-issued driver's license or identification card;
(11) A copy of the required insurance certificate.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/554
(Ordinance 2015-07-001 adopted 7/7/15)
Sec. 15-5. Facility use terms and conditions.
(a) Hours of operation shall be:
(1) Sunday-Friday: 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
(2) Saturday: 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m.
(b) The sale of any alcoholic beverages, smoking, and illegal gambling are strictly prohibited. “BYOB”
consumption is not allowed at any time. The serving of any alcoholic beverage is allowed with the completion of
the Alcoholic Beverage Policy and Agreement, the purchase of appropriate liability insurance and the hiring of
security staff, the number to be determined by the city police department.
(c) The agreement may not be assigned without prior written consent of the city, which consent may be
withheld by the city in its sole and absolute discretion.
(d) Video and audio equipment is available for use in the grand ballroom with the appropriate payment of all
fees prior to the rental date/time. If additional audio/visual equipment, DJ, band, or other personally owned or
rented equipment is to be used for the event, the city must receive a detailed list of all equipment prior to event
and details as to where it will be placed. It must be delivered within your rental time.
(e) The client certifies that to the best of his/her knowledge, the city property for use of which application is
hereby made will not be used for the commission of any crime or any act which is prohibited by law. This
agreement must be signed by persons authorized to sign on behalf of the client and bind the client to the terms
of this agreement.
(f) All cancellations must be submitted in writing. All cancellations will forfeit any payments made towards the
rental if not cancelled 120 days prior to a scheduled event.
(g) The agreement is to be governed by and interpreted in accordance with the laws of the city and the state.
If any action is brought arising out of the agreement, said shall be brought in the appropriate court in Tarrant
County, Texas.
(h) All decorations must be free-standing or tabletop. Decorations cannot be stapled, taped, nailed, or glued
to any walls, windows, doors, ceiling fans or blades, pillars and/or staging. Decorations cannot be suspended or
hung from any ceiling, staircase or doorway. Painting of any kind is prohibited. All decorating hours must occur
within your rental time. Balloons must be securely anchored and removed at the end of the event by the client.
They are not to be given out at any event. The client is responsible for removing decorations, food or other
materials brought into the facilities.
(i) Failure to comply with any term of the agreement or comply with any rules or regulations of the city will be
grounds to cancel event and deny permission for use or future use of city facilities by the client, be it individual
or organization, or any member thereof, in addition to any remedies available by law. Client agrees that should
the event be changed or canceled by client, or due to client's failure to meet the requirements of this
agreement, a full or partial refund of fees, if any, will be made only at the sole discretion of the city. The city may
cancel event or terminate this agreement, without cause, for its convenience or if facilities are needed for city
purposes. The city shall have final discretion over all issues regarding rental rates, the rules and regulations,
and the right to terminate any contract.
(j) Required deposits may be paid by cash, personal check, cashier's check, money order, or credit card.
When using a credit/debit card, certain fees apply.
(1) Reservation deposit: A fee must be paid to book a room(s) and is due when application is
signed. All fees and deposits are due 30 days prior to event. If balance is not paid 30 days prior to
the rental date, the city reserves the right to cancel said reservation without refund. Reservations
made less than 30 days of an event must be paid in full at the time of booking with a personal check,
credit/debit card, money order, cashier's check, or cash.
(2) Damage/cleaning deposit: $500.00 due 30 days prior to the event along with full payment of all
applicable rental fees. City staff will perform a walkthrough after the event to ensure that no damage
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/554
has occurred and the facility is clean. Deposit will be returned to client within 30 days after event if
no damages were incurred or cleaning is required. Should there be any findings the client will be
notified promptly. In the event that city property has been damaged or cleaning is necessary, the
client will accept the city's estimate of the amount incurred. The cost of any repairs and/or cleaning
deemed necessary will be charged to the client's damage deposit. Should the cost of repairs or
cleaning exceed the amount of the damage deposit, the client will receive an invoice for said
charges, which will be due within 15 days of the date of the invoice. Effective 30 days after invoice
date, any unpaid balance will bear a finance charge of 18% per month and future applications will be
accepted on a pre payment basis only.
(k) Call 9-1-1 in the event of an emergency. For non-emergency police matters, call police dispatch at 817-
568-5250 and provide the operator with your location in the facility.
(l) The city reserves the right to assign exclusive catering services at its facility. Client should make
arrangements with the city at least two weeks in advance of the event. All caterers must provide a Tarrant
County Health Department Permit to city two weeks in advance of the event.
(m) The client and its guests shall be held responsible for any and all loss, accident, neglect, injury, or
damage to person, life, or property, and claims which may be the result of, or may be caused by, the client's
occupancy or use of the facilities or facility. Client has been given an opportunity to inspect facility prior to the
event and accepts, discharges, and releases, and shall protect, indemnify, defend, and hold harmless, the city
and each of its employees, agents, employees, volunteers and representatives, from any and all liability, claims,
judgments, or demands including reasonable attorney's fees and costs, which may arise from any injuries,
deaths, and damage to property arising directly or indirectly out of this agreement, including, but not limited to
client's occupancy or use of the facility and the adjoining areas, including the parking lots, except if due to city's
active negligence or willful misconduct.
(n) Client shall secure and maintain comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of one million
dollars per occurrence with coverage for incidental contracts. Client agrees to endorse such policy to name the
city as additional insured. Further, the certificate of insurance shall provide 30 days prior written notice of
cancellation. Client shall also secure and maintain worker's compensation covering all certificates(s) of
insurance, along with the additional insured endorsement, at least 2 weeks in advance of the event; otherwise,
this agreement may be canceled by city.
(o) Notices shall be delivered to the person and address specified as the signatory hereto.
(p) Fees are due and payable as per listed above in subsection (j)(1). Checks shall be payable to the city.
Payment shall be made by cash, personal check, cashier's check, money order or credit/debit card.
(q) The agreement becomes effective on the date first written above and shall remain in effect for as long as
client remains on or utilizes city facilities, regardless of event(s) duration.
(r) Client must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age and provide proof thereof. Children must be
supervised by an adult throughout the time that they are in the facility. Ages through 12 require 1 adult per 4
children; ages 13 through 17 require 1 adult per 10 young adults.
(s) Use of the facilities shall be granted subject to the terms and conditions herein rules and regulations
established from time to time by the administration of the city [sic].
(t) The city assumes no liability or responsibility for any personal property of client or of its employees,
agents, representatives, guests or invitees brought onto the property before, during or after the event described
herein.
(u) Submission of the application/agreement or acceptance by the city of any fee does not guarantee
availability of any city facilities. Facility and adjoining areas are provided on an “as is” basis.
(v) Clients shall be required to cover all tables with a tablecloth if food or drinks are served.
(w) The client is responsible for removing decorations, food or other materials brought into the facilities.
(x) If additional audio/visual equipment, DJ, band, or other personally owned or rented equipment is to be
used for the event, the city must receive a detailed list of all equipment prior to event. It must be delivered within
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/554
your rental time.
(y) All trash bags are to be tied up and placed inside the dumpster behind the facility before the client leaves
the building.
(z) Storage space is not available.
(aa) All fire exits must be kept clean, clear and unobstructed at all times. The path of travel in hallways and to
exits may not be blocked by furniture or any other movable object.
(bb) Client must abide by room capacity limits. It is unlawful to exceed the capacity of any room. Failure to
abide by room capacity limits may result in the cancellation of the event without refund or pro-rating of fees if
the rental participants do not adhere to these facility rules.
(cc) The city strictly prohibits the use of flammable liquids, compressed gases, fog or smoke machines,
candles or any type of open flame; the throwing of rice, paper or metallic confetti, birdseed or other materials in
the facility or on the grounds; “parking lot parties”; pools, fountains, ponds or landscapes inside or outside the
facility, outside tents and stages, inflatable jumping rooms, inflatable water slides, animals of any kind in a city
facility, with the exception of service animals; smoking in a city building within 25 feet of a door, window or
ventilation; nudity; drugs. Explosives are not allowed near or inside the facility. Vehicles of any kind are not
allowed in the facility.
(dd) A Forest Hill Police Officer, Tarrant County Deputy Sheriff or Tarrant County Deputy Constable may be
required for security; however, security shall be required for any commercial event. The fee charged will be at
the current off-duty rate with a 4-hour minimum; payment is to be made in cash to the center staff upon arrival.
Officer/deputy upon arrival [sic]. All costs associated with the hiring of security services will be assumed by the
client. The city reserves the right to require monitoring during any event held on city property.
(ee) Signed agreement must be shown to city authorities on demand.
(ff) The facility is under video surveillance 24 hours a day.
(gg) All participants and spectators shall not be allowed to park on any grassy areas and shall park in
designated parking areas only. A client shall not charge for parking on the city property at any time.
(hh) Client shall be entitled to use only the area(s) that have been rented.
(ii) 10% discount will be considered for various room rentals for city residents with proof of residency (current
water bill or valid driver license) of applicant only. 10% discount will be considered for various room rentals for
non profit organizations with proof of 501(c)(3) status.
(jj) Kitchen includes: Commercial refrigerator, freezer, heating cabinet, ice machine, sink, and use of rolling
carts.
(kk) Flat-screen televisions are located in all meeting rooms with plug-ins for use with laptop computers.
(Ordinance 2015-07-001 adopted 7/7/15)
CHAPTER 16
COMMISSIONS, BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 16-1. Bylaws.
The boards, commissions or committees established by the city council may enact bylaws for the operation and
conduct of that board, commission or committee. The city council may, at its discretion, amend the bylaws of
any boards, commissions or committees of the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/554
Secs. 16-2–16-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION*
Sec. 16-21. Composition.
The city planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven members. (1976 Code, sec. 12-1; 1998 Code,
sec. 42-31)
Sec. 16-22. Terms.
The membership of the planning and zoning commission shall be divided into seven places. Each term of office
shall be for two years. Even-numbered places (2, 4 and 6) expire May 31 of even-numbered years, and oddnumbered
places (1, 3, 5 and 7) expire May 31 of odd-numbered years; provided, however, members shall
serve until their successors are appointed. (1976 Code, sec. 12-2; 1998 Code, sec. 42-32; Ordinance 2010-11-
003, sec. 2, adopted 11/16/10)
Sec. 16-23. Appointment and removal of members.
Commission members shall be appointed by the city council and may be removed with cause by a majority vote
of the council. Members may be reappointed upon expiration of their terms. Vacancies shall be filled for
unexpired terms thereof. (1976 Code, sec. 12-3; 1998 Code, sec. 42-33; Ordinance 96-960059, sec. 1, adopted
5/7/96; Ordinance 2013-02-003, sec. 2, adopted 2/19/13)
Sec. 16-24. Qualifications; ethics and open meetings requirements.
The planning and zoning commission members shall hold no other city office and shall be qualified voters of the
city. Members shall be bound by the provisions of article V of chapter 2, dealing with ethics. The commission is
bound by the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Law and, except for consultation with the city's attorney on
certain legal matters, will ordinarily hold all of its meetings and workshops in public. Members shall take the
oath of office prescribed for city officers. (1976 Code, sec. 12-4; 1998 Code, sec. 42-34)
Sec. 16-25. Meetings generally.
(a) The planning and zoning commission shall hold regular meetings on the first Monday of each month at
city hall, at such time as the commission shall establish. Any regularly scheduled meeting that is cancelled for
any reason shall be rescheduled within the same calendar month and special meetings may [be] called upon
the request of the chairperson, three (3) members of the commission, or three (3) members of the council.
(b) Items for meetings may be placed on the agenda by any commission member, a member of city council
or the city manager. City staff will administer the agenda, distribute and will not place any item on the agenda
without review by the chairperson or the city manager.
(1976 Code, sec. 12-5; 1998 Code, sec. 42-35; Ordinance 96-960059, sec. 2, adopted 5/7/96; Ordinance 2013-
02-003, sec. 3, adopted 2/19/13)
Sec. 16-26. Officers.
The commission shall select a chairperson who shall preside at meetings. In the absence of the chairperson,
the commission shall select a chairperson pro tern who shall preside. The chairperson is not disqualified from
voting. (1976 Code, sec. 12-6; 1998 Code, sec. 42-36)
Sec. 16-27. Attendance.
(a) Attendance requirements. Should a member fail to attend at least three of four consecutive announced
meetings (regular or otherwise) due to unexcused absences, that member's office shall automatically be
vacated and a vacancy declared in such member's office.
(b) Excused absences. Excused absences include those absences caused by illness of the member or his
immediate family; those caused by employment, i.e., overtime, travel or vacations; and those caused by
circumstances normally defined as unavoidable, i.e., “acts of nature or God.” Every reasonable attempt should
be made by a member to notify the city secretary of an absence in advance to be considered excused
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/554
(c) Vacancies. The appointing authority shall fill the vacancy as soon as possible for the unexpired term.
(1976 Code, sec. 12-7; 1998 Code, sec. 42-37)
Sec. 16-28. Staff support.
The city council may employ a planning consultant. The city manager shall appoint a planning administrator to
assist the planning and zoning commission. Such administrator shall cause the minutes of the meetings of the
commission to be taken and transcribed, and meeting notices posted. (1976 Code, sec. 12-8; 1998 Code, sec.
42-38; Ordinance 96-960059, sec. 2A, adopted 5/7/96)
Sec. 16-29. Duties.
The commission may make recommendations to the city manager or city council on all matters affecting the
physical development of the city, may be consulted on the comprehensive plan and the implementation thereof,
and shall exercise all other responsibilities as may be provided by law, including but not limited to the duties of
a zoning commission pursuant to Texas Local Government Code sec. 211.007 and the duties of a planning
commission as contemplated by Texas Local Government Code sec. 212.008. All plats shall be approved by
the city council in addition to the commission. (1976 Code, sec. 12-9; 1998 Code, sec. 42-39)
Secs. 16-30–16-46. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT*
Sec. 16-47. Composition.
The board of adjustment shall consist of five members, with four alternate members to serve in the absence of
one or more regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or city manager. (1976 Code, sec. 12-11;
1998 Code, sec. 42-61)
Sec. 16-48. Terms.
The membership of the zoning board of adjustment and the alternates shall be divided into places, with places
1 through 5 being members and places 6 through 9 being alternates. Each term of office shall be for two years.
The term of office shall expire on May 31; provided, however, members shall serve until their successors are
appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term thereof. (1976 Code, sec. 12-12; 1998 Code, sec.
42-62; Ordinance 96-960166, sec. 1, adopted 12/3/96; Ordinance 97-970105, sec. 1, adopted 8/19/97;
Ordinance 2010-11-003, sec. 3, adopted 11/16/10)
Sec. 16-49. Appointment.
Members shall be appointed by the city council. Odd-numbered places shall be appointed in odd-numbered
years and even-numbered places shall be appointed in even-numbered years. Members may be reappointed
upon expiration of their terms. (1976 Code, sec. 12-13; 1998 Code, sec. 42-63)
Sec. 16-50. Qualifications; ethics and open meetings requirements.
The board of adjustment members shall hold no other city office and shall be qualified voters of the city.
Members shall be bound by the provisions of article V of chapter 2, dealing with ethics. The board is bound by
the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Law and, except for consultation with the city's attorney on certain
legal matters, will ordinarily hold all of its meetings and workshops in public. Members shall take the oath of
office prescribed for city officers. (1976 Code, sec. 12-14; 1998 Code, sec. 42-64)
Sec. 16-51. Meetings.
Meetings of the board shall be held on the call of the chairperson and at other times as determined by the
board. The chairperson or acting chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
All meetings shall be open to the public. Regular meetings may be rescheduled and special meetings may be
called by the city secretary upon written request of the chairperson, the city council, or three members of the
commission. Each member of the planning and zoning commission shall be notified in writing and a notice shall
be published in the officially designated newspaper of the city of such special meeting. Any such notice shall
state the subject to be considered at the special meeting. A quorum for a regular or special meeting shall be
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/554
four members. Meetings shall be guided by the most current edition of Robert's Rules of Order insofar as such
are not inconsistent with the function of the board as set out herein or under applicable statute. The commission
may adopt bylaws subject to city council approval. (1976 Code, sec. 12-15; 1998 Code, sec. 42-65)
Sec. 16-52. Officers.
The board shall, after each annual appointment of new members, select a chairperson to preside at meetings,
and a vice-chairperson to serve in the absence of the chairperson. (1976 Code, sec. 12-16; 1998 Code, sec.
42-66)
Sec. 16-53. Removal of members.
Members may be removed for cause by the city council on a written charge after a public hearing. (1976 Code,
sec. 12-17; 1998 Code, sec. 42-67)
Sec. 16-54. Staff support.
A staff member shall be designated by the city manager to act as secretary and assist the board. (1976 Code,
sec. 12-18; 1998 Code, sec. 42-68)
Sec. 16-55. Authority.
The board shall have that authority granted by Texas Local Government Code sec. 211.009, and other relevant
statutes, as well as that granted by any applicable zoning ordinance.
(1) The board of adjustment may:
a. Hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this article or an
ordinance adopted under this article;
b. Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of a zoning ordinance when the
ordinance requires the board to do so; and
c. Authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms of a zoning ordinance if the variance
is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the ordinance is
observed and substantial justice is done.
(2) In exercising its authority under subsection (1)a of this section, the board may reverse or
affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision, or
determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or
determination, and for that purpose the board has the same authority as the administrative official.
(3) The concurring vote of four members of the board is necessary to:
a. Reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official;
b. Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the board is required to pass under a
zoning ordinance; or
c. Authorize a variation from the terms of a zoning ordinance.
(1976 Code, sec. 12-19; 1998 Code, sec. 42-69)
Sec. 16-56. Appeal to board.
(a) Any of the following persons may appeal to the board of adjustment a decision made by an administrative
official:
(1) A person aggrieved by the decision; or
(2) Any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by the decision.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/554
(b) The appellant must file with the board and the official from whom the appeal is taken a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds for the appeal. The appeal must be filed within a reasonable time as determined by the
rules of the board. On receiving the notice, the official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit
to the board all the papers constituting the record of the action that is appealed.
(c) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed unless the official from whom
the appeal is taken certifies in writing to the board facts supporting the official's opinion that a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order
granted by the board or a court of record on application, after notice to the official, if due cause is shown.
(d) The board shall set a reasonable time for the appeal hearing and shall give public notice of the hearing
and due notice to the parties in interest. A party may appear at the appeal hearing in person or by agent or
attorney. The board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time.
(1976 Code, sec. 12-20; 1998 Code, sec. 42-70)
Sec. 16-57. Judicial review of board decisions.
(a) Any of the following persons may present to a court of record a verified petition stating that the decision of
the board of adjustment is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality:
(1) A person aggrieved by a decision of the board;
(2) A taxpayer; or
(3) An officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality.
(b) The petition must be presented within ten days after the date the decision is filed in the board's office.
(1976 Code, sec. 12-21; 1998 Code, sec. 42-71)
Secs. 16-58–16-87. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. CELEBRATION COMMITTEE
Sec. 16-88. Composition.
The celebration committee shall consist of nine members. (1976 Code, sec. 12-41; 1998 Code, sec. 42-121)
Sec. 16-89. Terms.
The celebration committee members shall serve two-year terms expiring on May 31 of each year; provided,
however, members shall serve until their successors are appointed. (1976 Code, sec. 12-42; 1998 Code, sec.
42-122; Ordinance 2010-11-003, sec. 4, adopted 11/16/10)
Sec. 16-90. Appointment.
Committee members shall be appointed by the city council. Members may be reappointed by the council upon
expiration of their terms and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms thereof. (1976 Code, sec. 12-43;
1998 Code, sec. 42-123)
Sec. 16-91. Qualifications; conflicts of interest; ethics and open meetings requirements.
(a) Appointees shall include a member of the parks and recreation board, a representative of local schools, a
representative of civic organizations, a senior citizens representative, a youth representative, a representative
of local churches, and members at large, who shall be citizens who have demonstrated ability or interest in
working for the city in supporting civic activities.
(b) If a decision or action of the committee will benefit a member in a manner distinguishable from that in
which the public is affected, such member shall reveal this fact in writing to the city secretary and refrain from
participating in the action before the committee.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/554
(c) Members shall be bound by the provisions of article V of chapter 2, dealing with ethics. The committee is
bound by the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Law and will hold all of its meetings and workshops in
public as therein provided.
(1976 Code, sec. 12-44; 1998 Code, sec. 42-124)
Sec. 16-92. Meetings generally.
The committee shall meet upon call of the chairperson or the city council. A quorum shall consist of those
members attending a noticed meeting. (1976 Code, sec. 12-45; 1998 Code, sec. 42-125)
Sec. 16-93. Officers.
The committee shall elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary. One member shall be selected to act
as historian, and one to act as publicity and news dispenser. (1976 Code, sec. 12-46; 1998 Code, sec. 42-126)
Sec. 16-94. Attendance.
(a) Attendance requirements. Should a member fail to attend at least three of four consecutive announced
meetings (regular or otherwise) due to unexcused absences, that member's office shall automatically be
vacated and a vacancy declared in such member's office.
(b) Excused absences. Excused absences include those absences caused by illness of the member or his
immediate family; those caused by employment, i.e., overtime, travel or vacations; and those caused by
circumstances normally defined as unavoidable, i.e., “acts of nature or God” Every reasonable attempt should
be made by a member to notify the city secretary of an absence in advance to be considered excused.
(1976 Code, sec. 12-47; 1998 Code, sec. 42-127)
Sec. 16-95. Staff support.
The city manager shall cause city staff to:
(1) Provide necessary expertise and resources to assist the committee with budget preparation,
and review of expenditures; and
(2) Request and seek to obtain from the committee, in a timely manner, their goals and budget
information. The city shall provide funds and staff for agenda preparation and posting, typing of
minutes, financial oversight, postage and mailing, copying and typing.
(1976 Code, sec. 12-48; 1998 Code, sec. 42-128)
Sec. 16-96. Duties.
The city celebration committee shall be authorized to act as coordinator of civic, historic recognition and cultural
promotion events sponsored or administered by the city. Its duties shall include:
(1) Scheduling of events on an annual basis, including revision and updating.
(2) Obtaining council approval prior to scheduling events. Events not approved will not be
considered city events or activities.
(3) Maintaining an historic record of all city events and activities.
(4) Reporting to the city council requests from host groups, such as the parks and recreation
board, which seek city sanction.
(5) Scheduling and overseeing of all fundraising in the name of the city.
(6) Publishing and advertising city events (along with host groups) in a manner which will promote
the city and its citizens.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/554
(7) Acting as host group for the annual Christmas tree lighting ceremony and employees'
Christmas party.
(8) Acting as host group for special events assigned by the city council.
(9) Budgeting and reporting expenditures and a proposed income for planning projects.
(10) Requiring that host groups budget adequate funds for the committee to provide service to the
host group.
(11) Prepare and submit for council approval bylaws which provide for time and place of meetings
and detailed procedures for approval of purchases and expenditures of funds.
(12) Prepare and submit to the city council for approval annual goals, programs, events and
obligations of resources, complying with applicable codes and enabling documents; such goals,
programs, events and obligations shall be supported with an annual budget prepared in accordance
with the prescribed city budget process, and the budget shall detail the costs thereof in terms of
people, money, buildings and any other required resources.
(13) Cause all funds received to be deposited with the city's depository bank and to be expended
only in accord with the city's regular budgetary and fiscal restraints.
(14) Develop and present to the council for prior approval programs which clearly define goals,
objectives, tasks, reports, timeframes and responsible members.
(15) The chairperson shall prepare and present to the city council a quarterly report of activities at
the same time the city director of finance's quarterly financial report is presented. Such report shall
contain status and activity reports on programs, events, funds and personnel, and recommendations
for improvement or change.
(16) The committee shall use standardized reports and reporting processes.
(1976 Code, sec. 12-49; 1998 Code, sec. 42-129)
Secs. 16-97–16-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. PARKS, RECREATION AND CLEAN CITY COMMISSION*
Sec. 16-121. Composition.
The parks, recreation, and clean city commission shall consist of seven (7) members. (Ordinance 2013-02-005
adopted 2/19/13)
Sec. 16-122. Terms.
The membership of the parks, recreation, and clean city commission shall be divided into seven (7) places.
Each term of office shall be for two (2) years. Even-numbered places (2, 4, and 6) expire May 31 of evennumbered
years, and odd-numbered places (1, 3, 5, and 7) expire May 31 of odd-numbered years; provided
however, members shall serve until their successors are appointed. (Ordinance 2013-02-005 adopted 2/19/13)
Sec. 16-123. Appointment and removal of members.
Commission members shall be appointed by the city council and may be removed with cause by a majority vote
of the council. Members may be reappointed upon expiration of their terms. Vacancies shall be filled for
unexpired terms thereof. (Ordinance 2013-02-005 adopted 2/19/13)
Sec. 16-124. Qualifications; ethics and open meetings requirements.
(a) The commission members shall hold no other city office and shall be qualified voters of the city.
(b) Members shall be bound by the provisions of article V of chapter 2 of this code, dealing with ethics.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/554
(c) The commission is bound by the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Law and, except for consultation
with the city's attorney on certain legal matters, will ordinarily hold all of its meetings and workshops in public.
Members shall take the oath of office prescribed for city officers.
(Ordinance 2013-02-005 adopted 2/19/13)
Sec. 16-125. Meetings generally.
(a) The commission may hold regular meetings on the second (2nd) Monday of each month at city hall or at
such time and place as the commission shall establish. Regular meetings cancelled for any reason shall be
rescheduled in the same calendar month and special meetings may [be] called upon the request of the
chairperson, three (3) members of the commission, or three (3) members of the council.
(b) Items for meetings may be placed on the agenda by any commission member, a member of city council
or the city manager. City staff will administer the agenda, distribute and will not place any item on the agenda
without review by the chairperson or the city manager.
(c) A quorum for any meeting shall be four (4) members. The commission may adopt bylaws.
(Ordinance 2013-02-005 adopted 2/19/13)
Sec. 16-126. Officers.
The board shall select a chairperson who shall preside at the meetings. In the absence of the chairperson, the
commission shall select a vice-chairperson who shall preside. The chairperson is not disqualified from voting.
(Ordinance 2013-02-005 adopted 2/19/13)
Sec. 16-127. Attendance.
(a) Should a member fail to attend three (3) announced meetings (regular or otherwise) due to unexcused
absences, that member's office shall automatically be vacated and a vacancy declared in such member's office.
Commission members, by a majority vote, may excuse a fellow member's absence from meetings for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Illness;
(2) A death in the immediate family;
(3) Conflict with work scheduling;
(4) Travel;
(5) Jury duty;
(6) Previously scheduled vacation of the member;
(7) A funeral;
(8) Unexpected emergency situation that prohibits the member's attendance.
(b) Should a commissioner miss a meeting without providing prior notice by either calling in or in writing to
the chairperson or commission secretary shall be considered an unexcused absence, “NO SHOW”.
Attendance, non-attendance shall be reflected in the official minutes for the meeting.
(Ordinance 2013-02-005 adopted 2/19/13; Ordinance 2015-02-001 adopted 2/3/15)
Sec. 16-128. Staff support.
The city manager shall appoint an administrator and such administrator shall cause the minutes of the meetings
to be taken and transcribed and meeting notices posted. The chairperson shall review the minutes before filing,
posting and distribution. (Ordinance 2013-02-005 adopted 2/19/13)
Sec. 16-129. Duties.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/554
The duties of the commission shall include the following:
(1) The commission shall act as a recommendation body to the city council concerning the
operation and maintenance of city parks and recreation facilities; and the operation of facilities
and/or programs sponsored, leased, or contracted for by the city.
(2) Any activities involving parks or recreational facilities owned, contracted for, or leased by the
city, or programs sponsored by or contracted for by the city, shall be coordinated with the parks,
recreation, and clean city commission.
(3) Establish a program to recognize individuals and groups for outstanding accomplishments
and/or contributions.
(4) Establish programs/projects that advocate beautification of the city.
(5) Educate the public towards methods of changing behavioral patterns which result in litter and
unclean conditions.
(6) Promote and organize cleanup campaigns and beautification projects for medians, rights-ofway,
parks, city-owned property, and residential neighborhoods.
(7) Canvas citizens when major park changes are proposed for their sector.
(8) Attend/participate in conferences/training sessions at local and state level to effectively
impact/influence park trends, services, and operations if funding will allow.
(9) Provide year-end summary to city council on parks and recreation policy, programs, and
projects.
(10) Serve as liaison for the citizens and public agencies on park activity to stimulate community
involvement.
(11) To support the city council annual and long term goals and priorities and all parks, recreation,
and beautification projects/programs as requested by the city council or the city manager.
(12) Collaboratively work to influence use of parks to generate revenue and visibility for the city.
(13) Upon appointment, each commissioner shall: be provided a copy of the bylaws and duties of
a commissioner, shall review and sign said document, and document shall be kept on file with staff
liaison.
(14) Be a goodwill ambassador for this city and its government.
(Ordinance 2013-02-005 adopted 2/19/13)
Secs. 16-130–16-156. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. RESERVED*
Secs. 16-157–16-183. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. ARTS COMMISSION
Sec. 16-184. Composition and officers.
The arts commission shall consist of seven members and an ex officio member of the city staff who shall have
no vote. The chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary of the commission shall be selected by the
commission members. (Ordinance 2011-05-003, sec. 2(42-220), adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 16-185. Terms; removal of members.
The arts commission members shall serve two-year terms expiring on May 31 of each year. Commissioners
may be removed without cause by a vote of the council. (Ordinance 2011-05-003, sec. 2(42-221), adopted
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/554
5/3/11)
Sec. 16-186. Appointment.
Members of the arts commission shall be appointed by the city council. Members may be reappointed upon
expiration of their terms. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms thereof. (Ordinance 2011-05-003, sec.
2(42-222), adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 16-187. Qualifications; ethics; conflicts of interest; and open meetings requirements.
(a) Five commissioners shall be residents of the city at the time of appointment and for the term of his office.
Any such commissioner who moves from the city during his term of office shall notify council of the move and
shall forfeit his office.
(b) Two commissioners may be appointed from outside the city. The city council may elect to fill these two
positions with residents from the city. Any resident of the city appointed under this section shall be subject to
the notification and forfeiture requirements set out in subsection (a) of this section.
(c) If a decision or action of the commission will benefit a commissioner in a manner distinguishable from the
public at large, such commissioner shall reveal this fact in writing to the city manager and city secretary and
shall recuse himself from all discussions and votes before the commission regarding such matter.
(d) Commissioners shall be bound by all ordinances of the city and the laws of the state regarding ethical
behavior. Commissioners shall at all times comply with the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings statutes.
(Ordinance 2011-05-003, sec. 2(42-223), adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 16-188. Meetings.
The commission shall meet upon call of the chairperson or the city council. Three (3) council members must
agree to call a meeting of the commission and shall submit a written instruction to the city secretary to call a
meeting. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members. (Ordinance 2011-05-003, sec. 2(42-224), adopted 5/3/11;
Ordinance 2013-02-003, sec. 4, adopted 2/19/13)
Sec. 16-189. Attendance.
Failure to attend three consecutively called meetings shall result in forfeiture of office. A commissioner who
cannot attend a meeting shall notify the city secretary of the reason. The commission shall decide as a body
whether to excuse the absence. (Ordinance 2011-05-003, sec. 2(42-225), adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 16-190. Duties.
The duties of the commission are as follows:
(1) Encourage participation by citizens in the process of acquiring and commissioning works of
art;
(2) Foster quality design and the creation of an array of artwork in all media, materials, styles and
disciplines that best respond to the distinctive characteristics of each project site and the community
that it serves;
(3) Seek to ensure that projects reflect the diversity of culture, heritage and expressions of the city
and the state;
(4) Encourage the selection of artists at the beginning stages of each project who can work
successfully as members of the project design team and to encourage collaboration among all arts
and building disciplines;
(5) Encourage art projects for open spaces, parks, infrastructure and facilities that enhance the
quality, pride and civic identity of neighborhoods in the city;
(6) Encourage the role of art work in enhancing economic development and cultural tourism;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/554
(7) Encourage the role of artists in the functional design of eligible capital improvement projects;
(8) Foster and encourage the development of future public artists;
(9) Document, preserve, restore and/or repair all public art work acquired through this processor
formally adopted by the commission;
(10) Identify potential funding sources including, but not limited to public and private grants;
(11) Prepare and present a budget for any project to be recommended to council.
(Ordinance 2011-05-003, sec. 2(42-226), adopted 5/3/11)
Secs. 16-191–16-220. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. AUDIT COMMITTEE
Sec. 16-221. Created; membership.
An audit committee is hereby created, with seven members. Three voting members shall be sitting council
members. The three nonvoting members shall be nominated by the council and elected by majority vote. One
nonvoting member shall be the city's finance director. One nonvoting member must be a resident and
demonstrate a professional background in accounting, banking, auditing finances, municipal finance or
accounting, or budget preparation. Two nonvoting members shall be residents or business owners. (1976
Code, sec. 2-100; 1998 Code, sec. 2-221; Ordinance 2018-02-16, sec. 2, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 16-222. Terms of service.
The term of each of the three voting sitting council members of the audit committee shall run from October 1
through September 30 and shall be occupied by the three councilmembers elected at the May election prior to
the October 1 beginning date of their term. (1976 Code, sec. 2-101; 1998 Code, sec. 2-222; Ordinance 2017-
09-06 adopted 9/19/17; Ordinance 2018-02-16, sec. 3, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 16-223. Purpose.
The purpose of the audit committee is to work with the city's independent accountants and the city staff to
provide for better financial management and reporting for the city. (1976 Code, sec. 2-102; 1998 Code, sec. 2-
223)
Sec. 16-224. Duties.
The duties of the audit committee shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Recommendation of an accounting firm to perform the annual audit;
(2) Maintenance of good communications with city staff and independent accountants;
(3) Advise city staff and the city council on matters relating to accounting and financial reporting;
(4) Review and evaluation of year-end financial statements and the independent accountant's
audit report;
(5) Review and evaluation of the independent accountant's management letters;
(6) Review any reported deficiencies in internal controls;
(7) Recommend financial policy;
(8) Other projects as assigned by the city council; and
(9) Report to the city council as required.
(1976 Code, sec. 2-103; 1998 Code, sec. 2-224)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/554
Sec. 16-225–16-230. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. HISTORICAL PRESERVATION COMMISSION*
Sec. 16-231. Purpose.
The purpose of the commission is to preserve the historical and cultural heritage of the city for the benefit of
current and future generations. (Ordinance 2016-08-001 adopted 9/6/16)
Sec. 16-232. Composition.
The historical preservation commission shall consist of seven (7) members. (Ordinance 2016-08-001 adopted
9/6/16)
Sec. 16-233. Terms.
The membership of the historical preservation commission shall be divided into seven (7) places. Each term of
office shall be for two (2) years. Even-numbered places (2, 4, and 6) expire May 31 of even-numbered years,
and odd-numbered places (1, 3, 5 and 7) expire May 31 of odd numbered years; provided however, members
shall serve until their successors are appointed. (Ordinance 2016-08-001 adopted 9/6/16)
Sec. 16-234. Appointment and removal of members.
Commission members shall be appointed by the city council and may be removed without cause by a majority
vote of the council. Members may be reappointed upon expiration of their terms. Vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired terms thereof. (Ordinance 2016-08-001 adopted 9/6/16)
Sec. 16-235. Qualifications; ethics and open meeting requirements.
(a) The commission members shall be qualified voters of the city except for the following:
(1) The council may appoint one (1) historian to hold a voting seat on the commission. The
historian may or may not be a citizen of the city, but must be able to offer historical knowledge of the
history of the city.
(b) Members shall be bound by the provisions of this code dealing with ethics.
(c) The commission is bound by the provisions of chapter 551 of the Texas Government Code and, except as
authorized by state law, will hold all of its meetings and workshops in public. Members shall take the oath of
office prescribed for city officers.
(Ordinance 2016-08-001 adopted 9/6/16)
Sec. 16-236. Meetings generally.
(a) The commission may hold regular meetings once a month at city hall or at such time and place as the
commission shall establish. Regular meetings cancelled for any reason shall be rescheduled as soon as
practicable and special meetings may be called upon request of the chairman, or three (3) members of the
commission, or three (3) members of the city council.
(b) Agendas shall be created and drafted by the chairman, vice-chairman or secretary. The staff liaison may
assist in the creation of the agenda and shall distribute the agenda. Members, city council members and the
city manager may request items to be placed on the agenda.
(c) A quorum for any meeting shall be four (4) members. Meetings shall be conducted under and guided by
Roberts Rules of Order insofar as not inconsistent with the requirements of law. The commission may adopt
bylaws.
(Ordinance 2016-08-001 adopted 9/6/16)
Sec. 16-237. Officers.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/554
The commission shall select a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary. The chairman shall preside at meetings;
the vice-chairman shall preside in the absence of the chairman. The secretary shall be responsible for the
minutes of the meeting. Officers shall not be disqualified from voting. (Ordinance 2016-08-001 adopted 9/6/16)
Sec. 16-238. Attendance.
(a) Members shall be in attendance at regular monthly meetings or at specially called meetings unless
excused.
(b) Excused absences shall be for illness of the member or an immediate family member, employment,
vacation, or unavoidable circumstances. The member shall notify the chairman, vice-chairman, secretary or
staff liaison before the start of the meeting.
(Ordinance 2016-08-001 adopted 9/6/16)
Sec. 16-239. Staff support.
The city manager shall appoint a staff member as liaison who may assist in the creation of the agenda and post
notice of meetings. (Ordinance 2016-08-001 adopted 9/6/16)
Secs. 16-240–16-250. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. MAYOR'S YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL
Sec. 16-251. Composition.
The Mayor's Youth Advisory Council shall be composed of up to seven (7) members. Five (5) members shall be
active students in good standing, living in the city and two (2) adults in good standing, living in the city. The city
council shall appoint the members by motion or resolution. (Ordinance 2019-16 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 16-252. Terms.
Initial appointments to the Mayor's Youth Advisory Council shall be limited to those students in grade six (6)
through twelve (12). The term of each member shall be one (1) year and shall expire on the last day of May
each calendar year. Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled with appointments by the city council. Newly
appointed members shall be installed at the first regular committee meeting after their appointment. (Ordinance
2019-16 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 16-253. Appointment and removal of members.
The city council shall appoint the members by motion or resolution via an open application process. Members
may be removed without cause at the will of the city council. (Ordinance 2019-16 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 16-254. Officers.
Officers shall be elected annually from among the membership at its first meeting in June of each calendar
year, with it being the first agenda item, and at such other times as these offices may become vacant. In the
absence of a chair, the membership shall elect a vice chair. (Ordinance 2019-16 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 16-255. Meeting and quorum.
The Mayor's Youth Advisory Council shall meet as needed, at least monthly from September to May, and shall
designate the time and place of its meetings. The Mayor's Youth Advisory Council shall abide by rules set forth
by the Texas Government Code and keep a record of its proceedings consistent with the provisions of this
article and the requirements of any other applicable regulations. By May 31st of each year, the Mayor's Youth
Advisory Council shall submit to city council a written report of its activities for the previous year and an annual
plan of work for the ensuing year. These documents shall be retained as a part of the official city records.
(Ordinance 2019-16 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 16-256. Attendance.
Should a member fail to attend at least three of four consecutive announced meetings (regular or otherwise)
due to unexcused absences, that member's office shall automatically be vacated and a vacancy declared in
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/554
such member's office. Excused absences include those absences caused by illness of the member or his
immediate family; those caused by employment, i.e., overtime, travel or vacations; and those caused by
circumstances normally defined as unavoidable, i.e., “acts of nature or God.” Every reasonable attempt should
be made by a member to notify the city secretary of an absence in advance to be considered excused.
(Ordinance 2019-16 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 16-257. Staff support.
The city manager shall cause city staff to:
(1) Provide necessary expertise and resources to assist the membership with budget preparation,
and review of expenditures; and
(2) Request and seek to obtain from the membership, in a timely manner, its goals and budget
information. The city shall provide funds and staff for agenda preparation and posting, typing of
minutes, financial oversight, postage and mailing, copying and typing; and
(3) Give due consideration to membership responses.
(Ordinance 2019-16 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 16-258. Duties and powers.
The Mayor's Youth Advisory Council shall act in the specified capacity only, and shall have no power to bind the
city by contract or otherwise; authorize expenditures; interfere with administrative or personnel affairs; nor
create any other obligation whatsoever on the part of the city. In the performance of its function, the YAC is
authorized to make recommendations to the city council and the city manager on:
(a) Policy matters affecting the youth of the community; and
(b) Planning, organizing, coordinating, and carrying out drug-and-alcohol-free social, cultural,
recreational, and other activities for the youth of the community; and
(c) Establishing guidelines, rules and procedures for participation in such activities; and
(d) Assist other city boards, committees and commissions; and
(e) When requested by city council or the city manager, the members shall give advice and
assistance on matters concerning the needs of youth.
(Ordinance 2019-16 adopted 8/20/19)
Sec. 16-259. Disqualification from voting.
A member shall disqualify himself from voting whenever he finds that he has a personal or monetary interest in
any project or initiative brought before the Mayor's Youth Advisory Council or when he or she will be directly
affected by the decisions made by the council. (Ordinance 2019-16 adopted 8/20/19)
CHAPTER 18
ELECTRICAL CODE*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. Short title.
The title of this chapter shall be “The Forest Hill Electrical Code,” and it may be cited as such. (1976 Code, sec.
13-1; 1998 Code, sec. 46-1)
Sec. 18-2. Definitions.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/554
Generally. Words used in any regulation or standard of the National Board of Fire Underwriters used as a
standard of good practice shall, if defined therein, have the meanings assigned them. Words relating to
buildings and building use, when not otherwise separately defined, shall have meanings which conform to the
meanings set out in the building code and zoning ordinance of the city; otherwise, they shall have their usual
meanings.
Approved means equipment and/or devices inspected, tested and listed by a nationally recognized testing
agency, such as Underwriters' Laboratories.
Authorized person means any individual, firm or corporation who or which is licensed under the provisions of
this chapter to do the work as permitted under the specific provisions of this chapter.
Conductor means a wire or cable or other form of metal suitable for carrying electrical current or potential,
except as otherwise defined in the National Electrical Code.
Electrical construction means and includes all work and materials used in installing, maintaining, or extending a
system of electrical wiring, and all appurtenances, apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith, inside
of or attached to any building, structure, lot or premises.
Electrical contractor.
(1) The term “electrical contractor” means any person engaged in the business of installing or
altering, by contract, electrical conductors or equipment. The term “electrical contractor” includes
any authorized person, whether actually doing electrical work or not, and any authorized person who
subcontracts to do such work.
(2) The term “electrical contractor” does not include bona fide employees employed by such
contractor to do or supervise such work.
Electrician means a person who is engaged in the trade or business of electrical construction and who is
qualified under the terms and provisions of this chapter. Persons while engaged in the manufacture, fabrication
or assembly of products, equipment, or devices wherein electrical wiring, apparatus, other devices or
equipment is installed, incorporated or otherwise attached or used are specifically exempt from this chapter.
Equipment means conductors, material, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus, motors and the like,
used as a part of or in connection with an electrical installation.
Inspector means an individual employed by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the National
Electrical Code.
Journeyman electrician means any individual who possesses the necessary qualifications, training and
technical knowledge to install, maintain and extend electrical conductors and equipment and capable of doing
such work in accordance with standard rules and regulations governing such work.
Master electrician means any individual who possesses the necessary qualifications, training and technical
knowledge to plan, lay out and supervise the installation, maintenance and extension of electrical conductors
and equipment.
Registered, when used with the term “electrical contractor,” “electrician” or the like, means that the person has
made application to the electrical board and has satisfied the board that he is qualified to do the work stated in
the application, and that he has paid the necessary registration fees to date, and that his name is carried in the
records of the electrical inspector as a person authorized to do electrical work as defined in this chapter.
Special permission means a written ruling filed in the office of the building official. Special ruling means a
written ruling filed in the office of the electrical inspector.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-2; 1998 Code, sec. 46-2)
Sec. 18-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is the practical safeguarding of persons and of buildings and their contents from
electrical hazards arising from the use of electricity for light, heat, power, radio, signaling and other purposes.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/554
(1976 Code, sec. 13-3; 1998 Code, sec. 46-3)
Sec. 18-4. Application of chapter.
(a) Generally. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all installations of the work done on electrical
conductors, fittings, devices, motors, appliances, fixtures, signs and gaseous tubing, hereinafter referred to as
“electrical equipment,” within or on public and private buildings and premises, except as otherwise provided in
this section.
(b) Public utilities. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to installations used by electricity supply or
communication agencies in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or for signals for the
transmission of intelligence when located within or on buildings or premises used exclusively by such an
agency or on public thoroughfares; provided, however, that such agencies excepted are operating under a
franchise agreement within the city.
(c) Federal buildings. This chapter shall be construed to be inapplicable to any building which is owned and
operated by the United States government.
(d) City departments and buildings. The various departments and buildings of the city shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter insofar as the same may be applicable, but shall be exempt from the requirement of
fees.
(e) Electrical signs, gaseous tubings, etc. This chapter shall apply to all forms of electrical signs, gaseous
tubings and outline lighting conductors and equipment.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-4; 1998 Code, sec. 46-4)
Sec. 18-5. Reserved.
Editor's note–Former section 18-5 pertaining to the adoption of the National Electrical Code was superseded by the
provisions of Ordinance 2015-12-002 adopted 12/1/15, now codified as article V of this chapter. Prior to the adoption of
Ordinance 2015-12-002, the adoption of the electrical code derived from 1976 Code, sec. 13-5; 1998 Code, sec. 46-5;
Ordinance 200649, sec. 2, adopted 7/11/06.
Sec. 18-6. Supervision of work.
In the actual work of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing any electrical conductors or equipment for
which a permit is required by this chapter there shall be present and in direct supervision a licensed electrician
of the proper classification. Every journeyman electrician shall work under the supervision of a master
electrician. Should it come to the notice of the electrical inspector that such supervision and control is not being
maintained, the inspector may order the work discontinued, and the person to whom the permit has been
issued shall discontinue further work until proper supervision has been employed or supplied. Nothing herein
shall be construed as prohibiting the employment of apprentices or unskilled laborers assisting a duly registered
and qualified person under the provisions of this chapter. (1976 Code, sec. 13-7; 1998 Code, sec. 46-7)
Sec. 18-7. Persons permitted to make connections between service and service entrance conductors.
Only authorized employees of Texas Electric Service Company shall be permitted to make the connection
between Texas Electric Service Company's service conductors and the customer's service entrance
conductors. (1976 Code, sec. 13-8; 1998 Code, sec. 46-8)
Sec. 18-8. Persons authorized to connect or disconnect meters.
When new electrical meters are installed or existing electrical meters are to be relocated, the disconnection,
connection, or reconnection to the meter shall be made only by authorized employees of Texas Electric Service
Company. (1976 Code, sec. 13-9; 1998 Code, sec. 46-9)
Sec. 18-9. Unauthorized change or alteration of conductors or equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to in any manner change or alter electrical conductors or
equipment in or on any building. If, in the course of the erection of a building or structure, electrical conductors
or equipment is in such position as to interfere with the erection or completion of the structure, notice shall be
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/554
immediately given the authorized person or firm installing the electrical conductors or equipment, and the
needed change shall be made by such authorized person or firm. (1976 Code, sec. 13-10; 1998 Code, sec. 46-
10)
Sec. 18-10. Installations to conform to approved specifications.
The installation of electrical equipment, within or attached to buildings or structures, shall be done in
accordance with specifications previously submitted to and approved by the electrical inspector. Complete
descriptions of proposed work may be required by the electrical inspector. When drawings are requested, they
shall be to a definite scale, showing the point at which service connection is required, the size of the service
and subfeeders, the location of service switches and center of distribution, the arrangement of circuits and the
number of outlets connected thereto. (1976 Code, sec. 13-11; 1998 Code, sec. 46-11)
Sec. 18-11. Installations in public meeting places and commercial and industrial buildings.
(a) All electrical installations in any commercial building, public meeting place and industrial building shall be
in EMT or rigid conduit. NM sheath cable may be used only where concealed in conjunction with wood framing
in residential applications. In no instance shall EMT conduit be installed in concrete walls or slabs.
(b) In interpreting this section, the following definitions will be applicable:
Commercial building means a place where merchandise, commodities, goods or wares are bought or sold.
Industrial building means a place where labor is employed to conduct a business, such as, but not limited to,
manufacturing, processing, developing, storing or preparing foods, wares and merchandise.
Public meeting place means a room or space used for assembly or educational occupancy for SO or more
occupants or which has a floor space of750 square feet or more used for such purposes.
(c) All electrical main disconnects for all commercial buildings, public meeting places and industrial buildings
shall be located on the outside of the building served.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-12; 1998 Code, sec. 46-12)
Sec. 18-12. Reserved.
Editor's note–Former section 18-12 pertaining to amendments to the National Electrical Code was superseded by the
provisions of Ordinance 2015-12-002 adopted 12/1/15, now codified as article V of this chapter. Prior to the adoption of
Ordinance 2015-12-002, the amendments to the electrical code derived from the 1976 Code, sec. 13-13, 1998 Code, sec.
46-13, and Ordinance 200649, sec. 2, adopted 7/11/06.
Sec. 18-13. Sale of unapproved equipment, material, conductors, etc., prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, expose for sale, offer to sell, dispose as a premium, or offer for rent
and to repair any electrical material, conductors, equipment, apparatus or appliance within the city for use in the
city which is not approved by the electrical inspector or which does not have affixed thereto a UL label or which
has not previously been approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories or some similar or equivalent organization.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-14; 1998 Code, sec. 46-14)
Sec. 18-14. Posting and service of notices and orders.
(a) When any order or notice is issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to any person who cannot
be found after a reasonable search, such order or notice may be served by posting it in a conspicuous place
upon the premises occupied by him or upon the premises where the defects are alleged to exist. Such posting
of the notice shall be considered equivalent to personal service of such order or notice. An order sent by mail in
a sealed envelope with postage prepaid and directed to the address of the electrical contractor, owner, lessee
or occupant of the premises shall be equivalent to personal service of such order.
(b) The electrical inspector is hereby empowered to attach to the nearest electrical cabinet or equipment
feeding defective or hazardous wiring an official notice or seal to prevent use of electricity in that area, and it
shall be unlawful for any other person to place or attach such seal, or to break, change, destroy, tear, mutilate,
cover or otherwise deface or injure any such official notice or seal posted by the electrical inspector.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/554
(1976 Code, sec. 13-15; 1998 Code, sec. 46-15)
Sec. 18-15. Chapter does not affect liability for damages.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning,
operating, controlling or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any
defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection or
reinspection authorized herein or the certificate of approval issued as herein provided, or by reason of the
approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein. (1976 Code, sec. 13-16; 1998 Code, sec. 46-16)
Secs. 18-16–18-33. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND INSPECTIONS
Sec. 18-34. Authority to stop work.
In case any work is begun where a permit is required by this chapter, but without permission being first secured
therefor, or if electrical installations are otherwise being made in violation of this chapter, the electrical inspector
shall have the power to stop such work at once and to order any and all persons engaged therein to stop and
desist therefrom until the proper permission is secured. Such action shall not defer any other penalties which
may be applicable under this chapter. (1976 Code, sec. 13-17; 1998 Code, sec. 46-41)
Sec. 18-35. Police powers.
The electrical inspector shall have full police power and shall have the right to arrest any person who violates
any of the regulations of this chapter. Whenever, in the opinion of an electrical inspector, it shall be necessary to
call upon the police department for aid and assistance in making an arrest or stopping work, he shall have the
authority to do so, and it shall be the duty of any member of the police department, when called upon by such
inspector, to act immediately in giving the required assistance. (1976 Code, sec. 13-18; 1998 Code, sec. 46-42)
Sec. 18-36. Right of entry.
The electrical inspector shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building or premises in the
discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test of the electrical
equipment or installation contained therein. (1976 Code, sec. 13-19; 1998 Code, sec. 46-43)
Sec. 18-37. Inspections generally.
(a) Upon the completion of any electrical installation for which a permit has been obtained under this chapter,
it shall be the duty of the person making the installation to notify the electrical inspector, who shall inspect the
installation within 48 hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, of the time such notice is given.
(b) When any electrical equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the
building, the person installing the equipment shall notify the electrical inspector and such equipment shall not
be concealed until it has been inspected, approved or authorized by the electrical inspector. On large
installations, the person installing the electrical equipment shall give the electrical inspector due notice and
inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of work.
(c) The electrical inspector shall have the authority to require building contractors to open work which in any
manner conceals electrical wiring that has been closed without his knowledge or permission, and in no case
shall the inspector issue clearance until satisfied that the work is in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Inspectors shall also have the right to refuse to issue a clearance on any wiring that is concealed in
such a manner that it cannot be fully determined that it has been done in accordance with this chapter.
(d) If, upon inspection under this section, the installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, the electrical inspector shall immediately notify the person making the installation of
the existing defects.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-20; 1998 Code, sec. 46-44)
Sec. 18-38. Certificates of approval.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/554
(a) When the electrical inspector finds the installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
he shall issue to the person making the installation a certificate of approval, authorizing the use of the
installation and connection to the electrical supply.
(b) When a certificate of approval is issued authorizing the connection and use of a temporary installation,
such certificate shall expire at a time to be stated therein and shall be revocable for cause by the electrical
inspector.
(c) Permission may be given authorizing the connection and use of certain specified portions of an
incomplete installation. Such permission shall be revocable at the discretion of the electrical inspector.
(d) In no case shall certificates of approval be issued on installations or parts of installations where the work
installed does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. No certificate of approval shall be issued unless
the electric conductors or equipment has been installed in strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter
and the statutes of the state, and unless the installation is made in compliance with nationally approved
methods of construction for safety to life and property.
(e) The electrical inspector shall be deemed the judge of whether the installation of electric conductors and
equipment has been made in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(f) It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection to a supply of electricity or to supply electricity to
any electrical equipment for which a permit is required by this chapter, or which has been disconnected by the
order of the electrical inspector, until a certificate of approval has been issued by the electrical inspector
authorizing the connection and use of such equipment; provided, however, that the electrical inspector may
authorize a temporary connection.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-21; 1998 Code, sec. 46-45)
Sec. 18-39. Periodic reinspections.
(a) The electrical inspector shall periodically reinspect existing installations of electrical conductors and
equipment.
(b) When the installation of any conductors or equipment is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition,
the person owning, using or operating the installation shall be notified in writing and shall make the necessary
repairs or changes required to place such conductors or equipment in safe condition and have such work
completed within the period specified by the electrical inspector.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-22; 1998 Code, sec. 46-46)
Sec. 18-40. Authority to order repair or disconnection of service to dangerous equipment.
When any electrical equipment is found by the electrical inspector to be dangerous to persons or property
because it is defective or improperly installed, the person responsible for the equipment shall be notified in
writing and shall make any changes or repairs required, in the judgment of the electrical inspector, to place
such equipment in safe condition. If such work is not completed within 15 days or any longer period specified by
the electrical inspector in such notice, the building official shall have the authority to disconnect or order the
discontinuance of electric service to the electrical equipment. In cases of emergency, when necessary for safety
to persons or property, or when electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the
building official shall have the authority to immediately disconnect or cause the disconnection of any electrical
equipment. (1976 Code, sec. 13-23; 1998 Code, sec. 46-47)
Secs. 18-41–18-68. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. REGISTRATION OF ELECTRICIANS
Sec. 18-69. Required; exceptions.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person who is not registered as a qualified electrician in accordance with the
provisions of this article to engage in the business of electrical construction, or in the business of any of the
classifications prescribed herein, or to make any repairs, alterations, additions, or changes to any existing
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/554
system of electrical conductors, wiring, apparatus or equipment within the limits of the city, except as otherwise
provided in this section.
(b) Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any bona fide homeowner from personally installing electrical
conductors or equipment within his own home, provided that the owner shall file with the electrical inspector as
to his ability to install electrical wiring, apply for and secure a permit, pay required fees, do work in accordance
with this chapter, apply for an inspection, and receive a certificate of approval. Personal installation by an owner
under this subsection shall be by himself, for himself, on his own homestead premises, and without
compensation, and no person shall be employed to assist him in any way on such work.
(c) The following classes of work may be carried out by persons who are not registered electricians:
(1) The replacement of lamps and fuses and the connection of portable devices to suitable
receptacles which have been permanently installed.
(2) The installation, alteration or repairing of any wiring, devices or equipment for the operation of
signals for the transmission of intelligence, where such wiring, devices, appliances or equipment are
operated at a voltage not exceeding 30 volts, between conductors, and do not include generating or
transforming equipment.
(3) The installation, alteration or repair of electric wiring, devices, appliances, and equipment
installed by or for an electrical public service corporation operating under a franchise from the city
when for the use of such corporation in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of the
electrical energy or for the use of such a corporation in the operation of street railways, signals for
the transmission of intelligence as specified in section 18-4.
(4) Any work involved in the manufacture or test of electrical materials, devices, appliances or
apparatus, but not including any installation wiring other than that required for testing purposes, if
such equipment as completed is approved by the electrical inspector before it is installed or used
within the city.
(5) Any work involved in any factory in the manufacture, fabrication or test of products, equipment
or devices wherein electrical wiring, apparatus, devices or equipment is installed, fabricated,
manufactured, incorporated or otherwise attached.
(d) Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any person, firm or corporation from using their regular electrical
maintenance employees for installing, repairing, altering or maintaining electrical conductors or equipment
within or on the premises occupied by such person, firm or organization, provided such installation, repair,
alteration and/or maintenance is completed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the National
Electrical Code. Persons employed as electrical maintenance employees may obtain a plant specialist license
from the city provided that the person obtaining the license shows his competence in electrical maintenance
and installation by an examination approved by the city electrical board. Immediately upon the completion of
any such repairs, maintenance or installation of electrical work referred to herein, the persons shall call for an
immediate inspection of such work by the electrical inspector. Should any hazardous conditions be found, they
shall be corrected within a reasonable period of time. For the purpose of determining a hazardous condition, the
National Electrical Code referred to herein shall be used as the criteria. Any electrical work which upon
completion will be concealed shall receive a rough-in inspection prior to concealment.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-31; 1998 Code, sec. 46-101)
Sec. 18-70. Registration classifications.
There shall be six classes of electrical registration, which shall be as follows:
(1) Electrical contractor.
(2) Master electrician.
(3) Journeyman electrician.
(4) Plant specialist.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/554
(5) Master sign electrician.
(6) Journeyman sign electrician.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-32; 1998 Code, sec. 46-102)
Sec. 18-71. Application.
(a) Generally. To secure a certificate of registration as a qualified and competent electrician in any of the
classes set out herein, an application shall be made in writing and addressed to the electrical board. The
application shall show the applicant's name and address and such other information as may be desired by the
board.
(b) Contractors. Applicants for a certificate as electrical contractor shall file with the application an affidavit
setting forth the names of the persons who are the owners of the business or who are the officers of the firm
who own the business and the name and address of the person who shall be responsible for the business.
Such applicant shall appear in person if requested by the electrical board and be examined as provided in this
article.
(c) Master electricians. Applicants for a certificate as master electrician shall file with the application an
affidavit setting forth that such applicant is not less than 21 years of age and has had not less than five years'
experience in the installation, alteration, and repair of electrical equipment and conductors. A certificate of
graduation from, or an affidavit of attendance at, a recognized technical school or college may, at the discretion
of the electrical board, be certified as a part of the required five years' experience.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-33; 1998 Code, sec. 46-103)
Sec. 18-72. Examination of applicants.
Applicants for a certificate as a master electrician or journeyman electrician shall be tested and examined by
the Tarrant County Electrical Examining Board (TCEEB), and upon certification by the TCEEB that the applicant
is qualified for a particular class of certificate, the building official shall issue such certificate to the applicant
upon the payment of the fees provided for in this chapter. (1976 Code, sec. 13-34; 1998 Code, sec. 46-104)
Sec. 18-73. Fees.
The fees for registration of qualified electricians shall be payable to the electrical inspector's office as set out in
the following table. The application fee shall accompany the application for registration. The annual fee shall be
paid before the issuance of a certificate of registration and after the person has been approved by the electrical
board for registration. The fiscal year for payment of fees shall begin on January 1 and end December 31 of the
same year. No certificate shall authorize the holder thereof to enter into a contract for or do any installation,
maintenance or repair of any electrical work unless such person has paid his annual registration fee as required
by this section. The amounts of the application fee and annual registration fee shall be as established by the
city council, from time to time. (1976 Code, sec. 13-35; 1998 Code, sec. 46-105)
Sec. 18-74. Recording of registration; issuance of certificate.
Upon presentation to the electrical inspector of a certificate signed by the chairman or the secretary of the
electrical board stating the name and address of the applicant, the classification applied for, and that he has
passed the required examination, and after the applicant has paid to the city the registration fee prescribed in
this article, the electrical inspector shall register the name of the applicant in the records kept for that purpose
and shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration. (1976 Code, sec. 13-36; 1998 Code, sec. 46-106)
Sec. 18-75. Transfer, alteration, etc., of certificate.
It shall be unlawful for any person to lend, rent, or transfer his certificate of registration or any rights therein
contained to any other person, and for any person to make use of any such rights which are not actually his
own. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the electrical inspector to alter or amend in any manner any
such certificate of registration. (1976 Code, sec. 13-37; 1998 Code, sec. 46-107)
Sec. 18-76. Certificate to be displayed or carried on person.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/554
(a) Every holder of a certificate as an electrical contractor shall display his certificate in a conspicuous place
in his principal place of business.
(b) Every holder of a registered master or journeyman electrician's certificate shall carry his registration
certificate on his person at all times while doing electrical work and shall produce and exhibit it when requested
by an inspector or officer of the city.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-38; 1998 Code, sec. 46-108)
Sec. 18-77. Expiration and renewal of certificate.
Upon presentation to the electrical inspector of charges that the holder of any certificate of registration issued
under this article has willfully or persistently violated any provisions of this chapter or is incompetent to comply
with such provisions, or such person has been found guilty of violating any such provisions, the electrical
inspector shall fix a time and place for a meeting of the electrical board to consider such charges and shall
notify the holder of the certificate to be present at such meeting. Such notification shall be in writing and shall
be delivered to the holder at least five days in advance of the meeting. If, upon a hearing by the electrical board
of all evidence offered, it shall be decided by the board that the holder of the certificate has willfully or
persistently violated any of the provisions of this chapter or has proved himself incompetent, the electrical
inspector shall, upon the recommendation of the board, suspend or revoke the rights conveyed by the
certificate for a period of not less than 30 days and not more than two years. (1976 Code, sec. 13-39; 1998
Code, sec. 46-109)
Sec. 18-78. Special provisions relative to specific classifications–Contractors and repair shops.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of an electrical contractor without being
registered in the manner set forth in this article.
(b) Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical contracting shall apply for registration to the
electrical inspector. Upon the filing of such application in proper form, and the payment of the registration fee as
provided for in this article, the electrical inspector shall register the applicant as an electrical contractor and
shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration, provided he has qualified under this article and has
registered the proper address of his established place of business.
(c) An electrical contractor's certificate shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in the business of, and to
secure permits for, the installation, addition, alteration, servicing, replacing, removing or repair of any electrical
conductors, apparatus, appliances, devices and equipment. The actual work of installation shall be under the
direct supervision of a qualified master or journeyman electrician.
(d) When contracts to install electrical work have been obtained by persons who are not registered as
electrical contractors, the contract shall be assigned or sublet to a registered electrical contractor, and the name
of such registered electrical contractor shall immediately be disclosed to the electrical inspector.
(e) Any person engaged in the electrical contracting business shall be a qualified master electrician, or shall
have continuously in his employ a qualified master electrician who shall have active supervision over and be
responsible for carrying out the provisions of this chapter in its entirety.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-41; 1998 Code, sec. 46-110)
Sec. 18-79. Same–Master electricians.
(a) Any person holding an electrical contractor's certificate shall appoint or employ or shall himself be a
qualified master electrician.
(b) Any person who has been appointed or employed as a master electrician by a registered electrical
contractor shall register with the electrical inspector in writing.
(c) When an applicant has complied with the requirements of this chapter, the electrical inspector shall certify
him as a master electrician to a specific registered electrical contractor by placing his name on the contractor's
registration certificate and by an identification card issued to the registered master electrician.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/554
(d) The master electrician shall perform the work or supervise and direct the installation, alteration, repair,
and maintenance of electrical conductors and equipment authorized by permits issued under the authority of
this chapter.
(e) Whenever a master electrician shall leave or be discharged from the employ of any person who is
required to appoint or employ a master electrician, a notice in writing thereof shall be given immediately by both
the employer and the master electrician to the electrical inspector's office, and the permit privileges of such
employer shall, without further order or action, stand suspended until the employment or appointment and
qualifying of another master electrician as provided for in this chapter.
(f) When a master electrician has not acted in the capacity of a master electrician or in a supervisory position
on electrical work in the city for a continuous period of two years, he shall be reexamined before he shall be
certified as a registered master electrician. No master electrician shall be permitted to use his certificate of
registration in order to qualify more than one electrical contractor for registration in any consecutive 12-month
period.
(g) Applicants for registration as a master electrician shall be not less than 21 years of age, and shall have
had at least five years' experience in the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of electrical conductors,
equipment and apparatus, or an experience equivalent thereto. Applicants shall furnish the names and
addresses of former employers, and the period of time employed and in what capacity, proof of which service
shall be furnished in a manner satisfactory to the board of electricians. Every applicant shall be required to
answer a reasonable number of questions in writing to show that he has sufficient knowledge and technical
training to perform the work or to supervise the installation, alteration, repair, and maintenance of the electrical
conductors and equipment authorized by permits issued by the electrical inspector's office.
(h) A master electrician, after having passed the required examination, shall be granted a certificate showing
that he has the necessary qualifications to install or direct the installation of electrical conductors, devices,
apparatus, and equipment. It shall be unlawful for any master electrician to permit his name to be used or to
knowingly permit himself to be held out as the officer or employee in a supervisory capacity of any individual
person, firm or corporation holding an electrical contractor's certificate unless he is, in fact, an officer or
employee and does, in fact, supervise the installation of electrical work performed by such person.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-42; 1998 Code, sec. 46-111)
Sec. 18-80. Same–Journeyman electricians.
(a) Applicants for a certificate as a journeyman electrician shall be not less than 18 years of age and shall
have had at least four years' experience in the installation, alteration, repair, and maintenance of electrical
conductors and equipment, or an equivalent experience thereto. Every applicant shall be required to answer a
reasonable number of questions in writing to show that he has sufficient knowledge and technical training to
perform the work.
(b) A journeyman electrician's certificate shall entitle the holder thereof to engage himself in the employ of
any person registered under the provisions of this article. A registration card shall be issued to each registered
journeyman electrician.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-43; 1998 Code, sec. 46-112)
Sec. 18-81. False representations as to registration.
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself as a registered electrician of any class set out in
this chapter or to use the term “electrical contractor,” “master electrician” “electrician,” or words of similar import
or meaning on signs, cards, stationery or by any other manner whatsoever, unless such person is properly
registered within the meaning of the words used as provided in this chapter. (1976 Code, sec. 13-44; 1998
Code, sec. 46-113)
Sec. 18-82. Registration records.
The electrical inspector shall keep a record of all persons qualified by the electrical board to whom a certificate
of registration has been issued, provided that he shall not be responsible for the record of any person whose
registration has not been renewed and has thereby lapsed for a period of two years. (1976 Code, sec. 13-45;
1998 Code, sec. 46-114)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/554
Secs. 18-83–18-107. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. ELECTRICAL WORK PERMITS
Sec. 18-108. Required; exceptions.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed any electrical conductors or
equipment within or on any building, structure or premises, publicly or privately owned, or to make or cause to
be made any alteration in or addition to any existing electrical conductors or equipment, without securing a
permit therefor from the electrical inspector, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and except that no
permit will be required to execute any of the following classes of electrical work:
(1) The replacement of lamps or fuses or the connection of portable electrical equipment to
suitable permanently installed receptacles.
(2) Any work involved in the manufacture, fabricating, repair or testing of electrical equipment,
products, apparatus or devices manufactured, produced or used in any factory or manufacturing
facility.
(b) A permit shall be secured for all electric signs manufactured by registered electrical sign contractors
which are not approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories and which are to be sold, erected or installed in the
city.
(c) A permit shall be secured for all electrical changes, installations and revisions that are done in electrical
elevators. No permit shall be required when electrical conductors or equipment are being maintained by repairs
or replacement in kind.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-46; 1998 Code, sec. 46-141)
Sec. 18-109. Application.
Application for a permit under this article, describing the work to be done, shall be made to the electrical
inspector by the person installing the work. The application shall be accompanied by such information as may
be necessary to determine whether the installation as described will be in conformity with the requirements of
this chapter. When required by the electrical inspector, the applicant shall state the size of conductors to be
used for all services, mains, feeders and subfeeders, the size of main and subfeeder switches and fuses, the
area to be served by such conductors and the basis used in computing the required sizes of such conductors.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-47; 1998 Code, sec. 46-142)
Sec. 18-110. Fees.
(a) Any person granted a permit under this article shall pay to the city a fee therefor to cover the costs of
inspections under this chapter. Such fees shall be in amounts as established by the city council, from time to
time.
(b) Whenever any work for which a permit is required by the electrical code has been commenced without
first obtaining said permit, the fee for such permit shall be doubled.
(c) The permit fees prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall include the cost of the initial inspection
and one reinspection. If a second reinspection is required, a fee of $15.00 shall be charged to the defaulting
contractor for the second reinspection and for each inspection required thereafter.
(1976 Code, sec. 13-48; 1998 Code, sec. 46-143)
Sec. 18-111. Issuance generally.
If it is found that the installation as described in an application under this article will conform with all legal
requirements and if the applicant has complied with all provisions of this chapter, a permit for such installation
shall be issued. (1976 Code, sec. 13-48.1; 1998 Code, sec. 46-144)
Sec. 18-112. Failure to correct defective work.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/554
Upon failure on the part of any registered electrical contractor to correct any defect, error, or deficiency in any
work installed under the authority of an electrical permit issued to him, within ten calendar days after written
notification thereof by the electrical inspector or within such further reasonable time as may, upon request, be
prescribed, the electrical inspector shall, without further notice, stop the issuance of permits to such registered
electrical contractor until such corrections have been made, inspected, and approved In addition thereto, the
penalty provided for violation of this chapter may be enforced. (1976 Code, sec. 13-49; 1998 Code, sec. 46-
145)
Sec. 18-113. Expiration.
Every specific permit issued by the electrical inspector under the provisions of this article shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been started within six
months from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at
any time for a period of six months after the work is started. Before such work can be started again, a new
permit shall be obtained. (1976 Code, sec. 13-50; 1998 Code, sec. 46-146)
Sec. 18-114. Revocation.
The electrical inspector is authorized to revoke and declare null and void any permit obtained under this article
by fraud or misrepresentation or in any way contrary to the requirements of this chapter. Such a permit may
also be revoked and declared null and void by the electrical inspector for any violation of the provisions of this
chapter or for any other just cause. (1976 Code, sec. 13-51; 1998 Code, sec. 46-147)
Sec. 18-115. Cancellation and reissuance.
The electrical inspector is authorized to revoke a permit if the permittee fails to complete the job after ten days'
notice. Such notice shall be given by the electrical inspector in a letter addressed to the permit holder at his
address shown on the permit. After cancellation of such permit, a second permit may be issued by the electrical
inspector as though such first permit had never been issued. (1976 Code, sec. 13-51.1; 1998 Code, sec. 46-
148)
Sec. 18-116. Deviation from permit; permit does not authorize violation of chapter.
No deviation shall be made from the installation described in the permit issued under this article, without
notifying the electrical inspector. The issuance of a permit shall not be taken as permission to violate any of the
requirements of this chapter. (1976 Code, sec. 13-52; 1998 Code, sec. 46-149)
Sec. 18-117. Securing permit for person not entitled thereto.
It shall be unlawful for any person to secure for or furnish a permit for the installation, alteration or repair of
electrical conductors or equipment to any person not entitled to such permit under the regulations of this
chapter. (1976 Code, sec. 13-53; 1998 Code, sec. 46-150)
Secs. 18-118–18-147. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ELECTRICAL CODE
Sec. 18-148. Adoption and amendments.
(a) Adopted. The 2017 edition of the National Electrical Code, all appendixes, the recommended
amendments of the North Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as
the official electrical code of the city. This electrical code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into
this article in its entirety. The material contained in the National Electrical Code shall not be included in the
formal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and
will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours.
(b) Amendments.
(1) No #14 wire can be used in the incorporated city limits.
(2) The minimum breaker will be 20 Amp; 15 Amp will not be allowed in the incorporated city
limits.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/554
(1998 Code, sec. 46-171; Ordinance 200649, sec. 10, adopted 7/11/06; Ordinance 2015-12-002, sec. 14,
adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 14, adopted 8/6/19)
CHAPTER 20
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 20-1. Offense; penalties.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by fine to be determined by
scope of offense and/or state and federal laws.
(1998 Code. sec. 50-8; Ordinance 200391, sec. 8, adopted 10/7/03; Ordinance 2011-05-001, sec. 8, adopted
5/3/11)
Sec. 20-2. Organization.
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city which shall be held by the mayor.
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
director.
(2) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management
within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He may
delegate authority for execution of these duties to the emergency management coordinator but
ultimate responsibility for such shall remain with the director.
(3) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers
and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well
as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed
among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management
plan.
(1998 Code, sec. 50-1; Ordinance 200391, sec. 1, adopted 10/7/03; Ordinance 2011-05-001, sec. 1, adopted
5/3/11)
Sec. 20-3. Emergency management director; powers and duties.
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and
identifying and requiting or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to
prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city
and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed
necessary for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/554
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be
disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general
public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with
the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well
as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshalling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and
with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency
management efforts.
(10) Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could
be used during a disaster as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (Texas Government Code ch. 418).
(1998 Code, sec. 50-2; Ordinance 200391, sec. 2, adopted 10/7/03; Ordinance 2011-05-001, sec. 2, adopted
5/3/11)
Sec. 20-4. Emergency management plan.
(a) A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state.
The plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management of the state. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and
terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When
approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan
and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times.
(b) The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect
of law during the time of a disaster.
(1998 Code, sec. 50-3; Ordinance 200391, sec. 3, adopted 10/7/03; Ordinance 2011-05-001, sec. 3, adopted
5/3/11)
Sec. 20-5. Interjurisdictional program.
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the county and the designated
representative/officials of other cities in said county in the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency manage
plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to
participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/554
(1998 Code, sec. 50-4; Ordinance 200391, sec. 4, adopted 10/7/03; Ordinance 2011-05-001, sec. 4, adopted
5/3/11)
Sec. 20-6. Override.
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant lo this chapter shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith. (1998 Code, sec. 50-5; Ordinance 200391, sec. 5, adopted 10/7/03;
Ordinance 2011-05-001, sec. 5, adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 20-7. Liability.
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace,
health and safety and neither the city, the agents and representative of said city, nor any individual, receiver,
firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person
owning or controlling real or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a
license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part of such
real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy
attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civility liable
for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or
other permission or for loss of, or damage to the property of such person. (1998 Code, sec. 50-6; Ordinance
200391, sec. 6, adopted 10/7/03; Ordinance 2011-05-001, sec. 6, adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 20-8. Commitment of funds.
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency
management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person
have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the
city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the emergency management
coordinator or designee may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and
necessary for the protection of health, life or property. (1998 Code, sec. 50-7; Ordinance 200391, sec. 7,
adopted 10/7/03; Ordinance 2011-05-001, sec. 7, adopted 5/3/11)
CHAPTER 22
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. Arson reward–Established.
The mayor is hereby empowered to offer a reward of $500.00, payable to the person or persons who shall be
responsible for the arrest and conviction of any person committing in the city the crime of arson as the same is
now defined by the penal code of the state. (1976 Code, sec. 14-1; 1998 Code, sec. 54-1)
State law reference–Arson generally, Texas Penal Code sec. 28.02.
Sec. 22-2. Same–How offered.
Whenever the city manager shall be informed that any fire occurring in the city was of an incendiary origin, he
shall call for a report on the same by the city fire marshal, and if the marshal shall report that such fire was
caused by the commission of the crime of arson, it shall become the duty of the city manager to recommend
that the mayor offer the reward provided by section 22-1, which reward shall be in the form of a proclamation
duly issued by the mayor under his official signature and attested by the seal of the city. (1976 Code, sec. 14-2;
1998 Code, sec. 54-2)
Sec. 22-3. Same–Notice.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/554
(a) The city secretary is hereby directed to have prepared and posted an arson reward notice on placards
eight inches by 12 inches in size showing the following reward notice:
ARSON REWARD
The City of Forest Hill, Texas, hereby offers the reward of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for the arrest and conviction of any person or persons found guilty of committing the
crime of arson within the corporate limits of the City of Forest Hill, Texas. This reward is
a standing offer and shall be paid out of the general fund of the City of Forest Hill, Texas.
(b) Such placards shall be placed in wooden frames under glass and shall be posted inside at least 20
different public buildings within the city, one of which shall be the city hall, in accordance with the regulations of
the state fire insurance department.
(1976 Code, sec. 14-3; 1998 Code, sec. 54-3)
Sec. 22-4. Same–Payment.
Upon information being given by any person causing the arrest and conviction of any person guilty of the
specific crime of arson, and upon the final conviction of such person, the person giving such information shall
be entitled to receive the reward offered in section 22-1 from the city. (1976 Code, sec. 14-4; 1998 Code, sec.
54-4)
Sec. 22-5. Number of firefighters.
The following shall be the number of firefighters in addition to the fire chief for each classification within the city:
FIREFIGHTER
Assistant Chief 1
Fire Marshal 1
Lieutenants 3
Engineers 3
Firefighters 9
(Ordinance 2009004, sec. 1, adopted 3/3/09; Ordinance 2012-10-001, sec. 1, adopted 10/16/12)
State law reference–Authority for home-rule municipality to provide for a fire department, Texas Local Government Code
sec. 342.011 et seq.
Sec. 22-6. Address numbers.
Every residence and business with an outside entrance shall display a street address in numbers at least six
inches high, such numbers to be prominently displayed and visible. (1976 Code, sec. 14-69; 1998 Code, sec.
54-48)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/554
Secs. 22-7–22-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FIRE CODE
Sec. 22-31. Adopted.
The 2018 edition of the International Fire Code, all appendixes, the recommended amendments of the North
Central Texas Council of Governments, and local amendments is hereby adopted as the official fire code of the
city. This fire code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material
contained in the International Fire Code shall not be included in the formal codification of ordinances but shall
be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and
copying during regular business hours. (1976 Code, sec. 14-54; 1998 Code, sec. 54-31; Ordinance 96-960033,
sec. 1, adopted 3/19/96; Ordinance 200418, sec. 1, adopted 3/2/04; Ordinance 200840, secs. 1–4, adopted
4/1/08; Ordinance 2015-12-002, sec. 6, adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 2019-18, sec. 6, adopted 8/6/19)
Sec. 22-32. Conflicts.
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the fire code adopted by this and the other provisions of
this Code of Ordinances or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of the fire code shall prevail and
be controlling. (1976 Code, sec. 14-55; 1998 Code, sec. 54-32)
Sec. 22-33. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Corporation counsel. Wherever the term “corporation counsel” is used in the fire code, it means the city
attorney.
Jurisdiction. Wherever the term “jurisdiction” is used in the fire code, it means the city.
Municipality. Wherever the term “municipality” is used in the fire code, it means the city.
(1976 Code, sec. 14-56; 1998 Code, sec. 54-33)
Sec. 22-34. Penalties.
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire code adopted by this article or fail to comply
therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of
any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or
permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an
order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an
offense, punishable as provided in section 1-15. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse
the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations
or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each and every day any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(b) The application of the penalty set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(1976 Code, sec. 14-57; 1998 Code, sec. 54-34)
Sec. 22-35. Amendments.
The following sections of the fire code adopted in section 22-31 are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Forest Hill,
hereinafter referred to as “this Code.”
Section 109.3. Violation; penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or
terms of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/554
subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each
and every day any such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
Section 111.4. Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with
a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine not to exceed two thousand and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00) for each
offense, and each and every day any such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a
separate offense.
Section 307.2.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 307.2.2. Prohibited open burning. Open burning shall be prohibited within the City of Forest
Hill.
Section 505.1 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
Premises identification. Approved numerals of a minimum six inches (6") height and of a color contrasting
with the background designating address shall be placed on all new and existing buildings or structures in
such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property and from all
rear alleyways where said alleyways exist.
Exception 1. R-3 occupancies shall have approved numerals of a minimum three inches (3") height and a
color contrasting with the background clearly visible and legible from the street fronting the property and
rear alleyway where such alleyway exists.
Section 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems of the International Fire Code to read as follows:
Where allowed, automatic sprinkler systems installed in one-and two-family dwellings shall be installed
throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D. Additionally, an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
NFPA 13D shall be required in all multifamily dwellings (duplex, triplex, fourplex, etc.) not exceeding two
stories in height, up to a maximum of twelve (12) living units. Structures greater than two stories in height
or more than twelve (12) living units shall comply with all applicable sections of the 2003 International Fire
Code.
Section 3204.3.1.1 (Geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary
containers is prohibited): Are hereby prohibited within the city limits.
Section 3301.1.3 is amended by the addition of the following:
The presence or use of fireworks within the jurisdiction of the City of Forest Hill, in violation of this article is
hereby declared to be a common and public nuisance. The restrictions of this section shall be applicable
and in force throughout the territory of the City of Forest Hill, Texas.
Section 3404.2.9.5.1 (Geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in
aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited): Are prohibited within the city limits.
Section 3406.2.4.4 (Geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in aboveground
tanks is prohibited): Are prohibited within the city, except under certain conditions.
Section 3804.2 (Geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the
protection of heavily populated or congested areas): Are prohibited within the city limits.
(1976 Code, sec. 14-62; 1998 Code, sec. 54-39; Ordinance 200418, secs. 2, 3, adopted 3/2/04)
Sec. 22-36. Appeals.
Whenever the chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief to the city council
within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. (1976 Code, sec. 14-63; 1998 Code, sec. 54-40)
Sec. 22-37. New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/554
The code enforcement officer, the chief and the fire prevention officer shall act as a committee to determine and
specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies
which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire code. The fire prevention officer
shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
(1976 Code, sec. 14-64; 1998 Code, sec. 54-41)
Secs. 22-38–22-62. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. FLAMMABLE OR COMBUSTIBLE SUBSTANCES
Sec. 22-63. Aboveground storage tanks for flammable or combustible liquids.
Aboveground tanks used for abovegrade storage of Class II or IIIA liquids are allowed to be protected
aboveground tanks and when approved by specific use permit from the city council. Aboveground storage tanks
shall be designed in accordance with the currently adopted fire code and with the following:
(1) Shall only be allowed to be located in LI (Light Industrial) and HI (Heavy Industrial) zoning
districts by order of a specific use permit from the city council;
(2) Shall not be placed inside a building;
(3) Shall not exceed an aggregate amount of 12,000 gallons;
(4) Shall adhere to any and all federal, state and local regulations, including but not limited to
those found in the currently adopted fire code.
(1976 Code, sec. 14-58; 1998 Code, sec. 54-35; Ordinance 2010-05-004, sec. 2, adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 22-64. Bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids prohibited.
Bulk plants and terminals as referred to by sections 79.1401 through 79.1410 of the Uniform Fire Code are
prohibited within the city limits. (1976 Code, sec. 14-59; 1998 Code, sec. 54-36)
Sec. 22-65. Storage of liquefied petroleum gas restricted.
The limits referred to in section 82-103(a) of the Uniform Fire Code, in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas
is restricted, are hereby established as the city limits. (1976 Code, sec. 14-60; 1998 Code, sec. 54-37)
Sec. 22-66. Restriction on storage of explosives and blasting agents.
The limits referred to in section 77-106(b) of the Uniform Fire Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting
agents is prohibited, are hereby established as the city limits. (1976 Code, sec. 14-61; 1998 Code, sec. 54-38)
Sec. 22-67. Portable or mobile service stations.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to dispense from any mobile
service unit, vehicle, tank truck or other mobile device any flammable liquid used as motor fuel, as an act of
retail sale, into a tank of any motor vehicle parked on any of f-street parking facility or parked on any public
street.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to sell or dispense any flammable
liquid used as fuel into the tank of any motor vehicle parked on any of f-street parking facility or parked on any
public street from any mobile service unit, vehicle, tank truck or other mobile device used or being operated as
a self service station.
(c) A mobile service unit, vehicle, tank truck or other mobile device as used in this section shall mean and
include any vehicle, tank, tank truck or any other mobile device from which flammable liquids used as motor
fuels may be dispensed into the tanks of motor vehicles. It is the intent of this section to prohibit mobile gasoline
filling stations which either park or circulate among and around of f-street parking facilities and public streets
and from which the driver or attendant or other operator may make sales of gasoline or other flammable liquids
used as fuel to persons whose vehicles are parked in such locations.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/554
(d) This section shall not apply to the delivery of liquefied petroleum gasoline to service stations which are
fixed in one location with a building, fuel pumps with underground tanks, and other such fixtures, or to any other
lawful recipients having proper containers other than motor vehicles, nor does this section apply to the
emergency delivery of motor fuel to a motor vehicle which has run out of gas or is otherwise stalled because of
fuel problems.
(e) Every violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as
provided in section 1-15. Each and every act of dispensing fuel shall be deemed a separate violation.
(f) The city may also bring suit for injunction against any person that violates or threatens to violate any of the
provisions of this section, in order to prevent a continued violation of such activity.
(1976 Code, sec. 14-68; 1998 Code, sec. 54-47)
Secs. 22-68–22-92. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. FIRE LANES
Sec. 22-93. Fire lanes required for certain buildings; specifications; maintenance.
(a) Except for single-family and two-family residences and accessory structures thereto, no building shall be
constructed in such a manner that any part of the structure is more than 150 feet from a public street or
highway, unless a fire lane is provided as hereinafter set forth. Such fire lane shall be provided by the owner
thereof, who shall designate, construct and maintain the fire lane with a hard surface having a minimum width
of 20 feet and a minimum height clearance of 14 feet terminating within 150 feet of the most distant point of
such structure.
(b) Every fire lane more than 150 feet in length shall either connect at each end to a dedicated street or be
provided with a turnaround having a minimum diameter of 50 feet.
(c) All fire lanes shall be maintained and kept in a state of good repair and plainly visible at all times by the
owner, manager or person in charge of the premises, and the city shall never be responsible for the
maintenance thereof .
(d) No fire lane required by this section or any previous ordinance of the city shall be abandoned, altered or
closed without written permission of the fire chief or his authorized representative of the city.
(1976 Code, sec. 14-65; 1998 Code, sec. 54-42)
Sec. 22-94. Submission of plot plans for fire lanes; duty of contractors to provide fire lane during
construction.
(a) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, two plot plans with designated fire lanes shall be submitted to
the building inspection department for review by the fire chief or his authorized representative. The fire chief or
his authorized representative then will approve or disapprove the designated fire lanes and indicate the needed
signs and pavement markings. One of these plans shall be retained by the city and the other returned to the
owner for his use.
(b) The contractor or person in charge of any construction site for commercial, industrial, mercantile,
educational, institutional, assembly, hotel, motel, multifamily dwelling or mobile home park occupancies shall
provide and maintain during construction an approved all-weather fire lane, not less than 20 feet in width, as
shown on approved plot plans. Final paving of such fire lane shall be completed prior to issuance of any
certificate of occupancy.
(1976 Code, sec. 14-65.1; 1998 Code, sec. 54-43)
Sec. 22-95. Fire lane markings and signs.
The owner, manager or person in charge of premises for which fire lanes have been approved by the fire chief
or his authorized representative shall install and maintain appropriate fire lane markings in conspicuous places
and plainly visible along such fire lanes.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/554
(1) Painted fire lanes, fire lanes and large parking areas shall be designated by continuous lines
at least four inches in width on each side of the fire lane starting at the entrance from the street and
continued to the exit, including turnarounds if required. Such lines shall be traffic red in color. The
words “No Parking” and “Fire Lane” shall be painted in white letters alternately every 15 feet over the
red lines.
(2) Fire lanes adjacent to curbs shall have the entire curb painted traffic red. Fire lanes adjacent to
buildings or fences shall have a five-inch-wide stripe painted and lettered as in subsection (1) of this
section.
(3) Signs stating “No Parking-Fire Lane” and “Tow-Away Zone” shall be installed at the entrance
to fire lanes and any other place reasonably required by the fire chief or his authorized
representative. “No Parking-Fire Lane” and “Tow-Away Zone” signs shall be painted on a white
background with symbols, letters and border in red. Drawings and samples of such signs may be
obtained from the city fire department.
a. Such signs shall be 12 inches wide and 18 inches high, with a companion sign 12 inches
wide and six inches high.
b. Signs shall be securely affixed to an approved post and such post shall be a permanent
stationary type. The bottom of the signs shall be six feet above the finished grade. No other
signs shall be affixed on fire lane posts. Any variation in sign mounting shall require the
approval of the fire chief or his authorized representative.
(4) It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to attempt to or in fact
alter, destroy, deface, injure, knock down or remove any sign or other marking designating a fire lane
or tow-away zone erected under the terms of this section.
(1976 Code, sec. 14-65.2; 1998 Code, sec. 54-44)
Sec. 22-96. Obstructing fire lane.
(a) No person shall park, place, allow, permit or cause to be parked, placed or remain unattended any motor
vehicle, trailer, boat, trash receptacle or similar obstruction within or upon an area designated as a fire lane and
marked by an appropriate sign.
(b) Any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, trash receptacle or similar obstruction found parked or unoccupied within
an area designated as a fire lane as required by this section is hereby declared a nuisance and any such motor
vehicle, trailer, trash receptacle or similar obstruction parked or unoccupied in such a manner as to obstruct in
whole or in part any such fire lane shall be prima facie evidence that the registered owner unlawfully parked,
placed or permitted to be parked or placed such obstruction within a fire lane.
(c) The records of the state department of highways and public transportation or the department of public
safety showing the name of the person to whom the state highway license or boat or trailer license is issued
shall constitute prima facie evidence of ownership by the named person.
(d) No person other than a police officer or firefighter in the performance of their official duties shall stop or
block persons or vehicles within any marked fire lane on the city hall parking lot for any purpose.
(1976 Code, sec. 14-66; 1998 Code, sec. 54-45; Ordinance 904-950124-1400, sec. 1, adopted 5/16/95)
Sec. 22-97. Enforcement of fire lane regulations; impoundment of obstructions.
(a) The fire chief, any member of the fire department designated by the fire chief, the chief of police, or any
member of the police department designated by the chief of police is hereby authorized to cause fire lanes to
be maintained free and unobstructed at all times for fire department uses.
(b) The fire chief, any member of the fire department designated by the fire chief, the chief of police, or any
member of the police department designated by the chief of police is hereby authorized to issue parking
citations for any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, trash receptacle or similar obstruction found parked or unattended
in or upon a designated fire lane and may have such obstruction removed by towing it at the expense of the
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/554
owner of such vehicle, trailer, boat or receptacle, to the recognized city auto pound, and it may be impounded
until all towing and storage fees are paid.
(1976 Code, sec. 14-66.1; 1998 Code, sec. 54-46)
Secs. 22-98–22-122. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. FIREWORKS*
Sec. 22-123. Sale of fireworks prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, purchase, manufacture, transport, offer for sale, give away or store
fireworks within the city. (1976 Code, sec. 14-70; 1998 Code, sec. 54-49)
Sec. 22-124. Discharge of fireworks prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge fireworks within the city, except for display for which the chief of
the fire department upon approval of the city council has issued a permit specifying the time and place of such
discharge, together with such restrictions as he may deem necessary for the protection of life, safety and
property. No permit shall be granted for any time or place which would cause disturbance to persons residing in
the vicinity. (1976 Code, sec. 14-71; 1998 Code, sec. 54-50)
Sec. 22-125. Fireworks declared nuisance in unincorporated areas within 5,000 feet of city limits.
The presence of any fireworks in unincorporated areas within 5,000 feet of the city limits is hereby declared to
be a nuisance. The city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city for such injunctive relief as may be
necessary to prevent the sale, storage, transportation, keeping or using of fireworks within 5,000 feet of the city
and not within the corporate limits of any other city. (1976 Code, sec. 14-72; 1998 Code, sec. 54-51)
CHAPTER 24
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 24-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code sec. 16.315, delegated
the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore,
the city does ordain the regulations set forth in this chapter. (1976 Code, sec. 14½-1; 1998 Code, sec. 58-1;
Ordinance 2009018, art. 1, sec. A, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-2. Findings of fact.
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and
general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise
protected from flood damage.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-2; 1998 Code, sec. 58-2; Ordinance 2009018, art. 1, sec. B, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-3. Statement of purpose.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/554
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-3; 1998 Code, sec. 58-3; Ordinance 2009018, art. I, sec. C, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-4; 1998 Code, sec. 58-4; Ordinance 2009018, art. 1, sec. D, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined as follows, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them
the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application:
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which
originates at the apex and is characterized by:
(1) High-velocity flows;
(2) Active processes of erosion, sediment transport and deposition; and
(3) Unpredictable flow paths.
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that
formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/554
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one percent annual
chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard
boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the
FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH,
AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in
the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30 or VE that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that
level in any given year, also called the base flood.
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the
flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor,
raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. The term “existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by
the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads).
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/554
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See Flood elevation study.
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized,
appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce
the extent of the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of
associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes.
These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering
standards.
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
See Flood or flooding.
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway. See Regulatory floodway. Functionally dependent use.
(1) The term “functionally dependent use” means a use, which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking
facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and
ship building and ship repair facilities.
(2) The term “functionally dependent use” does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to
the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure means any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminary determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/554
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance
with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of levees and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Manufactured home.
(1) The term “manufactured home” means a structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities.
(2) The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVO) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance
rate map are referenced.
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever
is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes,
the term “new construction” means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height.
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See Area of special flood hazard.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/554
Start of construction, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as d welling units or not part of
the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roof ed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement.
(1) The term “substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of
the structure before start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
(2) The term “substantial improvement” does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4)
or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-5; 1998 Code, sec. 58-5; Ordinance 906-950150-1450, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/18/95;
Ordinance 2009018, art. 2, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-6. Lands to which chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (1976 Code, sec.
14½-6; 1998 Code, sec. 58-6; Ordinance 2009018, art. 3, sec. A, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current
scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Tarrant County, Texas and
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/554
Incorporated Areas,” dated March 21, 2019, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated March 21,
2019, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-7; 1998 Code, sec. 58-7; Ordinance 906-950150-1450, sec. 3, adopted 7/18/95;
Ordinance 2009018, art. 3, sec. B, adopted 9/18/09; Ordinance 2019-04 adopted 3/19/19)
Sec. 24-8. Establishment of development permit.
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-8; 1998 Code, sec. 58-8; Ordinance 2009018, art. 3, sec. C, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-9. Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. (1976 Code, sec. 14½-9; 1998 Code, sec. 58-9;
Ordinance 2009018, art. 3, sec. D, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (1976 Code, sec. 14½-10;
1998 Code, sec. 58-10; Ordinance 2009018, art. 3, sec. E, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-11. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-11; 1998 Code, sec. 58-11; Ordinance 2009018, art. 3, sec. F, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-12. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and
flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside
the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder. (1976 Code, sec. 14½-12; 1998 Code, sec. 58-12; Ordinance 2009018, art. 3, sec. G, adopted
9/18/09)
Sec. 24-13. Costs and fees.
(a) All persons, firms or corporations applying for licenses, inspections, permits or other city services,
activities, or uses that require the applicant to engage in any study or activity covered by this chapter shall pay
the requisite fees as established by the city council.
(b) All persons, firms or corporations applying for licenses, inspections, permits or other city services,
activities, or uses that require the applicant to submit plans, drawings or documents for review in compliance
with this chapter shall pay the actual cost of that review by city staff or persons retained by the city for the
purpose of reviewing such plans. These costs shall be paid upon receipt of an invoice from the city and work
shall not proceed until such costs have been paid in full.
(c) It shall be a violation of this chapter to conduct any activity or commence any use for which payment of a
fee is required until such fee has been paid. It shall be a violation of this chapter to conduct any activity or
commence any use for which payment of these costs are required until such payment has been made. The
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/554
penalty for violations shall be a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day that a violation occurs shall be a separate
violation.
(Ordinance 2019-08, sec. 2, adopted 3/19/19)
Secs. 24-14–24-42. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 24-43. Designation of floodplain administrator.
The public works superintendent or designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management
and Assistance-National Flood Insurance Program regulations), pertaining to floodplain management. (1976
Code, sec. 14½-21; 1998 Code, sec. 58-31; Ordinance 2009018, art. 4, sec. A, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-44. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval
is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is
the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 24-7, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
article III of this chapter.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must
require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill)
shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/554
one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by said section
65.12.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-22; 1998 Code, sec. 58-32; Ordinance 2009018, art. 4, sec. B, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-45. Permit procedures.
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms
furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the
placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
and substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 24-67(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 24-44(1).
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all
of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-23; 1998 Code, sec. 58-33; Ordinance 2009018, art. 4, sec. C, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-46. Variance procedures.
(a) The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/554
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures
set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of onehalf
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the
base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 24-45 (b) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted in this section and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of this chapter (section 24-3).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure
and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. Showing a good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights.
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense. create nuisances. cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for
other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-24; 1998 Code, sec. 58-34; Ordinance 906-950150-1450, sec. 4, adopted 7/18/95;
Ordinance 2009018. art. 4, sec. D, adopted 9/18/09)
Secs. 24-47–24-65. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 24-66. General standards.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/554
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and
substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical. heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-31; 1998 Code, sec. 58-61; Ordinance 2009018, art. 5, sec. A, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-67. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section
24-7, 24-44(8) or 24-68(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to two feet above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 24-45(a)
(1), is satisfied
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to two feet above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/554
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
a. Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM
or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the
purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites:
1. Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
2. In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
3. In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
4. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred substantial damage, as a result of a flood, be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to
two feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
c. Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM, that are not subject to the provisions of this subsection (4), be elevated so
that either:
1. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two feet above the base flood
elevation; or
2. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
c. Meet the permit requirements of section 24-45(a), and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (4) of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-321; 1998 Code, sec. 58-62; Ordinance 906-950150-1450, sec. 5, adopted 7/18/95;
Ordinance 2009018, art. 5, sec. B, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-68. Standards for subdivision proposals.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/554
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be
consistent with sections 24-2, 24-3 and 24-4
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of sections 24-8 and 24-45 and the
provisions of this article.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development
including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 24-7 or 24-44(8).
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all zone A areas, within
100 feet of the contour lines of zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the
community's FIRM.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(f) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-331; 1998 Code, sec. 58-63; Ordinance 2009018, art. 5, sec. C, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-69. Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 24-7, are areas designated as shallow
flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation or the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
a. Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet above the base flood
elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
b. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base
specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of
effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 24-45 are satisfied.
(4) Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-341; 1998 Code, sec. 58-64; Ordinance 2009018, art. 5, sec. D, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-70. Floodways.
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 24-L are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/554
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1; section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first
completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations.
(1976 Code, sec. 14½-351; 1998 Code; sec. 58-65; Ordinance 906-950150-1450, sec. 6, adopted 7/18/95;
Ordinance 2009018, art. 5, sec. E, adopted 9/18/09)
Sec. 24-71. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court
order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than
$2,000.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a
violation occurs is a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ordinance 2009018, art. 5, sec. G, adopted
9/18/09)
CHAPTER 26
HEALTH AND SANITATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 26-1. Designation of health authority.
The city designates the county health department director as its health authority for the purpose of ensuring
minimum standards of environmental health and sanitation within the scope of that department's function. (1976
Code, sec. 16-1; 1998 Code, sec. 66-1; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 2(66-1), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-2. State regulations adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by the executive
commissioner of the health and human services commission found in 25 Tex. Admin. Code secs. 229.161–
229.171 and 229.173-229.175 regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction. (1976 Code,
sec. 16-2; 1998 Code, sec. 66-2; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 2(66-2), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-3. Definitions.
In addition to the definitions contained in the rules adopted by reference under section 26-2, the following
words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Authorized agent or employee means the employees of the regulatory authority.
Child care facility means a facility keeping more than 12 unrelated children that provides care, training,
education, custody or supervision for children under 15 years of age who are not related by blood, marriage or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/554
adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of the day, whether or not the facility is operated
for profit or charges for the service it offers. Nonprofit facilities will be required to make application for a permit
and meet current requirements but are exempt from payment of the permit fees.
Food establishment.
(1) The term “food establishment” means a food service establishment, a retail food store, a
temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit and/or a roadside food vendor; every place where
food or drink is manufactured, packaged, produced, processed, transported, stored, sold,
commercially prepared, or otherwise handled, whether offered for sale, given in exchange or given
away for use as food or furnished for human consumption.
(2) The term “food establishment” does not apply to private homes where food is prepared or
served for guests or individual family consumption; the location of commercially packaged singleportion
nonpotentially hazardous snack items and wrapped candy sold over the counter is excluded.
Municipality, in this chapter, shall be understood to refer to the city.
Regulatory authority means the county public health department.
Service of notice means the notice provided for in these rules shall be deemed properly served upon the earlier
of delivery to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or the date when mailed by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit.
State rules means the state rules found at 25 Tex. Admin. Code secs. 229.161–229.171 and 229.173–229.175;
these rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-3; 1998 Code, sec. 66-3; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 2(66-3), adopted 7/19/11)
Secs. 26-4–26-24. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FOOD PERMITS, PLAN REVIEW AND FOOD MANAGER CERTIFICATION
Sec. 26-25. Food permits.
(a) Permits and exemptions. A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the
regulatory authority. Permits are not transferrable from one person or entity to another or from one location to
another location, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter. A valid permit must be visibly posted in or on
every food establishment regulated by this chapter.
(b) Application for permit and fees.
(1) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a
permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and
address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the
applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required
information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit.
Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a
renewal permit as for an initial permit.
(2) Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory
authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and
rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or
the renewal of a permit.
(3) Fees for permits issued under this chapter shall be as listed in article IV of this chapter.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-16; 1998 Code, sec. 66-31; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 3(66-31), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-26. Review of plans.
(a) Submission of plans. Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and
whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/554
specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for
review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20 percent or greater of the area of the food
establishment is to be remodeled or when equipment required by the rules is to be relocated or removed. The
plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and
construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The
plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules
adopted by this chapter. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or
conversion.
(b) Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension or
revocation.
(c) Fees for the review of plans shall be as listed in article IV of this chapter.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-17; 1998 Code, sec. 66-32; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 3(66-32), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-27. Inspections.
(a) Before a permit is issued, the city or its authorized representative shall inspect and approve the food
establishment. An inspection of a food establishment shall be performed at least once annually and shall be
prioritized based upon assessment of a food establishment's compliance and potential of causing foodborne
illness according to 25 Tex. Admin. Code sec. 229. l 71(h).
(b) The regulatory authority shall classify food establishments as special priority, high priority, medium priority
or low priority, according to:
(1) The type of operations;
(2) The particular foods that are prepared;
(3) The number of people served;
(4) The susceptibility of the population served;
(5) The history of violations; and
(6) Any other risk factor deemed relevant to the operation.
(c) Refusal of an owner, manager or employee to allow the authorized representative of the regulatory
authority, upon presentation of credentials, to inspect any permitted business or operation therein during normal
business hours will result in an immediate suspension of the permit, requiring all permitted activities to abate
until after such time as a hearing may be held per section 26-29
(Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 3(66-33), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-28. Food manager/food handler education.
The following requirements apply to food manager/food handler education:
(1) Each food service establishment shall have at least one person employed in a managerial
capacity possessing a current food manager certificate approved by the regulatory authority.
(2) Each food service establishment with six or more employees that is required to have certified
food managers must have at least one certified manager on site during all operations.
(3) Every employee of a food service establishment other than a certified food manager must
maintain a valid food handler certification registered with the regulatory authority.
(4) Food handler certification shall be valid for a period of up to three years as determined by the
regulatory authority.
(5) Food manager and food handler certification documentation must be maintained in the food
service establishment and presented upon request by the regulatory authority.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/554
(1976 Code, sec. 16-18; 1998 Code, sec. 66-33; Ordinance 884-940083-1600, sec. 1, adopted 6/7/94;
Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 3(66-34), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-29. Suspension of permit.
(a) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food
establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health.
Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) of this section. When a permit is
suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit
shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within ten days of receipt of a request for a hearing.
(b) Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in
writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a
hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the
permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The
regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
(Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 3(66-35), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-30. Revocation of permit.
(a) The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or
repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in
the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or
the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit
shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a
hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period.
(b) If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
(Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 3(66-36), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-31. Administrative process.
(a) A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the
person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the holder of the permit as shown on their permit application. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the
records of the regulatory authority.
(b) The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and
place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make
final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report
of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.
(Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 3(66-37), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-32. Remedies.
(a) Any person who violates a provision of these rules and any person who is the permit holder of or
otherwise operates a food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules and
any responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons shall be fined not more than $2,000.00.
(b) The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of these rules.
(c) The remedies cited herein are cumulative in nature.
(Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 3(66-38), adopted 7/19/11)
Secs. 26-33–26-52. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. SWIMMING POOLS
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/554
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 26-53–26-77. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS
Sec. 26-78. State regulations and guidelines adopted.
There is hereby adopted by reference of the Texas Health and Safety Code sec. 341.064; Tex. Admin. Code
secs. 265.181–265.208, standards for public pools and spas and Tex. Admin. Code secs. 265.301–265.308,
public interactive water features and fountains. A copy of each shall be kept on file in the official records of the
city. (1976 Code, sec. 16-55; 1998 Code, sec. 66-121; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 4(66-121), adopted
7/19/11)
Sec. 26-79. Definitions.
All definitions in the Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 341 and title 25 Tex. Admin. Code secs. 265.181–
265.208, the department of state health services regulations, standards for public pools and spas, are hereby
adopted. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Certified pool operator means a person who possesses a valid pool operator's certificate from a course
approved by the city.
City means the authorized representatives of the city, which shall include the director and representatives of the
county public health department.
Director means the director of the county public health department, who shall be an authorized representative
of the city with respect to public pool and spa inspections and permitting.
Pool.
(1) The term “pool” means any manmade permanently installed or nonportable structure, basin,
chamber or tank containing an artificial body of water that is used for swimming, diving, aquatic
sports or other aquatic activity other than a residential pool and that is operated by an owner, lessee,
operator, licensee or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for use. The pool may
be either publicly or privately owned.
(2) The term “pool” does not include a spa or a decorative fountain that is not used as a pool.
Private residential pool means a pool that is located on private property that is intended for use by one single
family and their invited guests, located on property used for the placement of a single family residence.
Private residential spa means a spa that is located on private property that is intended for use by one single
family and their invited guests, located on property used for the placement of a single-family residence.
Public interactive water feature and fountain (PIWF) means any indoor or outdoor installation maintained for
public recreation that includes water sprays, dancing water jets, waterfalls, dumping buckets or shooting water
cannons in various arrays for the purpose of wetting the persons playing in the spray streams.
Regulatory authority means the director and representatives of the county public health department.
Spa.
(1) The term “spa” means a constructed permanent or portable structure that is two feet or more
in depth and that has a surface area of 250 square feet or less or a volume of 3,250 gallons or less
and that is intended to be used for bathing or other recreational uses and is not drained and refilled
after each use. The term “spa” may include, but is not limited to, hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold
water, mineral baths, air induction bubbles or any combination thereof . Industry terminology for a
spa includes, but is not limited to, the terms “hydrotherapy pool,” “whirlpool,” “hot spa,” “hot tub,” etc.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/554
(2) The term “spa” does not include a private residential spa. A spa does not refer to a business
establishment, such as a day spa or a health spa.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-56; 1998 Code, sec. 66-122; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 4(66-122), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-80. Penalty for violations.
This article is declared a public health measure. Violators shall be punished as provided by section 1-15. (1976
Code, sec. 16-68; 1998 Code, sec. 66-154)
Sec. 26-81. Permit for pools and spas.
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public pool, spa or interactive water feature in
the city without a current and valid pool, spa or interactive water feature permit.
(b) Posting. A valid permit shall be posted in public view in a conspicuous place at the public swimming pool
for which it is issued or on file in a secure area of the permitted facility's premises.
(c) Nontransference (change of ownership). Permits issued under the provisions of this article are not
transferable. Upon change of ownership of a business, the new business owner will be required to meet current
standards as defined in city ordinances and state law before a permit will be issued. The new owner shall notify
the city within ten days after assuming ownership of the pool, spa or interactive water feature.
(d) Multiple permits. A separate permit shall be required for every public pool, spa or interactive water feature
except that public pools or spas or interactive water features on a single water filtration system require one
permit.
(e) Denial of permit. A permit may be denied if the city, upon inspection, determines that the requestor has
failed to comply with approved plans and specifications adopted in accordance with these rules.
(f) Inspection. An inspection shall be required annually to qualify for a permit. A permit is valid for one year
from the date of issuance.
(g) Permit fees. For public swimming pools/spas, a fee of $100.00 per pool and $100.00 per spa is required
annually. Fees are due and payable on or before May 1, and are paid to the county health department at 1800
University Drive, Fort Worth, Texas 76107. A permit fee is not required for pools or spas owned or operated by
the city.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-57; 1998 Code, sec. 66-123; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 4(66-123), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-82. Review of plans for pools and spas.
(a) Submission of plans. Before a public pool's and/or spa's and/or interactive water feature's construction or
extensive remodeling begins, the person proposing to construct or remodel shall submit an application to the
regulatory authority for review and approval. The application shall include:
(1) The construction or remodeling plans, under an engineer's seal, and specifications stating that
the proposed construction or remodeling complies with these rules and indicating that the proposed
layout, mechanical plans, construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed
fixed equipment and facilities;
(2) The date on or after which proposed construction is to begin;
(3) The phone number and address of the entity primarily responsible for constructing the pool,
spa or interactive water feature and the phone number and address of the entity primarily
responsible for operating the pool, spa or interactive water feature;
(4) A check or money order in the amount of $150.00 payable to the county; and
(5) Any necessary additional information necessary to verify compliance.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/554
(b) The city shall approve plans and specifications that meet the requirements of these rules. No public pool,
spa or interactive water feature shall be constructed or extensively remodeled except in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the city.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-58; 1998 Code, sec. 66-124; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 4(66-124), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-83. Pool, spa or interactive water feature closures.
(a) A public pool, spa or interactive water feature shall be closed if any of the following conditions occur:
(1) Disinfectant level below the minimums set by the department of state health services;
(2) pH below 7.0;
(3) Inability to see bottom drain (poor visibility);
(4) Chlorine levels above eight ppm; or
(5) Any other imminent health hazards.
(b) A closed sign shall immediately be posted and the pool, spa or interactive water feature access gate shall
be locked until all violations have been corrected.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-59; 1998 Code, sec. 66-125; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 4(66-125), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-84. Pool, spa, interactive water feature records.
Daily records for each permitted public pool, spa or interactive water feature shall be kept on premises and
shall include information pertaining to:
(1) Disinfectant: three times per day;
(2) pH: three times per day;
(3) Alkalinity: one time per week;
(4) Chemicals added: as noted by name, amount and date; and
(5) Other information needed to ensure the facility's proper operation.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-60; 1998 Code, sec. 66-126; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 4(66-126), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-85. Suspension and revocation of permit.
(a) The city may temporarily suspend the permit of a public pool, spa or interactive water feature for
noncompliance with state pool, spa or interactive water feature standards, by issuing a written notice for
suspension. When a permit is suspended, pool, spa or interactive water feature operations shall immediately
cease. A closed sign shall be immediately posted and the pool, spa or interactive water feature access gate
shall be locked until any and all violations have been corrected.
(b) Whenever a notice of suspension is issued by the city, the holder of the permit or the person in charge will
be given an opportunity to correct the violations prior to final revocation of the permit. The city may end the
suspension and reinstate the permit any time if the reasons for suspension no longer exist.
(c) The city may, after providing notice of pending revocation and an opportunity for a hearing, revoke a
permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the
city in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the city shall notify the holder of the permit or the
person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall
be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice. Unless a written request for a hearing is
filed with the city by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes
final.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/554
(d) A notice provided for in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or
the person in charge of pool and/or spa operations, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the address listed on the permit application. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the
records of the regulatory authority.
(e) The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and
place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearings, the regulatory authority shall make
a final finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written
report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.
(f) Any permit holder who wishes to dispute the decision of a hearing may appeal the decision to the director
of the county health department.
(g) Final revocation of a pool and/or spa permit shall not prevent the holder of the revoked permit from
making written application for a new permit to the regulatory authority.
(h) Prior to reopening, the owner or operator shall provide the application and fee required by section 26-81 if
a pool, spa or interactive water feature:
(1) Closes voluntarily at the request of the regulatory authority on more than two occasions in one
calendar year; or
(2) Closes on court order on more than two occasions in one calendar year.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-61; 1998 Code, sec. 66-127; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 4(66-127), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-86. Public pool and spa manager certification.
(a) The person in charge of pool, spa or interactive water feature operations at a class C pool as defined by
the adopted regulations, shall have at least one certified pool, spa or interactive water feature operator
employed to maintain the pool, spa or interactive water feature for each apartment complex or municipal
location. The certificate must be kept on premises to facilitate inspections.
(b) In the event that a certified pool, spa or interactive water feature operator is terminated or transferred, the
business shall have 60 days from the operator's termination or transfer date to designate a new certificate
holder. This requirement is applicable even if pool, spa or interactive water feature maintenance operations are
contracted to an outside company.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-62; 1998 Code, sec. 66-128; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 4(66-128), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-87. Penalty for violations.
This article is declared a public health measure. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be
fined not more than $2,000.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. (1976 Code, sec. 16-63; 1998 Code, sec. 66-129; Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 4(66-129),
adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-88. Designation of health authority.
The city designates the medical director of the county public health department as its health authority for the
purpose of ensuring minimum standards of environmental health and sanitation within the scope of that
department's function. (Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 4(66-130), adopted 7/19/11)
Secs. 26-89–26-119. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
Sec. 26-120. Fencing of swimming pools.
(a) Required. Every owner, lessee, tenant, licensee or other person in possession of land within the
corporate limits of the city upon which is situated a swimming pool shall at all times maintain a solid or chainlink
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/554
fence, wall or barrier that completely surrounds the swimming pool. The fence, wall or barrier shall be not less
than four feet in height with no openings, holes or gaps large enough for a sphere four inches in diameter to
pass through. A single-family, duplex, apartment or accessory building may be used as a part of such
enclosure, provided that all outside entrances into the swimming pool area or court are equipped with gates as
described in this section.
(b) Gates. All gates opening directly into a swimming pool enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing and
self latching devices designed to keep, and capable of keeping, such gates securely closed at all times when
not in actual use. The gate handle must be at least 40 inches above grade. Self-closing and self-latching
devices are not required on gates which provide access into buildings.
(c) New installations. A person who, on or after October 1, 1991, obtains a permit to install a swimming pool
is responsible for assuring compliance with the provisions of this section before an order is placed on the
swimming pool.
(d) Contractor's responsibility. Before the pool is filled with water, the swimming pool contractor is responsible
for:
(1) Ensuring that the fence/enclosure is complete;
(2) Ensuring that all required gate latches and self-closers are in place and operating;
(3) A final inspection shall be obtained from the city inspecting office prior to the actual use of the
swimming pool.
(e) Existing installations. All gates into swimming pool enclosures which lawfully existed prior to October 1,
1991, shall be made to fully comply with the self-closing and self-latching provisions of subsection (b) of this
section before January 31, 1992, or whenever the valuation of an addition, remodeling or repair made to any
structure on the same tract, lot or premises exceeds $10,000.00, whichever occurs first.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-65; 1998 Code, sec. 66-151)
Sec. 26-121. Insanitary swimming pools-Closing order.
(a) Upon inspection and determination by the county health department that any swimming pool within the
corporate limits of the city is insanitary, the city through its inspection office shall order that the same be closed
and the same be made sanitary within five days thereof and that the owner or manager of the premises be
ordered to enforce such closing order prohibiting the use of the swimming pool. A sign shall be placed in a
prominent position adjacent to the pool noting that the same has been closed by order of the city due to
insanitary conditions and the same shall remain until such conditions are corrected or the pool is drained.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to use a pool which has been closed; it shall likewise be unlawful for
any person to remove or deface the sign referred to in subsection (a) of this sect ion.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-66; 1998 Code, sec. 66-152)
Sec. 26-122. Same–Draining.
(a) A swimming pool closed under the provisions of section 26-78 shall be drained unless the owner corrects
the insanitary condition within five days of such closing. Such pool shall likewise be drained if the owner or
manager of the premises fails to enforce the closing order prohibiting the use of the swimming pool.
(b) It shall be unlawful to fail to drain the swimming pool within 24 hours after the same is ordered drained by
the city.
(1976 Code, sec. 16-67; 1998 Code, sec. 66-153)
Secs. 26-123–26-142. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES
Sec. 26-143. Food program fee schedule.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/554
(a) Food store:
< 5,000 sq. ft: $200.00
> 5,000 sq. ft: 300.00
(b) Food service:
< 500 sq. ft: 100.00
> 500 = 1,500 sq. ft: 150.00
> 1,500 = 3,000 sq. ft: 200.00
> 3,000 = 6,000 sq. ft: 250.00
> 6,000 sq. ft: 300.00
(c) Child care food service: 150.00
(d) Catering operation: 250.00
(e) Food court, per establishment: 200.00
(f) Adjunct operation:
Food service, per independent operation: 150.00
Food store < 5,000 sq. ft., per independent operation: 150.00
Food store > 5,000 sq. ft., per independent operation: 200.00
(g) Commissary:
No food preparation: 100.00
With food preparation: 200.00
(h) Mobile units:
Prepackaged food only: 100.00
Open and/or food preparation: 200.00
Pushcarts: 200.00
(i) Plan review:
< 500 sq. ft: 0.00
> 500 < 3,000 sq. ft: 50.00
> 3,000 sq. ft: 100.00
(j) Late fee:
From 1–30 days, 10% of fee owed
From 31–60 days, 20% of fee owed
(k) Reinspection fee:
Required reinspection: 75.00
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/554
The late fee increases ten percent for each 30-day block until permit fee and late fee is paid. Permits that are
more than 90 days overdue will be void and required to reapply.
(Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 5(66-180), adopted 7/19/11)
Sec. 26-144. Pool, spa and interactive water feature fees.
(a) Plan review and opening inspection: $150.00
(b) Annual permit: 250.00
(c) Required reinspection: 75.00
(Ordinance 2011-07-001, sec. 5(66-181), adopted 7/19/11)
CHAPTER 28
LAW ENFORCEMENT*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 28-1. Fees.
Fees for various police services are indicated by the following:
(1) Every owner of premises in the city equipped with a burglar alarm system shall register such
alarm system with the police department and shall pay a one-time registration fee.
(2) Any owner or agent of premises equipped with a burglar alarm system shall endeavor to
minimize false alarm calls. If, in any 12-month period starting January 1 of each year, the premises
experience more than five false alarm calls, the owner or agent shall pay unto the city a fee for each
false alarm thereafter.
(3) The police department shall be compensated when requested to provide security at special
functions or events.
(4) Fingerprinting for private use shall be performed with the payment of a fee as established by
the city council.
(5) An administrative fee shall be collected at the police department prior to the release of any
vehicle impounded by the police department. The fee to be collected shall be as established by the
city council.
(1976 Code, sec. 25-2; 1998 Code, sec. 102-2; Ordinance 2010-05-001, sec. 2, adopted 5/18/10)
Sec. 28-2. Number of police officers.
The following shall be the number of police officers in addition to the chief for each classification within the city:
POLICE OFFICER
Captains: Exempt 2
Sergeants 4
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/554
Corporals 4
Patrol officers 18
(1998 Code, sec. 102-3; Ordinance 97-0116, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/97; Ordinance 2009004, sec. 1, adopted
3/3/09; Ordinance 2012-10-001, sec. 1, adopted 10/16/12)
Secs. 28-3–28-22. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. POLICE RESERVE FORCE*
Sec. 28-23. Established.
An auxiliary police force, to be known as the police reserve, is hereby established, such force to be separate
and distinct from the police department. (1976 Code, sec. 25-15; 1998 Code, sec. 102-31)
Sec. 28-24. Composition.
The police reserve force shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered to join the organization and
whose applications for membership have been accepted and who have complied with all rules, regulations, and
orders provided for the conduct and control of the members thereof . It shall be composed of not more than 15
members. (1976 Code, sec. 25-16; 1998 Code, sec. 102-32)
Sec. 28-25. Diminishing or expanding membership.
The chief of police may by order diminish or expand the membership of the police reserve force as may be
required within the limit established therefor. (1976 Code, sec. 25-17; 1998 Code, sec. 102-33)
Sec. 28-26. Application for membership.
Application for membership in the police reserve force shall be filed with the police department. Such
application shall be on a form prescribed by the chief of police and approved by the city manager. (1976 Code,
sec. 25-18; 1998 Code, sec. 102-34)
Sec. 28-27. Applicant's qualifications and references.
Each applicant for membership in the police reserve force shall not have to be an actual resident of the city and
shall furnish satisfactory proof of good character, temperate habits, freedom from communicable diseases and
physical ability to perform the duties of the position for which he seeks appointment. (1976 Code, sec. 25-19;
1998 Code, sec. 102-35)
Sec. 28-28. Personal standards.
Any qualifications established for the position of police reserve force officers for the city shall meet the minimum
physical, mental, educational and moral standards, established by the state commission on law enforcement
officer standards and education, but may be stricter than the standards of the commission. (1976 Code, sec.
25-20; 1998 Code, sec. 102-36)
Sec. 28-29. Appointment of members.
A list of eligibles compiled by the chief of police and accompanied by a complete set of fingerprints or
supplemented immediately by fingerprinting by the police department, which fingerprints shall be checked by
the identification bureau to ascertain any criminal record of such person, shall be maintained by the police
department. Members of the police reserve force shall be appointed by the chief of police from such list of
eligibles. (1976 Code, sec. 25-21; 1998 Code, sec. 102-37)
Sec. 28-30. Oath.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/554
Every person who may be selected by the chief of police as a police reserve force officer shall subscribe to an
oath that he will observe and obey the Constitution of the United States, the constitution of this state and the
laws of this nation, this state and this city, and that he will carry out the duties of a member of the police reserve
force to the best of his abilities. (1976 Code, sec. 25-22; 1998 Code, sec. 102-38)
Sec. 28-31. Status.
Members of the police reserve force shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and
shall in no case assume the fulltime duties of regular police officers without first complying with all requirements
for such regular police officers. (1976 Code, sec. 25-23; 1998 Code, sec. 102-39)
Sec. 28-32. Supervision generally.
The chief of police shall be the head of the police reserve force, and the members of the reserve force shall be
under the authority, control and command of the chief of police, subject to all ordinances of the city and to this
article. (1976 Code, sec. 25-24; 1998 Code, sec. 102-40)
Sec. 28-33. Rules and regulations.
The chief of police may, by order, establish rules and regulations to govern the police reserve force, to fix
specific duties of its members, and to provide for the maintenance of discipline. He may change such orders
from time to time, and he may command members of the police reserve force to obey the instructions of a
regular police officer in carrying out their orders. (1976 Code, sec. 25-25; 1998 Code, sec. 102-41)
Sec. 28-34. Uniforms and badges.
The chief of police shall prescribe the uniforms and badges for the members of the police reserve force and
direct the manner in which the same shall be worn. Each individual reserve officer shall bear the cost of the
uniform and badge, but shall be reimbursed for such expenses after 12 months' consecutive service. (1976
Code, sec. 25-26; 1998 Code, sec. 102-42)
Sec. 28-35. Duties generally.
The duties of the police reserve force, subject at all times to the direction, supervision, and control of the chief
of police, shall be to assist the regular members of the police department in the enforcement of law and the
maintenance of peace and order during periods of emergency designated by the chief of police. The chief may
prescribe other duties than those mentioned herein to be performed by the police reserve force, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this article. (1976 Code, sec. 25-27; 1998 Code, sec. 102-43)
Sec. 28-36. Power of arrest.
A member of the police reserve force shall have the following powers of arrest and none other:
(1) He may arrest only while on active duty.
(2) He may arrest for a public offense committed in his presence.
(3) He may arrest a person who he knows as a fact has committed a felony, even though it was
not committed in his presence.
(4) He may arrest when a felony in fact has been committed, when he has reasonable cause for
believing the person arrested to have committed the felony.
(5) He may lend physical aid to any regular member of the police department in making any lawful
arrest, when authorized by the chief of police or requested by any regular member of the police
department.
(1976 Code, sec. 25-28; 1998 Code, sec. 102-44)
Sec. 28-37. Entry upon private property.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/554
No member of the police reserve force shall break into or otherwise forcefully enter upon private property or
enter the dwelling or habitation of another person without the consent of a member of the police department
who then and there requests his aid in the enforcement of the law. (1976 Code, sec. 25-29; 1998 Code, sec.
102-45)
Sec. 28-38. Termination of membership.
Membership of any person in the police reserve force may be terminated by the chief of police at any time for
any cause deemed sufficient by the chief of police or the city manager. Any member may resign from the police
reserve force at any time, but it shall be his duty to notify the chief of police of his resignation. (1976 Code, sec.
25-30; 1998 Code, sec. 102-4)
Sec. 28-39. Weapons.
No person appointed to the police reserve force may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer until he
has been approved by the chief of police and/or the city manager. After approval, he may carry a weapon only
when authorized by the chief of police and when discharging official duties as a duly constituted peace officer.
(1976 Code, sec. 25-31; 1998 Code, sec. 102-47)
CHAPTER 30
LIBRARY (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 32
MUNICIPAL COURT*
Sec. 32-1. Creation of municipal court of record.
(a) Pursuant to Texas Government Code sec. 30.0003, the city council hereby establishes the city municipal
court as a municipal court of record in order to provide a more efficient disposition of cases arising in the city
and more effectively enforce the ordinances of the city. The municipal court shall become a municipal court of
record from and after February 4, 2003, and shall be designated the “Municipal Court of Record in the City of
Forest Hill, Texas.”
(b) All prosecutions in the municipal court of record shall be conducted as provided in Texas C.C.P. art.
45.201. Complaints and pleadings must substantially conform to the relevant provisions of Texas C.C.P. chs. 27
and 45.
(1998 Code, sec. 78-1; Ordinance 200317, sec. 1, adopted 2/4/03; Ordinance 2008122, sec. 2(78-.01), adopted
10/21/08)
Sec. 32-2. Jurisdiction of court.
The municipal court of record has the jurisdiction and authority provided by Texas Government Code sec.
30.00005, as amended from time to time, and shall have:
(1) Criminal jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal ordinances, including but not limited
to those enacted under ordinances authorized by Texas Local Government Code secs. 215.072,
217.042, 341.903 and 551.002;
(2) Concurrent jurisdiction with a justice court in any precinct in which the city is located in criminal
cases that arise within the territorial limits of the city and are punishable only by fine;
(3) Civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal ordinances enacted under subchapter
A, chapter 214, Local Government Code (Texas Local Government Code sec. 214.001 et seq.), or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/554
subchapter E, chapter 683, Transportation Code (Texas Transportation Code sec. 683.071 et seq.);
(4) Concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at law under subchapter B,
chapter 54, of the Texas Local Government Code (Texas Local Government Code sec. 54.011 et
seq.), within the city's territorial limits and property owned by the city located in the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing health and safety and nuisance abatement
ordinances;
(5) Authority to issue:
a. Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and safety or nuisance
abatement ordinance violation; and
b. Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or demolishing the of fending
property and removing the debris from the premises;
(6) Such other authority as is provided by law.
(1998 Code, sec. 78-2; Ordinance 200317, sec. 1, adopted 2/4/03; Ordinance 2008122, sec. 2(78-.02), adopted
10/21/08)
Sec. 32-3. Terms of Government Code adopted.
This municipal court of record is established pursuant to the authority granted in Texas Government Code ch.
30, and the terms set forth therein are hereby adopted and incorporated herein for all purposes. (1998 Code,
sec. 78-3; Ordinance 200317, sec. 1, adopted 2/4/03; Ordinance 2008122, sec. 2(78-.03), adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 32-4. Judge.
(a) Establishment of office. The municipal court of record shall be presided over by a municipal judge
appointed and compensated as may be set by the city council according to the provisions of the city Charter
sec. 5.02 and Texas Government Code sec. 30.00006. The municipal judge must be a licensed attorney in
good standing in the state and must have two or more years of experience in the practice of law in the state.
The municipal judge must be a citizen of the United States and a resident of the state. A person may not serve
as a municipal judge if the person is employed by the city in any other positions and a municipal judge who
accepts any such employment with the city vacates the judicial office.
(b) Alternate municipal court judge. An alternate municipal court judge may be appointed and compensated
by the city council according to the provisions of the city Charter sec. 5.02
(c) Supervision and control of the municipal court of record. The municipal judge shall supervise and control
the operation and clerical functions of the administrative department of the municipal court of record including
the court personnel, during the proceedings or docket of the court according to Texas Government Code secs.
30.00006 and 30.00009. At all other times, the operation and clerical functions of the administrative department
of the municipal court of record shall be under the supervision and direction of the city manager or designee.
(d) Removal of judge. In conformity with Texas Government Code sec. 30.000085, the municipal judge may
be removed from office by the city council.
(1998 Code, sec. 78-4; Ordinance 200317, sec. 1, adopted 2/4/03; Ordinance 2008122, sec. 2(78-.04), adopted
10/21/08)
State law reference–Judge of court, Texas Government Code sec. 29.004.
Sec. 32-5. Appointment of municipal court clerk and court personnel.
(a) Appointment. Pursuant to city Charter sec. 4.04 and Texas Government Code sec. 30.00009, the city
manager has the authority to appoint a clerk of the municipal court of record, who shall be known as the
municipal court clerk. The municipal court clerk shall keep the records of the municipal court of record, issue
process, and generally perform the duties of a clerk of a county court at law exercising criminal jurisdiction. In
the annual budget, the city council may provide for deputy clerks, warrant officers, and other personnel as
needed for the proper operation of the municipal court of record. The municipal court clerk shall supervise the
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/554
selection of persons for jury service in the municipal court of record. Trial by jury, including the summoning of
jurors, must substantially conform to Texas C.C.P. ch. 45
(b) Seal. The court clerk is directed to acquire a seal in conformance with state law for the municipal court of
record. The appearance and use of the seal must substantially conform to, Texas C.C.P. art. 45.012(g), but
must also include the phrase “Municipal Court of Forest Hill, Texas” or “Municipal Court in Forest Hill, Texas.”
(c) Court reporter. A court reporter shall be provided to preserve the record in cases tried before the
municipal court according to Texas Government Code sec. 30.00010. The court reporter must meet the
qualifications provided by law for official court reporters. The court reporter or court staff may use written notes,
transcribing equipment, video or audio recording equipment or a combination of those methods to record the
proceedings of the court. The court reporter or court staff are not required to record testimony in any case
unless the judge or one of the parties requests a record in writing, and files the request with the court before
trial. If a record is made, it shall be kept for the 20-day period beginning the day after the last day of the court
proceeding, trial or denial of motion for new trial, whichever occurs last. The court reporter is not required to be
present during proceedings of the municipal court of record, provided that proceedings that are required to be
recorded are recorded by a good quality electronic recording device. If a case is appealed, the proceedings
shall be transcribed from the recording by an official court reporter.
(1998 Code, sec. 78-5; Ordinance 200317, sec. 1, adopted 2/4/03; Ordinance 2008122, sec. 2(78-.05), adopted
10/21/08)
Sec. 32-6. Appeals.
(a) Appeals. A defendant has the right of appeal from a judgment or conviction in the municipal court of
record. The state has the right to appeal as provided by Texas C.C.P. art. 44.01. Such appeals shall be in
accordance with and conform to Texas Government Code secs. 30.00014–30.00027.
(b) Transcript preparation fee. In the event of an appeal, the appellant shall pay a transcript preparation fee in
the amount of $25.00. The transcript preparation fee does not include the fee for an actual transcript of the
proceedings. The clerk shall note the payment of the fee on the docket of the court. If the case is reversed on
appeal, the transcript preparation fee of $25.00 shall be refunded to the appellant. In addition to the transcript
preparation fee, the fee for the actual transcript of the proceedings and statement of facts must be paid by the
appellant, pursuant to Texas Government Code secs. 30.00014 and 30.00019.
(1998 Code, sec. 78-6; Ordinance 200317, sec. 1, adopted 2/4/03; Ordinance 2008122, sec. 2(78-.06), adopted
10/21/08)
Sec. 32-7. Appointment of court clerk and court personnel.
The city manager shall appoint a clerk of the municipal court of record, who shall be known as the municipal
court clerk. The municipal court clerk shall keep the records of the municipal court of record, issue process, and
generally perform the duties of a clerk of a county court at law exercising criminal jurisdiction. In the annual
budget, the city council may provide for deputy clerks, warrant officers, and other personnel as needed for the
proper operation of the municipal court of record. During proceedings of the court, the clerk and court personnel
shall serve at the direction of the municipal court judge. At all other times they shall serve at the direction and
supervision of the city manager, or his designee, who shall have the authority to remove the court personnel
according to rules set forth in the city's personnel policies. (1998 Code, sec. 78-7; Ordinance 200317, sec. 1,
adopted 2/4/03)
Sec. 32-8. Court reporter.
The municipal court clerk shall appoint a court reporter who must meet the qualifications provided by law for
official court reporters. The court reporter or court staff may use written notes, transcribing equipment, video or
audio recording equipment, or a combination of those methods to record the proceedings of the court. The
court reporter or court staff are not required to record testimony in any case unless the judge or one of the
parties requests a record in writing, and files the request with the court before trial. If a record is made, it shall
be kept for the 20-day period beginning the day after the last day of the court proceeding, trial or denial of
motion for new trial, whichever occurs last. The court reporter is not required to be present during proceedings
of the municipal court of record, provided that proceedings that are required to be recorded are recorded by a
good quality electronic recording device. If a case is appealed, the proceedings shall be transcribed from the
recording by an official court reporter. (1998 Code, sec. 78-8; Ordinance 200317, sec. 1, adopted 2/4/03)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/554
Sec. 32-9. Seal.
The court clerk is directed to acquire a seal in conformance with state law for the municipal court of record.
(1998 Code, sec. 78-9; Ordinance 200317, sec. 1, adopted 2/4/03)
Sec. 32-10. Jury.
The court clerk shall supervise the selection of persons for jury service in the municipal court of record. (1998
Code, sec. 78-10; Ordinance 200317, sec. 1, adopted 2/4/03)
Sec. 32-11. Transcript preparation fee.
In the event of an appeal, the appellant shall pay a transcript preparation fee in the amount of $25.00. The
transcript preparation fee does not include the fee for an actual transcript of the proceedings. The clerk shall
note the payment of the fee on the docket of the court. If the case is reversed on appeal, the fee shall be
refunded to the appellant. In addition to the transcript preparation fee, the fee for the actual transcript of the
proceedings and statement of facts must be paid by the appellant. (1998 Code, sec. 78-11; Ordinance 200317,
sec. 1, adopted 2/4/03)
Sec. 32-12. Municipal court technology fund.
(a) Establishment of municipal court technology fund.
(1) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, here-in-now
known as the fund, pursuant to Texas C.C.P. art. 102.0172.
(2) The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the
general revenue account.
(b) Establishment of amount of fee, assessment, collection.
(1) The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00.
(2) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a
misdemeanor offense in the city municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered
convicted if:
a. Judgment, sentence or both are imposed on the person;
b. The person is placed on deferred disposition; or
c. The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence.
(c) Designated use of the fund and administration.
(1) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of or to maintain
technology enhancements for the municipal court of the city. The term “technology enhancements”
includes any and all items described in Texas C.C.P. art. 102.0172.
(2) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(1998 Code, sec. 78-12; Ordinance 990111, secs. I–III, adopted 9/21/99; Ordinance 200872, secs. 1–3,
adopted 7/1/08)
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas C.C.P. art. 102.0172.
Sec. 32-13. Municipal court building security fund.
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the “fund”) pursuant to
Texas C.C.P. art. 102.017.
(b) The municipal court of the city (the “municipal court”) is hereby authorized and required to assess a
municipal court building security fee (the “fee”) in the amount of $3.00 against all defendants convicted of a
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/554
misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate
assessment of the fee.
(c) A person is considered to have been convicted in a case if:
(1) Judgment, sentence or both are imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives deferred disposition; or
(3) The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence.
(d) The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the
treasury of the city. All fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the city, shall be segregated in the
fund.
(e) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services
for the building or buildings housing the municipal court of the city. The term “security devices and/or services”
includes any and all items described in Texas C.C.P. art. 102.017(d).
(f) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(1998 Code, sec. 78-13; Ordinance 200664, secs. I–IV, adopted 8/8/06; Ordinance 200871, sec. I, adopted
7/1/08)
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas C.C.P. art. 102.017.
Sec. 32-14. Juvenile case manager fund.
(a) There is hereby created and established a juvenile case manager fund pursuant to Texas C.C.P. art.
102.0174. The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the general
revenue account.
(b) The fund shall be used only to finance the salary and benefits of a juvenile case manager that is
employed by the municipal court of the city under Texas C.C.P. art. 45.056(a).
(c) The fee shall be $5.00, unless a greater sum is allowed by state law, in which case the amount of the fee
shall be the maximum amount allowed by state law. The fee:
(1) Shall be assessed and collected from a defendant who is convicted of a misdemeanor offense
punishable by fine only in the city municipal court as a cost of court. For purposes of this section, a
defendant is considered convicted of an offense if:
a. A sentence is imposed on the defendant by the court; or
b. The defendant receives deferred disposition from the court, including deferred
proceedings under Texas C.C.P. art. 45.052 or 45.053;
(2) Shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after January 1, 2011;
(3) May be waived by the municipal court judge in cases of demonstrated financial hardship on
the part of a convicted defendant if the defendant is indigent, has insufficient resources or income to
pay the fee, or is otherwise unable to pay all or part of the underlying fine or costs;
(4) Shall be collected by the court clerk and paid to the director of finance for deposit into the fund
established under subsection (a) of this section.
(d) The city council hereby authorizes the municipal court of the city to employ one or more
fulltime or part time juvenile case managers to provide services in cases involving juvenile of fenders
before the court consistent with the court's statutory powers.
(Ordinance 2010-11-001, sec. 2, adopted 11/16/10)
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas C.C.P. art. 102.0174.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/554
CHAPTER 34
NUISANCES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 34-1–34-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. JUNKED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 34-16. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
Inoperable means not capable of being used or operated due to legal or mechanical incapability.
Junked vehicle.
(1) The term “junked vehicle” means a vehicle that is self-propelled and:
a. Does not have lawfully attached to it:
1. An unexpired license plate; and
2. A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate;
b. Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
c. Is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
1. 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
2. 30 consecutive days. if the vehicle is on private property.
(2) The term “junked vehicle,” for purposes of this article, includes a motor vehicle. aircraft or
watercraft.
Motor vehicle collector means a person who:
(1) Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and
(2) Acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or
special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest
vehicle for historic interest.
Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original
manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
(Ordinance 200875, sec. 3(74-1), adopted 7/1/08)
Sec. 34-17. Junked vehicle declared to be public nuisance.
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible at any time of the year, from a public place
or public right-of-way:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/554
(1) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
(2) Tends to reduce the value of private property; invites vandalism;
(3) Creates a fire hazard;
(4) Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors;
(5) Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of
municipalities; and
(6) Is a public nuisance.
(Ordinance 200875, sec. 3(74-2), adopted 7/1/08)
Sec. 34-18. Offense.
(a) A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by section 34-17
(b) An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00.
(c) The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance on conviction.
(Ordinance 200875, sec. 3(74-3), adopted 7/1/08)
Sec. 34-19. Authority to abate nuisance; procedures.
(a) Generally.
(1) The city, by this section, is adopting procedures for the abatement and removal from private or
public property or a public right-of-way of a junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle as a public
nuisance.
(2) This article shall be administered by the chief of police or designee provided the same is a
regularly salaried, fulltime employee of the city. Any authorized person may remove the nuisance.
(3) A person authorized to administer these procedures may enter private property to examine a
public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of
the nuisance, consistent with state and federal law.
(4) The removal of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location in the city after a
proceeding for the abatement and removal of a junked vehicle has commenced has no effect on the
proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
(b) Notice.
(1) Notice of the nature of the nuisance must be personally delivered, sent by certified mail with a
five-day return requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature
confirmation service to:
a. The last known registered owner of the nuisance;
b. Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and
c. The owner or occupant of :
1. The property on which the nuisance is located; or
2. If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the rightof-
way.
(2) The notice must state that:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/554
a. The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on
which the notice was mailed; and
b. Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires, which shall
also be the date by which the nuisance must be abated and removed.
(3) If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown,
notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, hand delivered.
(4) If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not
earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return.
(5) No notice is required for issuance of a citation for an offense under this article.
(6) If the city mails a notice to the property owner in accordance with this subsection (b) and the
United States Postal Service returns the notice as refused or unclaimed, the validity of the notice is
not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered.
(c) Hearing.
(1) The municipal court judge shall conduct hearings relative to the abatement of junked vehicles.
(2) A public hearing must be conducted prior to the removal of the public nuisance not earlier than
the 11th day after the date of service of notice.
(3) If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required under subsection (b)(1)c of
this section, by no later than the date by which the nuisance must be abated and removed, the
hearing shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of notice.
(4) At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the
owner, to be inoperable.
(5) If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a resolution or order requiring
removal of the nuisance must include the vehicle's:
a. Description;
b. Vehicle identification number; and
c. License plate number.
(6) As part of the order authorizing removal or abatement of the public nuisance, the court shall:
a. Prohibit a vehicle from being reconstructed or made operable after removal; and
b. Require that notice identifying the vehicle or part of the vehicle be given to the department
of public safety not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. On receipt of notice of
removal, the department shall immediately cancel the certificate of title issued for the vehicle.
(7) The municipal court shall have full authority to enforce the abatement procedures, including
but not limited to issuing all necessary orders.
(Ordinance 200875, sec. 3(74-4), adopted 7/1/08)
Sec. 34-20. Exceptions.
(a) Procedures adopted herein shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part thereof that is:
(1) Completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
(2) Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a
licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/554
vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part, thereof, and the outdoor storage
area, if any, is:
a. Maintained in an orderly manner;
b. Does not constitute a health hazard; and
c. Is screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly
growing trees, or shrubbery. A vehicle or part thereof, covered by a tarp, car blanket, or similar
covering does not meet the requisite screening requirements of this article.
(b) For purposes of this section, the term “ordinary public view” means the view from private or public
property, or public right-of-way from average grade of the surrounding property.
(Ordinance 200875, sec. 3(74-5), adopted 7/1/08)
Secs. 34-21–34-30. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. ABANDONED VEHICLES*
Sec. 34-31. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that is inoperable and more than eight years old and left
unattended on public property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public
property for a period of more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without
the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle left
unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state or federal highway within this state for more than
48 hours or for more than 12 hours on a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the state turnpike
authority.
Demolisher means a person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal
or to otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle.
Garagekeeper means an owner or operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility or
establishment for the servicing, repair or maintenance of a motor vehicle.
Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act (Texas
Transportation Code ch. 501), except that for purposes of sections 34-32 through 34-34. the term “motor
vehicle” includes a motorboat, outboard motor or vessel, subject to registration under Texas Parks and Wildlife
Code ch. 31.
Storage facility means a garage, parking lot or any type of facility or establishment for the servicing, repairing,
storing or parking of motor vehicles.
(1976 Code. sec. 18-16; 1998 Code, sec. 74-31)
Sec. 34-32. Authority to take possession of abandoned motor vehicles.
(a) A police department may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle found on public or private
property.
(b) A police department may employ its own personnel. equipment and facilities or hire persons. equipment
and facilities to remove, preserve, store. send notice regarding and dispose of an abandoned motor vehicle, it
takes into custody.
(1976 Code, sec. 18-17; 1998 Code, sec. 74-32)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/554
Sec. 34-33. Notification of owner and lienholders that abandoned vehicle has been taken into
custody.
(a) The police department, after taking into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, shall notify, not later than
the tenth day after taking the motor vehicle into custody, by certified mail, the last known registered owner of
the motor vehicle and all lienholders of record pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act (Texas Transportation
Code ch. 501, or Texas Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31), that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The
notice shall describe the year, make, model, and vehicle identification number of the abandoned motor vehicle,
set forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held, and inform the owner and any
lienholders of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle not later than the 20th day after the date of the notice on
payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody, or
garagekeeper's charges if notice is under section 34-19. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner
or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided constitutes a waiver by the
owner and lienholders of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the abandoned
motor vehicle at a public auction.
(b) If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, if the registration contains no address for
the owner, or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all
lienholders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor
vehicle was abandoned is sufficient notice under this article. The notice by publication may contain multiple
listings of abandoned vehicles, shall be published within the time requirements prescribed for notice by certified
mail, and shall have the same contents required for a notice by certified mail.
(c) The consequences and effect of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor vehicle are as set forth in a valid
notice given under this section.
(d) The police department or its agent that takes custody of any abandoned motor vehicle is entitled to
reasonable storage fees for:
(1) A period of not more than ten days beginning on the day the department takes custody and
continuing through the day the department mails notice as provided by this section; and
(2) A period beginning on the day after the day the department mails notice and continuing
through the day any accrued charges are paid and the vehicle is removed.
(1976 Code, sec. 18-18; 1998 Code, sec. 74-33)
Sec. 34-34. Auction of abandoned motor vehicles.
(a) If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided by section 34-33, the police
department shall sell the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. Proper notice of the public auction shall
be given, and in the case of a garagekeeper's lien, the garagekeeper shall be notified of the time and place of
the auction. The purchaser of the motor vehicle takes title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and
claims of ownership, shall receive a sales receipt from the police department, and is entitled to register the
purchased vehicle and receive a certificate of title.
(b) From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the police department shall reimburse
itself for the expenses of the auction, the costs of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle that resulted from
placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred under section 34-
33
(c) Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder
for 90 days and then shall be deposited in a special fund that shall remain available for the payment of auction,
towing, preserving, storage, and all notice and publication costs that result from placing another abandoned
vehicle in custody, if the proceeds from a sale of another abandoned motor vehicle are insufficient to meet
these expenses and costs.
(1976 Code, sec. 18-19; 1998 Code, sec. 74-34)
Secs. 34-35–34-56. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKYARDS
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/554
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 34-57. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Motor vehicle junkyard or business means any business and any place of storage or deposit which displays, or
in or upon which there are displayed, one or more vehicles which are unfit for reconditioning for use on the
public highways, or used parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage or other waste, or
discarded or secondhand material, which has been a part, or is intended to be a part, of any motor vehicle, the
sum of which parts or material shall be equal in bulk to one or more motor vehicles.
Vehicle which is unfit for reconditioning for use on the public highways means the vehicle:
(1) Does not bear a current year's license plate evidencing registration, and, in addition, a current
year's state inspection sticker evidencing inspection; or
(2) Remains in an inoperable condition for a period of six weeks or more, although it bears a
current year's license plate and a current year's state inspection sticker.
(1976 Code, sec. 18-61; 1998 Code, sec. 74-61)
Sec. 34-58. Exemptions.
(a) There are hereby exempted from the coverage of this article, antique autos which have and are now
qualified as such under state law; provided, however, that the owner of the realty upon which said antique
automobiles are located shall, prior to September 1 of each year, furnish to the city secretary a list of all such
antique autos owned by him or located upon realty owned, leased or occupied by him, which descriptions shall
set forth in full a description of the automobiles, including the motor number, make, model and serial number,
along with satisfactory proof of the current registration of such antique autos with the state department of public
safety as provided for under state law.
(b) The provisions of this article shall likewise not apply to vehicles in operable condition specially adapted or
constructed for racing or operation on privately owned drag strips or raceways, or vehicles stored as the
property of a member of the armed forces of the United States who is on active duty assignment outside the
continental and territorial limits of the United States.
(1976 Code, sec. 18-62; 1998 Code, sec. 74-62)
State law reference–Qualifications for specialty antique vehicles license plates, Texas Transportation Code sec. 504.502.
Sec. 34-59. Fence required.
Each motor vehicle junkyard in the city shall be completely surrounded by a fence or structure at least six feet
in height and of material which obscures the public view. (1976 Code, sec. 18-63; 1998 Code, sec. 74-63)
State law reference–A person who operates a junkyard or an automotive wrecking and salvage yard required to comply
with any applicable screening requirements adopted by ordinance of a municipality, Texas Transportation Code sec.
396.023.
Sec. 34-60. Organization of yard.
No motor vehicle, or parts thereof, shall be piled or stacked in any such motor vehicle junkyard in any manner
as to exceed six feet in height, or 625 square feet in floor or lot area. An aisle of at least four feet shall be
maintained at all times between piles or stacks of motor vehicles or parts thereof, in such a manner as to allow
free access on the part of the fire department of the city. (1976 Code, sec. 18-64; 1998 Code, sec. 74-64)
Sec. 34-61. Removal of gasoline.
All gasoline shall be drained from the gasoline reservoirs of all motor vehicles stored or kept on the premises of
any such motor vehicle junkyard unless such motor vehicles are in such state of repair as to enable them to be
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/554
removed from the premises under their own power. (1976 Code, sec. 18-65; 1998 Code, sec. 74-65)
Secs. 34-62–34-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 34-81. Investigations.
The city manager shall cause to be made an investigation of any premises whereupon motor vehicles are
stored or located, which vehicles are unfit for reconditioning for use on the public streets and highways. The city
manager or his duly authorized representative shall have the authority to go upon the premises to conduct such
investigation without being guilty of any trespass. (1976 Code, sec. 18-87; 1998 Code, sec. 74-81)
Sec. 34-82. Notice to remove vehicles.
If, upon investigation, all or any motor vehicles are found to be unfit for reconditioning for use on the public
streets or highways by the city manager or his authorized representative, then the city manager shall give
notice in writing to the true owner of the realty whereon such vehicles are located of such fact, which notice
shall require the true owner of the realty to remove or cause to be removed all such of fending vehicles from the
premises within ten days from the receipt by the owner of such notice. Such notice shall contain a description of
the premises and a description of the particular vehicle or vehicles situated thereon that are to be removed.
(1976 Code, sec. 18-88; 1998 Code, sec. 74-82)
Sec. 34-83. Extension of time for removal of vehicle.
Should the owner of the premises be actively engaged in the removal of such vehicle at the expiration of said
ten-day period, the city manager may, upon request by said owner and for good cause shown, grant an
additional seven-day extension in writing for the completion of said removal project. (1976 Code, sec. 18-89;
1998 Code, sec. 74-83)
Sec. 34-84. Removal of vehicles by city.
Should the owner of the realty fail to remove or cause to be removed vehicles under the provisions of this
article within the ten-day period or the extended seven-day period, if such extension has been granted in
writing, then under such circumstances the city, or its designated representative, may enter upon the premises
without being guilty of any trespass and remove all of said of fending vehicles therefrom. (1976 Code, sec. 18-
90; 1998 Code, sec. 74-84)
Sec. 34-85. Redemption of vehicles removed by city.
All vehicles removed by the city shall be held and retained either on public or private property for a period of 60
days. The true owner may, within this 60-day period, replevy said vehicles by payment to the city of the cost of
removal and storage of the same; provided, however, that no such vehicles replevied shall thereafter be placed
upon the premises of the owner. (1976 Code, sec. 18-91; 1998 Code, sec. 74-85)
Sec. 34-86. Sale of vehicles removed by city.
If at the expiration of the 60-day period, the owner has not replevied removed vehicles, the city may, after ten
days published notice of sale, sell said vehicles at public sale. The proceeds of said sale shall be applied to the
cost of removal and storage, and the surplus, if any, refunded to the owner. (1976 Code, sec. 18-92; 1998
Code, sec. 74-86)
Sec. 34-87. Lien for costs of removal and storage.
In the event that vehicles sold at public sale as herein provided and the proceeds received therefrom are
insufficient to cover the cost of removal and storage of the same, then a lien shall be perfected against the real
property of the owner from which said vehicles were removed and notice of said lien shall be delivered to the
county clerk for recordation. Removal of said inoperable motor vehicles from the real property shall constitute
an improvement and enhancement of value to the realty, and as a result of such enhancement in value and
betterment of the realty the city shall hold and have a lien against the same as herein provided. (1976 Code,
sec. 18-93; 1998 Code, sec. 74-87)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/554
Sec. 34-88. Collection of lien does not bar prosecution.
The collection of a lien for the removal of a vehicle under the provisions of this article shall not bar prosecution
of the owner of such vehicle or the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such vehicle was found as
provided in section 1-15. (1976 Code, sec. 18-94; 1998 Code, sec. 74-88)
Secs. 34-89–34-119. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. NOISE
Sec. 34-120. Scope of article.
The acts enumerated in this article are declared to be nuisances, but such an enumeration is not to be deemed
exclusive or an implied repeal of other provisions governing noise. This article shall be deemed cumulative of
all other ordinances governing noise, and other ordinances are repealed only to the extent of any conflict
herewith. (1976 Code, sec. 19½-1; 1998 Code, sec. 82-1)
Sec. 34-121. Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises generally.
Any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury
to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited. Any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration which substantially interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities is also declared to be a nuisance
and is hereby prohibited. (1976 Code, sec. 19½-2; 1998 Code, sec. 82-2)
Sec. 34-122. Playing of radios, phonographs, etc.
The playing of any radio, phonograph, tape player, cassette player, television set, sound reproduction device or
musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in any dwelling, hotel or
other type of residence is hereby prohibited. (1976 Code, sec. 19½-3; 1998 Code, sec. 82-3)
Sec. 34-123. Use of loudspeakers and amplifiers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a loudspeaker or amplifier of such intensity that annoys and disturbs
persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
The use of such device during any other hours of the day may be authorized provided a permit is obtained from
the city manager. (1976 Code, sec. 19½-4; 1998 Code, sec. 82-4)
Sec. 34-124. Noisy animals or birds.
It shall be unlawful to keep any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb
the comfort and repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. (1976 Code, sec.
19½-5; 1998 Code, sec. 82-5)
Sec. 34-125. Noisy vehicles.
The running of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to
create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, jarring, or rattling noise or vibrations is hereby prohibited. (1976
Code, sec. 19½-6; 1998 Code, sec. 82-6)
Sec. 34-126. Loading vehicles; opening or destruction of bales, boxes, etc.
The creation of any loud and unnecessary noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or
the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers is hereby prohibited. (1976 Code, sec.
19½-7; 1998 Code, sec. 82-7)
Sec. 34-127. Parking of motor vehicles with motor running.
The parking or storage between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any motor vehicle or trailer, with any
motor or motors affixed thereto, left in operation, for a period in excess of one hour, within a distance of 200 feet
from any family dwelling, is hereby prohibited. (1976 Code, sec. 19½-8; 1998 Code, sec. 82-8)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/554
Sec. 34-128. Sounding of vehicle horn or signaling device.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device on
any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle or the creation by means of such signal device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh noise for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, except as a danger or
warning signal. (1976 Code, sec. 19½-9; 1998 Code, sec. 82-9)
Sec. 34-129. Mufflers required on engines.
The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine,
motor vehicle, or boat engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom is hereby prohibited. (1976 Code, sec. 191/z-10; 1998 Code, sec. 82-10)
Sec. 34-130. Use of compressed air devices.
The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise to be created is effectively
muffled and reduced, is hereby prohibited. (1976 Code, sec. 19½-11; 1998 Code, sec. 82-11)
Sec. 34-131. Blowing of steam whistles.
The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or
stop work, or as a warning of danger, is hereby prohibited. (1976 Code, sec. 19½-12; 1998 Code, sec. 82-12)
Sec. 34-132. Noise near schools and hospitals.
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school or institution of learning while the
same is in session or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such
institution is hereby prohibited, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such manner indicating that same
is a school or hospital street. (1976 Code, sec. 19½-13; 1998 Code, sec. 82-13)
Sec. 34-133. Erection, demolition and excavation work prohibited at night; exception.
The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair work, of any building other than between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day, except in case of urgent necessity and in the interest of public
safety and convenience, and then only by permit from the city manager, is hereby prohibited. (1976 Code, sec.
19½-14; 1998 Code, sec. 82-14)
Sec. 34-134. Shouting of peddlers, hawkers and vendors.
The raucous shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors, which disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood, is hereby prohibited. (1976 Code, sec. 19½-15; 1998 Code, sec. 82-15)
Sec. 34-135. Use of noise to attract attention to shows, sales, etc.
The use of any bell, drum, loudspeaker, whistle or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
attention by the creation of noise to any performance or show is hereby prohibited. (1976 Code, sec. 19½-16;
1998 Code, sec. 82-16)
Secs. 34-136–34-153. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS
Sec. 34-154. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them by this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper or
booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature.
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly
entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation,
and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/554
thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four
issues per year, and sold to the public, and shall mean and include any other copyrighted material.
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn
upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(1976 Code, sec. 3-13; 1998 Code, sec. 3-31)
Sec. 34-155. Exemption for mail and newspapers.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, or to newspapers,
except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. (1976
Code, sec. 3-14; 1998 Code, sec. 3-32)
Sec. 34-156. Depositing or distributing on inhabited private premises.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except
by handling or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or
upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not
posted, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any
such handbill in or upon such premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such
handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and
except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulation. (1976 Code,
sec. 3-15; 1998 Code, sec. 3-33)
Sec. 34-157. Depositing or distributing on posted property.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises a sign bearing the words: “No Trespassing,” “No
Peddlers or Agents,” “No Advertisement,” or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of
such premises do not wish to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbills left upon such
premises. (1976 Code, sec. 3-16; 1998 Code, sec. 3-34)
Sec. 34-158. Depositing on uninhabited or vacant premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which are
uninhabited or vacant. (1976 Code, sec. 3-17; 1998 Code, sec. 3-35)
Sec. 34-159. Placing on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle. (1976 Code, sec. 3-18; 1998 Code, sec.
3-36)
Sec. 34-160. Distributing in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place, except that a
handbill may be personally delivered to any person willing to accept the same. (1976 Code, sec. 3-19; 1998
Code, sec. 3-37)
Secs. 34-161–34-188. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES AND OFFENSIVE CONDITIONS*
Sec. 34-189. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning, and any words not herein defined shall be construed in the context used and by
ordinary interpretation and not as a word of art:
Brush means scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/554
Carrion means the dead and putrefying flesh of any animal, fowl or fish.
Code enforcement official means a city employee or person or entity acting under a contract with the city,
authorized to enforce the provisions of this article and city ordinances, including but not limited to the building
official, inspector, code enforcement officer, code compliance officer or designee.
Dump means to dispose, discharge, place, deposit, throw, leave, sweep, scatter, unload or toss.
Filth means any matter in a putrescent state.
Garbage means any kitchen refuse, foodstuffs or related material, including all decayable waste.
Impure or unwholesome matter means any putrescible or nonputrescible condition, object or matter that may,
could or tends to cause injury, death or disease to human beings.
Junk means all worn out, worthless or discarded material, including but not limited to any of the following
materials, or parts of said materials or any combination thereof:
(1) New or used iron, steel or nonferrous metallic scrap, brass or waste materials;
(2) Used and/or inoperative household appliances, household electrical or plumbing fixtures, floor
coverings and/or window coverings not currently in use;
(3) Used lumber, brick, cement block, wire, tubing and pipe, tubs, drums, barrels and/or roofing
material not currently in use;
(4) Air conditioning and heating equipment not currently in use;
(5) Used vehicle components and parts not currently in use;
(6) Used furniture other than that designed for outdoor use or that which would normally be
considered as antique furniture;
(7) Used and/or inoperative residential lawn care equipment and machinery not currently in use;
(8) Used pallets, windows or doors not currently in use;
(9) New or used sheet metal, structural steel and/or chain not currently in use;
(10) Used and/or inoperable vending machines, radios and/or televisions not currently in use; and
(11) Any other type of used and/or inoperable machinery or equipment not currently in use.
Matter means that of which any physical object is composed.
Nuisance.
(1) The term “nuisance” means any condition, object, material or matter that:
a. Is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health;
b. Renders the ground, the water, the air or food a hazard or likely to cause injury to human
life or health;
c. Is offensive to the senses; or
d. Threatens to become detrimental to the public health.
(2) The term “nuisance” includes, but not be limited to: any abandoned or uncovered (including
unsecured covered) wells, shafts or basements, abandoned refrigerators, stagnant or unwholesome
water, sinks, privies, filth, carrion, rubbish, junk, trash, debris or refuse, impure or unwholesome
matter of any kind, and any objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/554
Objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter means any matter, condition or object that is objectionable,
unsightly or unsanitary to a person of ordinary sensitivities.
Owner means any person or entity shown as the property owner on the latest property tax assessment rolls or
any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in the property, including any agent who is
responsible for managing, leasing or operating the property; provided, however, an individual who is an
employee of the owner or management company, is not personally liable for criminal or civil penalties if the
individual provides the property owner's name, street address and telephone number to the code enforcement
official, if the violation relates to a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion relative to the construction
of improvements on the property but not as to violations in construction or development of the property,
consistent with state law as it exists and as it may be amended.
Property means all privately owned, occupied or unoccupied property, including vacant land, and/or a building
designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial or religious purposes. The term shall also
include a yard, ground, wall, driveway, fence, porch, steps or other structure appurtenant to the property.
Putrescible means the decomposition of organic matter with the formation of foul-smelling, incompletely
oxidized products.
Refuse means heterogeneous accumulation of worn out, used, broken, rejected or worthless materials,
including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, paper or litter, and other decayable or nondecayable matter.
Rubbish means junk, trash, debris, rubble, stone, useless fragments of building materials, and other
miscellaneous, useless waste or rejected matter.
Trash and debris means all manner of refuse, including but not limited to: mounds of dirt, piles of leaves, grass
and weed clippings, paper trash, useless fragments of building materials, rubble, furniture other than furniture
designed for outside use, useless household items and appliances, items of salvage, such as scrap metal and
wood, old barrels, old tires, objects that hold water for an extended period of time, tree and brush trimmings,
dead standing or fallen trees, and other miscellaneous wastes or rejected matter.
Urban nuisance means any condition that exists and because of violations of this article, is in a state of
disrepair, such that it could reasonably cause injury, damage, harm or inconvenience to a considerable portion
of the community and the use and enjoyment of property, materially interfering with the property use or comfort
and enjoyment of surrounding property, taking into consideration the nature and use of the properties in the
area and the character of the community in which they are situated, which condition would be substantially
offensive and annoying to persons of ordinary sensibilities, taste and habits in the community. The term “urban
nuisance” includes, but is not limited to:
(1) Fences that are leaning, falling down, missing boards or otherwise deteriorated;
(2) Motor vehicles, or parts thereof, that do not qualify as junked vehicles as defined by city
ordinances and state statutes but that are wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, on blocks,
trailers, under tarps or other similar covering, in the process of repair, demolition or salvage.
Vegetative growth means any grass, weeds, shrubs, trees, brush, bushes or vines.
Weeds means any vegetation that because of its height is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary, excluding:
shrubs, bushes, trees, cultivated flowers and cultivated crops.
(Ordinance 200876, sec. 3(66.61), adopted 7/1/08)
Sec. 34-190. Penalty upon failure to comply.
(a) Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this article, who continues to
violate or fail to comply with same within seven days after notice is given and received as set forth in section
34-195, shall also be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount
not to exceed $2,000.00, such offense being a violation of the health and safety ordinances of the city. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply
occurs or continues to occur. This section shall be in addition to and cumulative of the provisions for abatement
of the nuisance by the city and charging the cost of same against the owner of the property.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/554
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, any violation of any provision of this article that constitutes
an immediate danger or threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought
by the city for such purpose.
(c) In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained herein, the city may enforce the provisions of this
article pursuant to the applicable provisions of Texas Local Government Code ch. 54, which provides for the
enforcement of municipal ordinances.
(Ordinance 200876, sec. 3(66.70), adopted 7/1/08)
Sec. 34-191. Prohibited accumulations, dumping, stagnant water, trash, and other unsightly or
unsanitary matter declared a nuisance.
(a) It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having
supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the territorial limits of the city, to
knowingly or intentionally permit or allow any stagnant or unwholesome water, sinks, refuse, filth, carrion,
weeds, rubbish, brush, refuse, trash, debris, junk, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, or other
objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever nature, to accumulate or remain upon any such real property or
within any public easement on or across such real property or upon any adjacent public street or alley right-ofway
between the property line of such real property and where the paved surface of the street or alley begins.
(b) It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person to knowingly or intentionally dump, or permit
to be dumped, upon or along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street, park, right-of-way or vacant lot into or
adjacent to water, or any other public or private property within the territorial limits of the city, any unwholesome
water, refuse, rubbish, trash, debris, filth, carrion, weeds, brush, junk, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter
of any kind, or other objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever kind.
(c) It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person owing, claiming or occupying or having
supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the territorial limits of the city, to
knowingly or intentionally permit or allow an urban nuisance to exist on any residentially zoned property, or on
property that abuts a residential use. It shall be an affirmative defense that:
(1) A permit was issued for the repair of the fence and such repair work is being diligently
performed within the time frames authorized under the permit;
(2) The urban nuisance has existed on the property for less than 30 days and the person has
documented proof of anticipated date of removal;
(3) That the urban nuisance is completely contained on an improved surface, fully screened from
public view behind a fence or within a structure.
(d) It shall be the duty of all persons to keep the sidewalks in front of their property free and clear of all such
matter, and to fill up, drain or regrade any lots, ground or yards that have stagnant water thereon, and to
cleanse and disinfect any house, building, establishment, lot, yard or ground from refuse, rubbish, trash, filth,
carrion, or objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of any kind, or other impure or unwholesome matter of
any kind.
(Ordinance 200876, sec. 3(66.62), adopted 7/1/08)
Sec. 34-192. Weeds, brush and unsightly matter.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real
property, occupied or unoccupied, within the territorial limits of the city, to knowingly or intentionally permit
weeds, brush or any objectionable or unsightly matter to grow to a height greater than ten inches upon such
real property within 200 feet of any property line that abuts street rights-of-way, alleys, utility easements,
subdivided additions, developed property or any buildings or other structures. It shall be the duty of such person
to keep the area from the line of his property to the curbline next adjacent to it, if there is a curbline, and, if not,
then to the centerline of the adjacent unpaved street, or to the edge of the pavement, cleared of the matter
referred to in this subsection. All vegetation (including hay unless the hay is cultivated on property that has
been granted an agricultural property tax exemption on the most recent tax roll as certified by the county
appraisal district in the county in which the property is located), except regularly cultivated row crops, that
exceeds ten inches in height shall be presumed to be objectionable and unsightly matter; provided further that
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/554
regularly cultivated row crops shall not be allowed to grow within the right-of-way of any public street or
easement nor shall such crops be allowed to obstruct the necessary view to and from adjacent rights-of-way,
but shall be kept mowed as provided in this subsection.
(b) With respect to lots, tracts or parcels of land of five or more acres, the provisions of this section shall not
apply to any area situated more than 200 feet from any open public street or thoroughfare, as measured from
the right-of-way line of said street or thoroughfare, and situated more than 200 feet from any adjacent property
under different ownership and on which any building is located or on which any improvement exists, as
measured from the property line.
(Ordinance 200876, sec. 3(66.63), adopted 7/1/08)
State law reference–Municipal authority to require lot owner to keep lot free from weeds, rubbish, brush, and other
objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter, Texas Health and Safety Code sec. 342.004; additional municipal authority
to abate dangerous weeds, Texas Health and Safety Code sec. 342.008.
Sec. 34-193. Inspections.
(a) For purposes of ascertaining whether violations of this article exist, the code enforcement official is
authorized to inspect the exterior of a structure and premises that contain no structure.
(b) If entry onto the property is refused, the code enforcement official shall have every recourse provided by
law, including but not limited to an administrative search warrant or an injunction to secure entry. If the owner,
occupant, or person in control cannot be identified or located, the code enforcement official shall be authorized
to enter the property to the extent allowed by, and in accordance with, law.
(Ordinance 200876, sec. 3(66.64), adopted 7/1/08)
Sec. 34-194. Duty of owner or occupant to cut and remove weeds, brush and unsightly matter.
It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real
property, occupied or unoccupied, as described in sections 34-191 and 34-192, to remove, drain and/or fill all
prohibited matter or conditions and to cut and remove all weeds, brush, vegetative growth, and other
objectionable or unsightly matter as of ten as may be necessary to comply with sections 34-191 and 34-192
and to use every precaution to prevent the same from occurring or growing on such property. Failure to so
comply shall be a violation of this article. (Ordinance 200876, sec. 3(66.65), adopted 7/1/08)
Sec. 34-195. Notice of violation and to abate; failure to comply; correction by city.
(a) If such person violating the terms of this article fails or refuses to comply with the demand for compliance
contained in the notice set forth in section 34-190 within seven days after the date of notification as provided
herein, the city shall have the authority as provided by law to enter upon such property and do or cause to be
done the work necessary to obtain compliance with this article. All reasonable costs, charges and expenses
(hereinafter “charges”) incurred in doing or in having such work done shall be a charge to, and be a personal
liability of, such person.
(b) It shall be the duty of the code enforcement official, to give a minimum of seven days official notice, in
writing, to such person violating the terms of this article, subject to the provisions herein stated The notice shall
be in writing and may be served on such person violating the terms of this article:
(1) By delivering it to him in person;
(2) By forwarding or sending a letter or written notice addressed to such person at the person's
address as recorded in the appraisal district in which the property is located and delivered by United
States certified mail, return receipt requested, with a second optional copy by United States regular
mail; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained by:
a. Publication at least once within seven consecutive days in the city's official newspaper;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/554
b. Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the
violations relates; or
c. Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property
to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(c) If the city mails a notice to the property owner in accordance with subsection (b) of this section and the
United States Postal Service returns the notice as refused or unclaimed, the validity of the notice is not
affected, and the notice shall be considered as delivered.
(d) The city, in the notice provided herein, may inform the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
regular mail and a posting on the property, or by personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits
another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the
first anniversary of the date of such notice, the city, without further notice, may correct the violation at the
owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If the violation covered by a notice under this
subsection occurs within said one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an
ownership change, then the city, without notice, may take any action permitted by subsection (a) of this section,
and assess its reasonable expenses incurred as provided by ion 34-197
(Ordinance 200876, sec. 3(66.66), adopted 7/1/08)
Sec. 34-196. Additional authority to abate nuisance.
(a) The city may abate, without notice, weeds that:
(1) Have grown higher than 48 inches; and
(2) Are an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person.
(b) Not later than the tenth day after the date the city abates weeds under this section, the city shall give
notice to the property owner in the manner required by section 34-195. The notice shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the violation of the ordinance that occurred on the property;
(3) A statement that the city abated the weeds; and
(4) An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the
city's abatement of the weeds.
(c) The city shall conduct an administrative hearing before the building and standards commission - city
council on the abatement of weeds under this section if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the
abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with the city a written request for a hearing. An administrative
hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after the date a request for
a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to the city's
abatement of the weeds.
(d) The city may assess reasonable expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses
and creates liens under section 34-197. A lien created under this section is subject to the same conditions as a
lien created under section 34-197. The authority granted the city by this section is in addition to the authority
granted by section 34-197
(Ordinance 200876, sec. 3(66.67), adopted 7/1/08)
Sec. 34-197. Expenses incurred by city; lien.
(a) If a notice as provided for herein is delivered to the owner of such real property, and he fails or refuses to
comply with such demand for compliance within the seven-day time period established herein, the charges set
forth in section 34-195 shall be, in addition to a charge to and personal liability of said owner, a privileged lien
upon and against such real property, including all fixtures and improvements thereon. In order to perfect such
lien, the code enforcement official first shall give such owner written notice of demand for payment of such
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/554
charges. Such written notice may be given by any one of the methods provided for herein for the giving of the
initial notice demanding compliance with the terms of this article.
(b) If such owner fails or refuses to make complete payment of said charges within 30 days of his receipt of
said notice, the mayor, municipal health authority or other municipal official designated by the mayor, such as
the code enforcement official, shall file a written statement of such charges with the county clerk for filing in the
county land and deed records where the property is located. Said statement shall be deemed sufficient if it
contains the following minimum information; however, it also may contain such other additional information
deemed appropriate by the mayor, the code enforcement official or duly appointed representative:
(1) The name of the owner of the real property, if known;
(2) A legal description of the real property;
(3) A statement of the charges incurred by the city in doing or in having such work done as
necessary to bring the real property into compliance with this article; and
(4) A notarized affidavit executed by the code enforcement official stating that all prerequisites
required by this article for the imposition of the charges and the affixing of the lien have been met
and that all statements and/or representations made therein are true and correct.
The lien attaches upon the filing of the lien statement with the county clerk.
(c) All such charges shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date of payment by the
city. The lien obtained is security for the expenditures made and is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements. The city may bring suit to collect the charges, institute foreclosure proceedings, or both. The
written statement of such charges provided for herein, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence
of the city's claim for charges or right to foreclose the lien. The owner of the real property or any other person
claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of the real property shall be jointly and severally liable for
such charges.
(d) This remedy is in addition to any penal provision provided herein.
(Ordinance 200876, sec. 3(66.68), adopted 7/1/08)
Sec. 34-198. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the code enforcement official and it shall be unlawful for any
person to interfere with or hinder the code enforcement official in the exercise of their duties under this article.
Notwithstanding any provisions contained herein to the contrary, the code enforcement official are hereby
granted the authority to issue immediate citations to persons violating any provision of this article in their
presence. (Ordinance 200876, sec. 3(66.69), adopted 7/1/08)
Secs. 34-199–34-299. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. DONATION BINS AND RECYCLING CONTAINERS
Sec. 34-300. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to provide rules, regulations, and standards for the placement, collection,
and use of donation bins and recycling containers in the city in order to promote the public health, safety,
morals, and general aesthetics of the city for the citizens and business owners in the city. (Ordinance 2014-09-
005 adopted 9/16/14)
Sec. 34-301. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, and words used herein shall be interpreted to read
as follows; and any words not herein defined shall be construed in the context used and by ordinary
interpretation, and not as a word of art:
Donation bin (bin) shall mean any container or receptacle held out to the public as a collection place for people
to drop off articles of clothing, shoes, textiles, and other household items.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/554
Nonprofit organization shall mean an organization that has its 501(c)(3) article of incorporation on file with the
Secretary of State as a nonprofit organization or is a bona fine chapter of a state or national nonprofit
organization.
Organization shall mean any person, organization, or corporation that owns the bin and that receives a permit
to operate a bin in the city pursuant to this chapter.
Property owner shall mean the person or entity having legal title to property and/or the person shown as the
owner of the property on the current tax rolls of the city. This term shall include the property owner's agent,
renter, or lessee either of which may have permission from the owner to make decisions concerning the
property.
Recycling container shall mean a trash dumpster structure that collects recycling materials to be recycled
instead of refuse or garbage materials.
(Ordinance 2014-09-005 adopted 9/16/14)
Sec. 34-302. Bin construction requirements.
Bin construction shall be of metal, wood, steel, or similar material designed to have four (4) walls, a roof, and a
floor, not to exceed the dimension of six feet, one inch (6"1') in width or depth, nor shall exceed seven feet (7")
in height. Said structure shall be of adequate weight to withstand typical weather conditions as to not be moved
within a parking lot by wind. The structure must be built substantially enough, as to not pose any public threat,
and be painted or finished in a way that consists of a uniform color of earth tones, natural tones, or rust colors
as per the zoning ordinance exterior facade requirements. (Ordinance 2014-09-005 adopted 9/16/14)
Sec. 34-303. Permit requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place a bin within the city limits without first obtaining an annual permit
from the permits department as hereinafter provided. Said permit shall be valid for one (1) calendar year or any
part thereof with every permit expiring on December 31 of each year. The organization shall provide the
following:
(1) The organization's name, business name, business address, and business phone number.
(2) The address in which the bin will be located.
(3) Proof the organization is a nonprofit organization.
(4) State sales tax identification number.
(5) Written authorization from the property owner in which the bin will be located.
(6) Site plan of the property showing all structures on the property with accurate dimensions and
showing where the bin will be located and the size of the bin. Once site plan is approved, then the
bin shall not be moved without written explanation as to the reason for the change and written
permission from the permits department. Relocating a bin to a different address shall require a new
permit.
(7) Annual permit fee of $25.00 per bin per location.
(Ordinance 2014-09-005 adopted 9/16/14)
Sec. 34-304. General requirements for bins.
The following are general requirements of all bins:
(1) Bins shall be allowed as an ancillary use in any non-residential zoning districts those being LR
(Local Retail), GB (General Business), LI (Light Industrial), HI (Heavy Industrial), and PD (Planned
Development) by right.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/554
(2) The placement of said bins shall be behind the required building line setbacks and shall not
impede traffic nor visually impair any motor vehicle drivers from a public street nor shall the bin be
located in any required landscape required area. A bin shall not be located within 50 feet of a
residentially zoned district.
(3) A bin shall not be located in any parking space required to meet the minimum parking
requirements for a site and may not be located in any platted or dedicated access easement or fire
lane.
(4) No more than two (2) bins shall be located in any platted lot and there must be a minimum
distance of two hundred (200) feet between bins on adjacent lots.
(5) No landscaping, screening fences or walls are required around the bin but aesthetically
pleasing site design considerations are encouraged.
(6) All signage on each bin shall be in compliance with the city sign ordinance.
(7) Each bin shall have a valid organization name and phone number legibly written in two (2) inch
letters and numbers so that the general public who wishes may contact said organization at any
time.
(8) The organization shall employ a staff of full-time, paid drivers, to collect the contents of the
bins. Said bins shall be collected a minimum of four (4) times per week 52 weeks per year. Said
driver shall ensure that no accumulation of clothing or other donations, trash or debris, or illegally
dumped items are in the area surrounding the bin.
(9) The visual aesthetics and structural integrity of the bin shall be maintained continually.
(10) The organization shall have twenty-four (24) hours to remove any [and] all graffiti from the bin
once notified by the code enforcement department.
(11) The organization shall have forty-eight (48) hours to remove any trash, debris, clothing, or
illegal dumping around said bin once notified by the code enforcement department.
(12) The organization shall replace any damaged or vandalized bin within five (5) calendar days
once notified by the code enforcement department, unless damage is such as to constitute a danger
to person or property in which case the bin shall be removed or replaced within twenty-four (24)
hours of notification.
(13) The organization shall display a legible copy of the permit on the bin at all times.
(Ordinance 2014-09-005 adopted 9/16/14)
Sec. 34-305. General requirements for recycling containers.
Recycling containers shall be subject to the same requirements as trash containers as per the city's zoning
ordinance which states: “a visual screen consisting of a solid fence having a minimum height of six (6) feet shall
be installed so as to screen trash container(s) from street right-of-way and/or residential purposes. Said trash
container(s) shall be screened on a minimum of three sides, with the open side oriented so as not to be viewed
from a street or residential purpose.” (Ordinance 2014-09-005 adopted 9/16/14)
Sec. 34-306. Penalties for violation.
Any person in violation of any portion of this code and of any other ordinance of the city shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined of up to but not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) per day that said violation exists. (Ordinance 2014-09-005 adopted 9/16/14)
CHAPTER 36
OFFENSES*
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/554
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 36-1. Posting on poles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or place upon or against any telegraph, telephone or electric light
pole or electric light standard within the city any advertisement of any character or description. (1976 Code,
sec. 3-1; 1998 Code, sec. 3-1)
Sec. 36-2. Airtight containers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other
structure, or within any warehouse or storage room or any unoccupied or abandoned dwelling, building or other
structure, under such circumstances as to be accessible to children, any icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight or
semi-airtight container which has a capacity of 1½ cubic feet or more and an opening of 50 square inches or
more and which has a door or lid equipped with a latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door
or lid shut. (1976 Code, sec. 20-1; 1998 Code, sec. 86-1)
State law reference–Similar provisions, Texas Health and Safety Code sec. 756.011 et seq.
Sec. 36-3. Discharge of firearms.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol or firearm of any kind, or to discharge an air rifle
or air pistol of any description, by whatever name known, that operates by means of compressed air,
compressed gas, springs, or any other means which is capable of discharging shots, pellets or any solid object
at a velocity in excess of 300 feet per second, or discharges any cannon cracker or torpedo on, across or within
500 feet of any public square, street or alley or within 300 feet of any business establishment, in the city. The
term “cannon cracker” means any combustible package more than two inches long and more than one inch
through. (1976 Code, sec. 20-2; 1998 Code, sec. 86-2)
Sec. 36-4. Interfering with or obstructing city officers.
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any manner, to interfere with, prevent or otherwise obstruct any officer or
employee of this city in the performance of his official duties. (1976 Code, sec. 20-3; 1998 Code, sec. 86-3)
Sec. 36-5. Selling, brandishing, displaying or possessing of toy guns or replica firearms.
(a) Definition. The term “toy gun” or “replica firearm” means any gun that is used to mimic firearms that
discharges projectiles; such as, dart guns, air-assault guns or traditional toy guns.
(b) Offense.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any business or anyone to sell a toy gun or replica firearm that is not
easily and immediately identifiable as a toy. Any toy gun sold or provided to minors under the age of
17 shall be transparent, or manufactured with bright colors such as orange, yellow or green.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any business or anyone to sell or make available a realistic replica of
actual gun models to minors under the age of 17.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 17 to knowingly or recklessly display,
brandish or possess any toy gun or replica firearm in a public place that is not easily and
immediately identifiable as a toy by being transparent or of a bright color, such as orange, yellow
and green, in a manner that causes a reasonably prudent peace officer or member of a public safety
agency to become alarmed for their safety or the safety of others.
(c) Penalty for violation. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding $500.00. Each day
such violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall
be punishable as such hereunder. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the
proof of an offense defined by this section.
(1998 Code, sec. 86-4; Ordinance 2007096, sec. 2, adopted 10/2/07)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/554
Secs. 36-6–36-28. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CONDUCT AND TRAFFIC AT DRIVE IN RESTAURANTS
Sec. 36-29. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Drive-in restaurant means any restaurant where food or beverages are served directly to or are permitted to be
consumed by patrons in automobiles, motorcycles or other vehicles parked on the premises.
(1976 Code, sec. 20-60; 1998 Code, sec. 86-31)
Sec. 36-30. Duty of operator generally.
The owner, lessee or operator of any drive-in restaurant shall maintain quiet and good order upon the premises
thereof and shall not permit disorderly or immoral conduct or loitering thereon, nor shall he cause or permit any
noise or nuisance on the parking lot of the drive-in restaurant whereby the quiet and good order of the
neighborhood may be disturbed. (1976 Code, sec. 20-61; 1998 Code, sec. 86-32)
Sec. 36-31. Enumerated prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant to:
(1) Race the engine of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motor
vehicle, or blow any horn of any motor vehicle or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly
noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or the
neighborhood may be disturbed;
(2) Enter the premises of any drive-in restaurant in a motor vehicle of any kind and park the
vehicle and leave the premises without getting the consent of the owner or operator thereof ;
(3) Enter the premises of any drive-in restaurant in a motor vehicle of any kind and use said
premises for cruising or racing, as a shortcut to another street, or to annoy or endanger any person
or other vehicle lawfully on the premises;
(4) Congregate in groups of three or more persons and linger and loiter at any location on the
premises of any drive in restaurant other than in the restaurant building or in a legally parked
vehicle;
(5) Remain on the premises of the drive-in restaurant after having been directed to leave by the
owner, manager or other person in charge of the premises.
(1976 Code, sec. 20-62; 1998 Code, sec. 86-33)
Sec. 36-32. Sign to be posted.
It shall be the duty of the restaurant operator to post on the premises in a conspicuous location one or more
signs bearing the following legend: “Forest Hill City Code prohibits cruising in or congregating and loitering
outside of a motor vehicle. No unoccupied vehicles may be left on these premises without the consent of the
restaurant operator.” (1976 Code, sec. 20-63; 1998 Code, sec. 86-34)
Secs. 36-33–36-52. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Sec. 36-53. Sale or other transfer of harmful inhalants to persons under 18 years of age.
(a) The following terms shall, for purposes of this section, have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Harmful inhalant means spray paint, model glue and volatile substances containing butyl nitrite or its isomers.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/554
Model glue means any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the building of model airplanes, boats and
automobiles, or any similar substance which contains one or more of the following volatile solvents:
(1) Acetone;
(2) Amylacetate;
(3) Benzol or benzene;
(4) Butyl acetate;
(5) Butyl alcohol;
(6) Carbon tetrachloride;
(7) Chloroform;
(8) Cyclohexanone;
(9) Ethanol or ethyl alcohol;
(10) Ethyl acetate;
(11) Hexane;
(12) Isopropanol or isopropyl alcohol;
(13) Isopropyl acetate;
(14) Methyl “cellosolve” acetate;
(15) Methyl ethyl ketone;
(16) Methyl isobutyl ketone;
(17) Toluol or toluene;
(18) Trichloroethylene;
(19) Tricresyl phosphate;
(20) Xylol or xylene; or
(21) Any other solvent, material, substance, chemical or combination thereof having the property
of releasing toxic vapors.
Spray paint means any aerosol container which contains or purports to contain paint, varnish, primer, rust
preventative, lacquer, stain, enamel, gilt, solvent or like substance.
Underage vendee means any vendee, buyer, or transferee less than 18 years of age.
(b) No person shall knowingly sell or otherwise transfer possession of any harmful inhalant to any underage
vendee.
(c) It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this section that such underage vendee:
(1) Was, in fact, purchasing or receiving such harmful inhalant with the intent that such harmful
inhalant would be used for a purpose other than inhaling; but any belief or perception of the vendor
or transferor as to such underage vendee's intent shall be irrelevant for purposes of this defense; or
(2) Presented the transferor with identification which indicated such underage vendee to be 18
years of age or older, which included a photograph of such underage vendee, and which appeared
on its face not to be altered, mutilated or forged.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/554
(d) Except as provided for in subsection (c)(2) of this section, any belief or perception of the transferor or
vendor as to the underage vendee's age shall be irrelevant in any prosecution under this section, both for
purposes of deciding guilt or innocence and for deciding punishment. The term “knowingly,” as used in
subsection (b) of this section, shall refer only to the sale or transfer and shall not refer to the age of the
underage vendee.
(1976 Code, sec. 20-71; 1998 Code, sec. 86-61)
State law reference–Abusable volatile chemicals generally, Texas Health and Safety Code sec. 485.001 et seq.
Sec. 36-54. Curfew hours for minors.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Curfew hours means from:
(1) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the
following day; and
(2) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 am. on any Saturday or Sunday.
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate
action. The term “emergency” includes but is not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or
any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian means:
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor means any person under 17 years of age.
Officer means a police officer of the city.
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting
business at any establishment. The term “operator” includes the members or partners of an association or
partnership and the officers of a corporation.
Parent means a person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody
of a minor.
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, and includes,
but is not limited to, streets, highways, parks and the common areas and parking lots of schools, hospitals,
apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, commercial shopping centers and shops.
Remain means to:
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by an officer or the owner, operator or other
person in control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious
permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/554
(b) Offenses.
(1) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of an
establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(2) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits or by insufficient
control allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within
the city during curfew hours.
(3) The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly
allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
(c) Defenses.
(1) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) of this section that the minor was:
a. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
b. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian without any detour or stop;
c. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
d. Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning from home from an
employment activity, without any detour or stop;
e. Involved in an emergency;
f. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
g. Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, a school district or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or
stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, a school district or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
h. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as
the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or
i. Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
Texas Family Code ch. 31.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) of this section that the owner, operator or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on
the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(d) Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, an officer shall ask the apparent of
fender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any
response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (c) of this section is present.
(e) Penalties.
(1) A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day or
part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon
conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(2) When required by Texas Family Code sec. 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive
original jurisdiction over a minor who violates subsection (b)(1) of this section and shall refer the
minor to juvenile court.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/554
(1998 Code, sec. 86-62; Ordinance 889-940111-2500, sec. 1, adopted 8/2/94)
Sec. 36-55. Urinating or defecating in public prohibited.
(a) A person commits an offense if the person urinates or defecates:
(1) In or on a public street, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, building, structure, plaza, or utility right-ofway
or other public place; or
(2) In public view.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the person is in a restroom.
(Ordinance 2016-10-002 adopted 10/18/16)
Secs. 36-56–36-81. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. GRAFFITI*
Sec. 36-82. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Aerosol paint means an aerosolized paint product, including a clear or pigmented lacquer or finish.
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, signature, symbol, design or other marking of any sort which
is etched, written, painted, drawn or applied in any other way to any structure, building or property of any sort or
to any portion or element thereof, whether the property is public or private.
Guardian means:
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor means any person under 17 years of age.
Owner means any person with the legal right of possession to tangible property, which includes but is not
limited to the actual owner or his lessee.
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person.
Unauthorized means without the permission of the owner or person in control of property, whether public or
private.
(1998 Code, sec. 86-91; Ordinance 900-950056-2000, sec. 1, adopted 1/24/95; Ordinance 95-950171, sec. 1,
adopted 9/5/95)
Sec. 36-83. Unauthorized graffiti prohibited.
It shall be an offense for any person to create unauthorized graffiti on any property in the city when said graffiti
is visible from public property, a public right-of-way or any private property other than that on which the graffiti
exists. (1998 Code, sec. 86-92; Ordinance 900-950056-2000, sec. 2, adopted 1/24/95)
Sec. 36-84. Removal required.
(a) Responsibility of property owner. An owner of any tangible property in the city commits an offense if he
fails to remove all graffiti from the property that is visible from any public property or right-of-way or from any
private property other than the property on which the graffiti exists, unless the graffiti was created on the
property with the owner's consent and does not violate the sign regulations of the city or any other applicable
city ordinance or state or federal law.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/554
(b) Notice of violation. Prior to issuance of a citation issued for failure of a person to remove graffiti from
property under his control, the owner must be given notice of the violation. Notice may be made personally to
the owner in writing, by letter addressed to the owner's mailing address or by publication in the newspaper of
general circulation in the city at least twice within ten consecutive days, if personal service cannot be obtained
or the owner's mailing address is unknown. A citation for a violation of subsection (a) of this section may be
issued 30 calendar days after notification of the violation to a business or business owner; if the subject
property is occupied as a residence, a citation may be issued 45 calendar days after notification of the violation.
Notice will be deemed to have occurred as of the day the notice was given personally to the owner, or three
days after written notice was mailed to the owner, or if notice is by publication, on the date that the second or
last notice is published in the newspaper of general circulation in the city. Notice shall be sufficient if it states the
following regarding the offense: date, physical location denoted by street address, name of owner, and notation
of the violation of this article.
(c) Removal by property owner. Once provided notice by the city, an owner shall arrange graffiti removal
himself.
(d) Request for extension of time. Once the owner has received notice and arranged for cleanup, the owner
may request, in writing, an extension of time. The request shall be directed to the chief of police and must set
out the reasons for the delay. The request must be received prior to the expiration of the period set out in
subsection (b) of this section. The chief shall be authorized to grant one 14-calendar-day extension.
(e) Computation of time periods. The time for graffiti removal will be counted:
(1) From the date the notice is personally served on the owner or from the sixth day after the
notice is placed in the U.S. mail;
(2) If the owner cannot be found or the notice is returned by the U.S. Postal Service, from the date
the notice is published for the second time, in accordance with subsection (b) of this section; or
(3) The 14-day extension, if granted, shall commence immediately upon the expiration of the
original time period, as calculated in subsection (e)(1) of this section.
(1998 Code, sec. 86-93; Ordinance 900-950056-2000, sec. I, adopted 1/24/95; Ordinance 95-950171, sec. 2,
adopted 9/5/95; Ordinance 200015, sec. 1, adopted 1/18/00)
Sec. 36-85. Responsibility of parent or guardian for graffiti created by minor.
A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal
negligence permits the minor to create graffiti on tangible property in the city without the property owner's
consent. (1998 Code, sec. 86-94; Ordinance 95-950171, sec. 3, adopted 9/5/95)
Sec. 36-86. Possession of aerosol paint by minor.
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a minor to possess aerosol paint of any sort or character.
(b) Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section that, at the time of
possession, the minor was accompanied or supervised by a parent or guardian, a teacher in connection with a
bona fide school project, or a supervisor during the minor's regular employment, or that the minor possessed
the aerosol paint on the property on which he lives or that the possession occurred as part of an organized
event sponsored or supervised by the city, a school, a church or some other officially recognized entity.
(1998 Code, sec. 86-95; Ordinance 95-950171, sec. 3, adopted 9/5/95)
Sec. 36-87. Enforcement.
(a) Enforcement generally; penalty. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to enforce the graffiti provisions
of this article.
(b) Affirmative defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 36-84(a) that:
(1) No notice was served on the property owner, in compliance with section 36-84(b);
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/554
(2) The property owner has removed graffiti from that particular property three or more times
within the preceding 12 months; or
(3) Before being issued a citation under this section, the property owner gave the chief of police
written authorization to allow persons to enter onto the property and remove the graffiti, pursuant to
a volunteer or community service program approved by the chief of police in which the property
owner is eligible to participate.
(1998 Code, sec. 86-96; Ordinance 95-950171. sec. 3, adopted 9/5/95)
Secs. 36-88–36-117. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. SMOKING*
Sec. 36-118. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article. shall be construed as defined in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Administrative area means any enclosed indoor area, under the control of an employer, to which employees,
but not the general public. except by specific invitation, have access to during the course of employment,
including. but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, employee restrooms, conference rooms and
employee cafeterias.
Air purification system means an electrically powered hospital grade, HEPA media filter that will clean all of the
air in a designated smoking area every 15 minutes as follows: not less than 95 percent of 0.3 micron
particulates efficiency including dust, smoke, pollen, mold spores, bacteria, tobacco smoke, viruses and
allergens and not less than 95 percent removal of gases, vapors, volatile-organic compounds (VOC) and odors
and contains an air barrier system or other barrier system if required by a licensed professional engineer. to
prevent air from the smoking area from being drawn across the nonsmoking area. The term “portable air
purification system” means a portable hospital grade unit meeting the same standards.
Bar means an establishment or area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages, that derives 75
percent or more of its gross revenue on a quarterly, (three-month) basis from the sale or service of alcoholic
beverages, as defined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code and in which the service of food is only incidental
to the consumption of such beverages.
Billiard hall means a place of amusement whose chief purpose is providing the use of billiard/pool tables to the
public. The term “billiards” means any game played on a cloth-covered table with balls and cue sticks where the
balls are struck by the sticks and the balls strike against one another. (Also known as a pool hall.)
Bingo parlor means a facility defined and regulated under the Texas Occupations Code ch. 2001, the “Bingo
Enabling Act.”
Burning means partial or complete combustion of tobacco or other product for purposes of inhalation, ingestion
or absorption.
Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation
of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons
for compensation.
Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity formed
for profit-making or nonprofit purposes, including but not limited to, banks, laundromats, hotels, motel, retail
establishments, professional corporations, and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering,
architectural or other professional services are delivered.
Eating establishment means any place where food is prepared or served for on-premises consumption and
which is accessible by the public or a substantial group of the public. The term “eating establishment” includes
but is not limited to restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, fast food establishments,
luncheonettes, lunchrooms, soda fountains, food carts, food vending vehicles and catering establishments.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/554
Employee means any person who works for hire and compensation at an indoor or enclosed area with an
assigned indoor location as a work place by an employer.
Employer means any person, partnership, corporation, municipal corporation, nonprofit entity, or other entity
that employs the services of one or more persons.
Enclosed area means an area closed in by a roof, or other covering, whether permanent or temporary and has
40 percent or more of its perimeter closed in by walls or other coverings, whether permanent or temporary, with
appropriate openings for ingress and egress.
Health facility means any institution that provides public health services, including medical, surgical, and
overnight facilities for patients, including but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors'
offices, dentists' offices, nursing homes, adult care facilities, convalescent homes and residential treatment
centers/homes.
Major renovation means changing the amount of floor space in a building by one third.
Minor means any person less than 18 years of age.
Net floor area means the total floor area of the interior of an eating establishment, excluding the kitchen,
restrooms, storage areas and offices.
Person means any individual, partnership, cooperative, association, corporation or venture.
Physical barrier means a barrier that will form an effective membrane continuous from outside wall to outside
wall, from a smoke barrier to a smoke barrier, from floor to floor or roof above, or a combination thereof,
including continuity through all concealed spaces, such as above suspended ceilings, interstitial structural and
mechanical spaces. Transfer grilles, louvers and similar openings shall not be used in these partitions. Selfclosing,
tightfitting doors are permitted in such barriers.
Place of employment.
(1) The term “place of employment” means any enclosed area under the control of an employer
including but not limited to work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms,
classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways.
(2) The term “place of employment” does not mean a private residence.
Private club.
(1) The term “private club” means any building, premises or portion thereof which is permitted by
the state and allowed by special use permit by the city as a private club for the storing, possession,
and dispensing for on premises consumption of alcoholic beverages.
(2) The term “private club” does not include a premises operated by a person that is not available
to and not customarily used by the general public and entry and privileges thereto are established by
regulations that a person has established distinct from a state alcohol and beverage private club
membership.
Private function means the rental of a ballroom, restaurant, private club, or other facility for the sole purpose of
entertaining, private parties, events or other social functions where attendance is by invitation only.
Public business means any deliberation between a quorum of members of any board, commission, department,
committee or agency within the executive or legislative department of the state, or the city council or any board
or commission of the city at which any public business or public policy is discussed or considered or at which
any formal action is taken.
Public place.
(1) The term “public place” means any enclosed area in which the public has general access, is
invited or permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, educational facilities, health facilities,
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/554
laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, marketing establishments,
retail service establishments, retail stores, theaters, and waiting rooms.
(2) The term “public place” does not include a private residence, nor is a facility while it is being
used for a private function, such as a reception, party, etc. Private clubs are not considered a public
place.
Restaurant.
(1) The term “restaurant” means any place where food is manufactured, packaged, produced,
processed, transported, stored, sold, commercially prepared, vended, or otherwise handled. The
term includes any such place regardless of the duration of the permit or whether there is a charge
for the food. The term “restaurant” includes, but is not limited to, a coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich
shop, private or public school cafeteria, and any other eating establishment that gives or offers food
to the public, guests, or employees, including catering facilities.
(2) The term “restaurant” does not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if said cocktail lounge or
tavern is a “bar” as defined in this section. The term “restaurant” does not include private homes
where food is prepared or services for guests and individual family consumption.
Retail or service establishment means any establishments which sells goods or services to the general public,
including but not limited to any eating establishment, bar, hotel, motel, department store, grocery store,
drugstore, shopping mall, laundromat, bingo parlor, bowling center, amusement center, billiard hall, beauty shop
or barbershop and any use designated as a retail or service establishment in the city's zoning ordinance, as it
exists and as it may be amended.
Retail tobacco store means retail or service establishment whose primary business is the sale of tobacco,
tobacco products or smoking implements or other combustible products and accessories. Primary business
means to refer to an establishment that derives 90 percent or more of its gross revenues on a quarterly (threemonth)
basis from the sale of enumerated products.
Secondhand smoke means ambient smoke resulting from the act of smoking.
Sell means to offer for sale, convey, exchange, barter or trade.
Service line means any indoor line or area where persons wait for goods or service of any kind, regardless of
whether or not an exchange of money will occur. Such service includes, but is not limited to, sales, giving of
information, directions, advice, and the transfer of money or goods.
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, possessing or carrying any lighted or burning cigar, cigarette, pipe, hookah
or other water pipe, drug-related paraphernalia, or any other device that contains lighted or burning tobacco or
tobacco product, weed, plant or other combustible substance, whose smoke is intended to be inhaled.
Sports arena means sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice
rinks, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical
exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events.
Tobacco product means any tobacco, cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, flavored tobacco,
sweetened tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco, weed, plant, other product or combustible substance
which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhalation or other manner of ingestion or absorption.
Tobacco shop means a retail establishment whose annual gross revenues from the sale of tobacco and other
combustible products and smoking accessories are at least 50 percent.
Tobacco vending machine means any mechanical, electric or electronic self-serving device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens, or any other form of payments, dispenses tobacco products.
Valid identification means a valid driver's license or an identification card issued by the department of public
safety and contains a physical description and a photograph consistent with the person's appearance. The
proof of identification may include a driver's license issued by the state or another state, a passport, or an
identification card issued by a state or the federal government.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/554
Ventilation system means an HVAC system, designed by a licensed professional engineer to meet the
requirements of this article and, all other requirements of the city's building code. A ventilation system must:
(1) Provide an air change every 15 minutes;
(2) Provide exhaust air to the exterior of the building and the air from the smoking area cannot be
drawn across the nonsmoking area; and
(3) Have an air barrier system, if required by a licensed professional engineer, to prevent air from
the smoking area from being drawn across the nonsmoking area.
Workplace means any indoor or enclosed area of a structure, or portion thereof, intended for occupancy by
employees who provide primarily clerical, professional or business services of a business entity, or which
provide primarily clerical, professional or business services to other business entities or to the public at that
location. A workplace is any location in an indoor or enclosed area where an employee works or performs
services for an employer.
(1976 Code, sec. 20-80; 1998 Code, sec. 86-121; Ordinance 2009006, sec. 2(86-121), adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 36-119. Smoking prohibited.
(a) City buildings. All enclosed buildings owned, operated, controlled or leased by the city shall be
designated as nonsmoking with no designated smoking section. A person commits an offense if he smokes or
possesses a lighted or burning tobacco product in a city building. Exception: Jail cells located in city facilities
used for the holding of prisoners shall be designated as a smoking area. AU other areas, including cells used
for the holding of city prisoners, shall be designated as nonsmoking areas.
(b) Smoking prohibited in public places. A person commits an offense if he smokes or possesses a burning
tobacco, weed or other plant product of any of the following indoor or enclosed areas:
(1) Public or private schools, including trade and business schools, primary and secondary
schools, universities and community colleges.
(2) Any facility owned, operated, leased, controlled or managed by the city.
(3) Public elevators and stairwells.
(4) Buses, taxicabs, and other means of public transportation.
(5) All boarding and waiting areas within 20 feet of public transit depots.
(6) Public restrooms.
(7) Service lines.
(8) Retail or service establishments.
(9) Businesses, including all areas available to and customarily used by the general public.
(10) Aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums.
(11) Day care centers, except that day care centers that are also private homes shall be
considered private residences when the children or adults receiving care have gone home.
(12) Every publicly or privately owned theater, auditorium or other enclosed facility which is open
to the public for the primary purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, musical recital,
athletic event or any other performance or event, except when smoking is part of a stage production.
(13) Any portion of any publicly or privately owned area to which the public has access.
(14) Any seating area of any publicly or privately owned outdoor athletic facility or sports arena.
(15) Health care facilities, nursing homes and hospitals.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/554
(c) Exceptions.
(1) It is an exception to subsections (b)(1), (8), (9), (10), (12) and (15) of this section that the
smoking occurred in an administration area.
(2) It is an exception to subsections (b)(8), (9), (12) and (15) of this section that the smoking
occurred within an area designated by the owner, manager, or operator of the place or establishment
as a smoking area as provided in subsection (e) of this section.
(3) It is an exception to subsection (b)(15) of this section that the smoking occurred in a patient
room where smoking was agreeable to all patients assigned to the room and the administrator of the
facility; provided that no oxygen supply product is present in the room; provided that a sign was
present on each door leading into the room which stated: “Smoking is Permitted in this Room.”
(d) Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under:
(1) This section that the conveyance or public place within which the offense occurred did not
have prominently displayed a reasonably sized notice that smoking was prohibited.
(2) This section that facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials were not located within
the conveyance or within 20 feet of the public entrances to the place or establishment.
(3) Subsections (b)(13) and (14) of this section that the offense occurred in an open concourse
designated as a smoking area by the owner, operator or person in control of the outdoor athletic
facility, theater or amphitheater. Such open areas shall not be subject to the ventilation requirements
of subsection (f) of this section.
(e) Designated smoking areas.
(1) The owner, manager or operator of a retail or service establishment may designate a public
smoking area in such establishment, provided that the area shall be located so as to prevent the
exposure to customers of the establishment to secondhand smoke.
(2) The administrator of a hospital or health care facility may designate a public smoking area
within such facility. provided that the area shall be located so as to prevent the exposure to patients
and the general public to secondhand smoke.
(3) The owner, manager, or operator of a theater or auditorium may designate a public smoking
room within such facility. provided that the room is enclosed and located so as to prevent the
exposure to the general public within the facility to secondhand smoke.
(4) All designated smoking rooms and areas shall be equipped with ventilation systems in
compliance with subsection (f) of this section.
(5) All designated smoking rooms and areas shall be subject to the approval of the building
inspection department.
(6) The total combined floor space of the designated smoking areas or rooms in a structure shall
not exceed 50 percent of the public areas within such structure. excluding restrooms, elevators, and
eating establishments.
(7) A person commits an offense if he designates or maintains a smoking area or room in violation
of this subsection and of subsection (f) of this section.
(f) Compliance required. All designated smoking areas must comply with the following:
(1) Not exceed 50 percent of the net floor area.
(2) Be equipped with an air purification system (defined in this article) or must have a separate
ventilation system (defined in this article).
(3) Not allow the air from the smoking area to be drawn across the nonsmoking area.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/554
(4) A designated smoking area shall be situated so as to minimize the impact of smoke upon
pathways and other common areas.
(1976 Code, sec. 20-81; 1998 Code, sec. 86-122; Ordinance 2009006, sec. 2(86-122), adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 36-120. Regulation of smoking in eating establishments, nightclubs, adult entertainment
establishments, amusement centers, billiard halls, bingo parlors and bowling centers.
(a) A person commits an offense if he smokes tobacco or possesses a burning tobacco product in an eating
establishment bar, nightclub, adult entertainment establishment, amusement center, billiard hall, bingo parlor or
bowling center.
(b) An owner, manager or operator of an eating establishment, bar, nightclub, adult entertainment
establishment, amusement center, billiard hall, bingo parlor or bowling center commits an offense if he allows
smoking of a tobacco product.
(c) Exceptions.
(1) It is an exception to subsection (a) of this section that the smoking or possession occurred in
an area designated as a smoking area by the owner, manager or operator of the establishment, and
such area is in conformance with this article, and such area is marked as a smoking area.
(2) It is an exception to subsection (a) of this section that the smoking or possession occurred in
an area regulated by and in conformance with section 36-122
(3) It is an exception to subsections (a) and (b) of this section that the eating establishment, bar,
night club, adult entertainment establishment, amusement center, billiard hall or bingo parlor does
not allow or employ minors.
(d) Defenses.
(1) It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the establishment did
not have prominently displayed a reasonably sized notice that smoking was prohibited.
(2) It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the facilities for the
extinguishment of smoking materials were not located within 20 feet and outside of the public
entrances of the establishment
(e) Restaurants. All restaurants shall be nonsmoking, however a designated smoking area can be furnished
provided the designated smoking area complies with section 36-119(f).
(f) Existing restaurants.
(1) Subsection (e) of this section does not apply to any existing restaurant until two years after the
passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived. However any restaurant which
undertakes a major renovation after the said effective date shall comply with section 36-119(f).
(2) All restaurants shall be nonsmoking, however a designated smoking area can be furnished
provided the designated smoking area complies with section 36-119(f).
(3) A restaurant with a maximum occupancy of 50 seats or less is exempt from the requirements
in section 36-119(f) provided that the restaurant owner posts a sign at the restaurant's entrance that
states: “A Nonsmoking Section is Not Available.”
(4) However, an owner of a restaurant with 50 seats or less can choose to comply with the
ordinance or designate the entire restaurant as nonsmoking.
(g) The owner, manager, or operator of an eating establishment bar, nightclub, adult entertainment
establishment, amusement center, billiard hall, bingo parlor or bowling center commits an offense if he
designates or maintains a smoking area in violation of this section.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/554
(1) An eating establishment, bar, nightclub, adult entertainment establishment, amusement center,
billiard hall, bingo parlor or bowling center, which does not meet the requirement of section 36-
119(f), shall post a sign at all public entrances stating “No Smoking-City Ordinance.”
(2) The owner or manager of an establishment governed by this subsection commits an offense if
he fails to post and maintain the required signs.
(3) All children's playgrounds associated with eating establishments shall be nonsmoking. All
doors and gates leading to such play areas shall be posted, “No Smoking-City Ordinance.”
(4) An eating establishment which provides smoking areas must post a sign at all public entrances
stating “Smoking in Designated Areas Only.”
(1976 Code, sec. 20-82; 1998 Code, sec. 86-123; Ordinance 2009006, sec. 2(86-123), adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 36-121. Regulation of smoking in the workplace.
(a) An employer who owns, occupies, or controls a workplace may:
(1) Designate the workplace or portions thereof as nonsmoking areas.
(2) Have and implement a written policy on smoking which conforms to this article.
(3) Make the policy available for inspection by employees and communicate said policy to all
employees at least three weeks prior to its adoption.
(4) Prominently display reasonably sized sign; that smoking is prohibited.
(5) Provide facilities in sufficient numbers in such locations as to be readily accessible for the
extinguishment of smoking materials.
(b) A person commits an offense if he smokes or possesses a tobacco product in any portion of the
workplace which has been designated as a nonsmoking area or if he violates any other provisions adopted,
implemented, and maintained in accordance with this chapter.
(Ordinance 2009006, sec. 2(86-124), adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 36-122. Where smoking is not regulated.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject
to the smoking restrictions of this chapter:
(1) Private residences.
(2) Hotel and motel room rented to guests.
(3) Retail tobacco stores.
(4) Enclosed meeting or assembly rooms in restaurants, hotels, motels, and other public places
while the entire room is being used for a private function provided it complies with section 36-119(f)
or has a portable air purification system (defined in this article).
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who
controls any establishment described in this section may designate the entire establishment as a nonsmoking
establishment
(Ordinance 2009006, sec. 2(86-125), adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 36-123. Structural modifications not required.
Except as provided in sections 36-119(e)(4) and 36-120, nothing in this article shall require the owner, operator,
manager or other person in control any building. facility, room, establishment, or structure to incur any expense
to make structural or other physical modifications to comply with the terms and conditions of this article. The
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/554
posting of signs or the equipping of any area with facilities for the extinguishment of tobacco products shall not
be construed to be structural or other physical modifications. (Ordinance 2009006, sec. 2(86-126), adopted
4/21/09)
Sec. 36-124. Posting of signs; placing of receptacles.
(a) Signs. All signs shall be in letters not less than one inch high with a stroke of not less than one-eighth
inch on a contrasting background. Signs shall display universal “No Smoking” sign (circle with line drawn
through cigarette). Text to be in English and Spanish and verbiage to include “as defined by sections 36-118–
36-125.”
(1) A place or conveyance regulated by section 36-119; that elects to be totally nonsmoking shall
have signs conspicuously posted at all entrances which state: “No Smoking-City Ordinance.”
(2) If a place or conveyance regulated by section 36-119, has a designated smoking area, such
signs may also state: “No Smoking-Except in Designated Areas.”
(3) A designated smoking area shall have signs conspicuously posted in the area which state:
“Smoking in This Area Only.”
(4) Establishments exempt under section 36-120(c)(3), which do not provide a nonsmoking area
shall have signs conspicuously posted at all entrances which state: “We Do Not Have a Nonsmoking
Area.”
(b) Receptacles. A place, establishment or conveyance regulated by sections 36-119 or 36-120 which is
partially or totally nonsmoking shall have facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials located within no
less than two feet and not more than 20 feet of all entrances and within all designated smoking areas.
(c) Offenses.
(1) The owner, manager or operator of a place, conveyance or establishment commits an offense
if he fails to post signs and provide extinguishment facilities as required by this section.
(2) The owner, manager, or operator of a place, conveyance or establishment commits an offense
if he places or maintains facilities for the extinguishment of tobacco products in public areas other
than as provided for in subsection (b) of this section.
(Ordinance 2009006, sec. 2(86-127), adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 36-125. Exemptions.
Any owner or manager of a business, facility, room, structure, or other establishment subject to sections 36-119,
36-121 and 36-124 may apply for an exemption or modification to any provision of this article due to unusual
circumstances or conditions. Such exemption shall be granted by the board of adjustment, only if the evidence
presented by the applicant for exemption establishes either that:
(1) The applicant cannot comply with the provisions of this article for which an exemption is
requested without incurring expenses for structural or other physical modifications, other than
posting signs, to buildings and structures; or
(2) Due to such unusual circumstances, the failure to comply with the provision for which the
exemption is requested will not result in a danger to health or annoyance, inconvenience or
discomfort.
(Ordinance 2009006, sec. 2(86-128), adopted 4/21/09)
CHAPTER 38
OIL AND GAS*
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/554
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 38-1–38-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. GAS WELLS
Sec. 38-19. Purpose.
The exploration, development and production of gas in the city are activities which necessitate reasonable
regulation to ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to enjoy their property and
its benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and
uniform limitations, safeguards and regulations for operations related to the exploring, drilling, developing,
producing, transporting and storing of gas and other substances produced in association with gas within the city
to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public, minimize the potential impact to property and
mineral rights owners, protect the quality of the environment and encourage the orderly production of available
mineral and gas resources. (1998 Code, sec. 64-1; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance
2007104, sec. 2, adopted 11/6/07)
Sec. 38-20. Definitions.
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of gas wells not specifically defined
in this article shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent and reasonable gas industry
operators. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandonment means “abandonment” as that term is defined by the Texas Railroad Commission, and includes
the plugging of the well and the restoration of any well site as required by this article and applicable state law.
All-weather hard surface means a permanent surface that as a minimum is a base course constructed such that
it meets the requirements of the International Fire Code, as adopted and as may be amended, be at least 20
feet wide, have and overhead clearance of 14 feet, drains appropriately, remains water resistant, is free of litter,
debris, weeds, grass or other objectionable materials or objects and is visibly dust-free.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Berm means a mound of soil, either natural or manmade, used to obstruct a view. The side slope shall not
exceed a three-foot horizontal and a one-foot vertical slope.
Blowout preventer means a mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other device or combination of such devices
secured to the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith,
which can be closed around the drill pipe, or other tubular goods which completely close the top of the casing
and are designed for preventing blowouts.
Building means any primary structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The
term “building” shall be construed as if followed by the words “or portions thereof .”
Cathodic protection means an electrochemical corrosion control technique accomplished by applying a direct
current to the structure that causes the structure potential to change from the corrosion potential to a protective
potential in the immunity region. The required cathodic protection current is supplied by sacrificial anode
materials or by an impressed current system.
Closed loop system means a series of tanks including filters separators and shakers on the discharge side of
the drilling process that contains by-products of drilling such as cuttings and earthen materials. The means to
contain the by-products and recycle useable materials for reuse in the drilling process.
Commission means the Texas Railroad Commission.
Completion means the date the work is completed for the drilling, redrilling or reworking of a well and the crew
is released by completing its work or contract or by its employer once all phases have been completed and
natural gas is put into the pipeline.
Day means a calendar day.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/554
Derrick means any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure which is required or used in connection
with drilling or reworking a well for the production of gas.
Development review committee (DRC) means an internal staff review committee that includes, but is not limited
to, representatives of the departments of planning and development, inspections, public works, fire, police,
parks and recreation, neighborhood services, economic development and the gas inspector.
Drill site means the immediate area used during the drilling, redrilling or reworking of a well.
Drilling means digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing gas or for
the purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth.
Drilling equipment means the derrick, together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, every
piece of apparatus, machinery or equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling.
Emergency response plan means a plan put in place to deal with emergency situations that may occur at the
site during all stages of the drilling and production process.
Exploration means geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for gas or
other subsurface hydrocarbons.
Filed means administratively complete and all technical requirements have been met for purposes of review by
the appropriate authority as stated herein, including the payment of all required fees.
Fire department means the fire department of the city.
Flaring means the burning of unwanted gas through a pipe (also called a flare). Flaring is a means of disposal
used when there is no way to transport the gas to market and the operator cannot use the gas for a another
purpose.
Flow back operations includes work over and the means necessary to expel water from the drilling hole in order
to facilitate the production of gas.
FRAC tank means a manmade water storage tank designed using earthen berms to contain approximate
4,000,000 gallons of water. These can be from existing ponds or other water storage tanks. Manmade tanks
shall be lined with plastic with an appropriate mil spec rating.
Fracturing means the injecting of a fluid into a well to cause pressure that cracks or opens up fractures already
present in the formation.
Gas means any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth
and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the
gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas.
Gas inspector means an individual designated by the city manager or any other person or entity so designated
as an inspector by the city manager. The gas inspector shall report to the office of the fire marshal.
Gas well means any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of natural gas.
Generator plant means the electrical service generated on site servicing the drilling rig and all associated
equipment including personal living quarters.
Grounding and bonding means the means to ground all power and equipment on the drilling site to prevent
electrical discharges and lighting protection.
Hazardous material means a “hazardous substance” as that term is defined in the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1988, as enacted and as may be amended.
Operation site means the area used for development and production and all operational activities associated
with gas after drilling activities are complete.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/554
Operator means, for each well, the person listed on the commission's form W-1 or P-4 for a gas well that is, or
will be, actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, funding, operating, pumping or controlling any
well, including, without limitation, a unit operator, provided, however, any such person, whether listed on the
commission's form W-1 or P-4 that provides funding, drilling or operation of the well, at any time, shall be
identified and considered an operator for all purposes under this ordinance. If the operator, as herein defined, is
not the lessee under a gas lease of any premises affected by the provisions of the article, then such lessee
shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is no gas lease relating to any premises affected
by this article, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator.
Permit means any written license granted by the city for the exploration, development, and production of gas
wells issued pursuant to rules and regulations of this article, including, but not limited to, a special use permit
and/or specific use permit, as defined herein.
Person means both the singular and the plural and means a natural person, a corporation, association,
guardian, partnership, receiver, trustee, administrator, executor and fiduciary or representative of any kind.
Planning and development department means the planning and development department of the city.
Planning and zoning commission means the planning and zoning commission of the city.
Production means the period between completion of drilling and the abandonment of the well, after the
fracturing and flow back operations have been completed and natural gas has been run through a series of
separators and tank batteries to metering devices and into the pipeline.
Public building means all buildings used or designed to and intended to be used for the purpose of assembly of
persons for such purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement or health care. Public buildings include,
but shall not be limited to, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories, mortuary chapels, dance halls,
exhibition halls, museums, gymnasiums, bowling lanes, libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms, restaurants and
hospitals.
Public park.
(1) The term “public park” means any land area dedicated to and/or maintained by the city for
traditional park-like recreational purposes.
(2) The term “public park” does not include privately owned amusement parks or privately owned
golf courses.
Public works department means the public works department of the city.
Redrill means recompletion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than 150
feet from the existing well bore.
Religious institution means any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities
intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious
belief.
Residence means a house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, HUD code manufactured home or
other building designed for dwelling purposes, including those for which a building permit has been issued on
the date the application for a gas well permit is filed and accepted by the planning and development
department.
Reworking means recompletion or reentry of an existing well within the existing bore hole or by deepening or
sidetrack operations which do not extend more than 150 feet from the existing well bore, or replacement of well
liners or casings.
Rig-down means the day drilling has been completed and the rig is dissembled and all equipment prepared
from movement from the pad site.
Rig-up means the process of setting up equipment and the drilling rig in order to start the drilling process.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/554
Right-of-way means any area of land within the city that is acquired by, dedicated to, or claimed by the city in
fee simple, by easement, by prescriptive right or other interest and that is expressly or impliedly accepted or
used in fact or by operation of law as public roadway, sidewalk, alley, utility, drainage or public access
easement or used for the provision of governmental services or functions. The term includes the area on, below
and above the surface of the public right-of-way. The term applies regardless of whether the public right-of-way
is paved or unpaved.
Right-of way maintenance agreement means a written agreement obligating the operator to repair damage,
excluding ordinary wear and tear, if any, including, but not limited to, public streets, sidewalks, pathways, trails
and bridges, caused by the operator or its employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors or representatives in
the performance of drilling or production of gas wells authorized by the city.
School means any public or private primary and secondary educational facilities providing education up through
and including the 12th grade level and any licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the state or
by the city that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six children
under 14 years of age, and for less than 24 hours per day.
Special use permit means permit issued from the office of the fire marshal for specific uses such as perforating
operations, wire line logging and welding.
Specific use permit means the use permit recommended by the planning and zoning commission, and
approved by council, subject to situational suitability as provided by the city's zoning ordinance, as approved
and as it may be amended.
Street means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way,
including the entire right-of-way.
Tank means a container, covered or uncovered, used in connection with the drilling or production of gas or
other hydrocarbons for holding or storing fluids.
Technical advisor means such person familiar with and educated in the gas industry or the law as it relates to
gas matters who may be retained from time to time by the city, as provided in section 38-37.
Thoroughfare plan means the thoroughfare plan approved by the city.
Well means any single hole or bore to any horizon, formation, or strata, for the purpose of producing gas, liquid
hydrocarbon, brine water or sulphur water, or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal or
production of gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth. For each separate new hole a gas well permit is
required.
Wire line logging means the use of radioactive isotopes which are used when measuring formations within the
immediate vicinity of the drilling hole.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-2; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-21. Penalty for violation.
(a) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to intentionally or knowingly:
(1) Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of a gas well permit issued under this article;
(2) Fail to comply with any condition set forth in a gas well permit issued under this article; or
(3) Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article.
(b) Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 per violation per day,
subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) The penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law, including, but
not limited to, the recovery of civil penalties under Texas Local Government Code ch. 54, subch. B. The city
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violation of
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/554
this article. The power of injunction may be exercised in enforcing this article whether or not there has been a
criminal complaint filed.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-21; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-22. City oversight.
(a) The city council shall retain the services of a gas inspector who shall enforce the provisions of this article.
The gas inspector may have a degree in petroleum engineering with a background in drilling and production or
demonstrate a proven background in the drilling, production, and operation of gas wells; provided, however,
said gas inspector shall possess all required state law certifications and licenses. The gas inspector and other
city officials shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the intent and
purpose of this article and its particular provisions. Failure of any person to comply with any such order or
directive shall constitute a violation of this article. The gas inspector shall report to the office of the fire marshal.
(b) The gas inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of
this article to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards or directives of the city or state. Failure of any person to permit access to the gas inspector shall
constitute a violation of this article.
(c) The gas inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records, including any records sent
to the commission, logs, reports and the like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well necessary
to establish and determine compliance with the applicable permit. Failure of any person to provide any such
requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article.
(d) The gas inspector shall conduct periodic inspections at least once a year of all permitted wells in the city
to determined that the wells are operating in accordance with proper safety regulations as set out in this article
and in regulations of the commission.
(e) The gas inspector and other city officials authorized to enforce the provisions of this article or other
ordinances and codes adopted by the city council shall have the authority to issue any orders, citations, notices
of violation or directives required to carry the intent and purpose of this article and its provisions.
(f) The gas inspector shall ensure that the drilling site meets all site plan conditions as approved in the drilling
permit. The gas inspector shall have the authority to recommend changes to any site plan in order to preserve
and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, including, but not limited to, public
infrastructures, such as roads and utilities.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-3; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-23. Operator's agent.
Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the state, upon whom all orders and
notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator
designating such agent shall within ten days notify the city manager or the city manager's designee, in writing,
of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the city are discontinued. Failure
to do so shall be deemed a violation of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 64-4; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted
4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted 11/6/07)
Sec. 38-24. Seismic survey permit requirements.
A permit shall be required for seismic surveys. No seismic survey permit shall be granted unless the applicant
shows proof of lease of mineral property within 200 feet of the right-of-way on which the survey is to be
conducted. All seismic survey permit applications shall be submitted to the city manager or the city manager's
designee for approval. The seismic survey shall not begin prior to the issuance of a seismic survey permit from
the city. Failure to obtain a permit consistent with this article, or commencing work without a permit, shall be
deemed a violation of this article. A permit shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:
(1) Operator/applicant name, phone number, fax number, physical address, and, if possible, email
address; if the operator is a corporation, the state of the incorporation, and if the operator is a
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/554
partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners shall be provided.
(2) Detailed mapping of location and extent of seismic survey.
(3) Date and time the seismic survey will be conducted and completed.
(4) Detailed explanation of the seismic survey method to be used on site.
(5) If the seismic survey is conducted in any city right-of-way then the operator must reimburse all
costs to the city for any damages associated with the seismic survey.
(6) The permit fee for a seismic survey on city property shall set by the city council on a case-bycase
basis, calculated based upon a minimum $0.25 per linear foot, plus the costs of barricade
rental and personnel required to direct and divert traffic if city forces and materials are used.
(7) An operator must submit a traffic safety and management plan with the application for a
specific use permit with all seismic surveys that are conducted within the right-of-way.
(8) Under no circumstances may explosive charges, including, but not limited to, the use of
dynamite, be used in any way related to the preparation and/or operation of conducting a seismic
survey.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-5; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-25. Gas well permit requirements.
(a) A person wanting to engage in and/or operate gas production activities shall apply for and obtain a gas
well permit under this article and shall indicate what type of well permit is requested. It shall be unlawful for any
person acting either for himself or acting as an agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any
person to drill any well, assist in any way in the site preparation, reworking, fracturing or operation of any such
well or to conduct any activity related to the production of gas without first obtaining a gas well permit issued by
the city in accordance with this article. Such activities include, but are not limited to, reworking, initial site
preparation, drilling, operation, construction of rigs or tank batteries, fracturing and pressurizing.
(b) The operator must apply for and obtain a gas well permit for the drilling of each well. The operator shall
neither apply nor obtain a blanket permit for more than one well if multiple wells are located on the same tract of
land. Each new well established at the ground surface will be considered and require a new gas well permit.
(c) An existing gas well permit shall not constitute authority for the re-entering and drilling of an abandoned
well. An operator shall obtain a new well permit in accordance with the provisions of this article if the operator is
reentering and drilling an abandoned well.
(d) When a gas well permit has been issued to the operator for the drilling, reentering, activating or
converting of a well, such gas well permit shall constitute sufficient authority for drilling, operation, production
gathering or production maintenance, repair, reworking, testing, plugging and abandonment of the well and/or
any other activity associated with mineral exploration at the site of such well. An amended gas well permit shall
be obtained before such well may be modified for purposes of redrilling, deepening or converting such well to a
depth or use other than that set forth in the then current permit for such well.
(e) Any person who intends to rework a permitted well using a drilling rig to fracture stimulate (fracturing) a
permitted well after initial completion or to conduct seismic surveys or other exploration activities shall give
written notice to the gas inspector no less than ten days before the activities begin. The notice must identify
where the activities will be conducted and must describe the activities in detail, including, but not limited to,
whether explosive charges will be used, the duration of the activities and the time the activities will be
conducted. The notice must also provide the address and 24-hour telephone number of the person conducting
the activities. The person conducting the activities shall post a sign on the property giving the public notice 48
hours in advance of the fracturing activities. The sign shall comply with the requirements of section 38-33, onsite
and technical regulations, and section 38-33(z)(1), signs.
(f) Well setbacks for gas well permits.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/554
(1) It shall be unlawful to drill, redrill, deepen, reenter, activate or convert any well, the center of
which, at the surface of the ground, is located:
a. Within 600 feet from any playgrounds, competition athletic fields, swimming pools, water
slides and playgrounds, concession stands, pavilions or picnic areas within a public park;
b. Within 600 feet from any residence, religious institution, public building, retail or
commercial building, hospital building or school for which a building permit has been issued on
the date of the application for a gas well permit is filed with the planning and development
department;
c. Within 75 feet of any public street, road, highway, or right-of-way line;
d. Within 200 feet of any existing potable water well;
e. Within 150 feet of any property line.
The measurement of all distances shall be calculated from the proposed well bore, in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the object listed in
subsections (f)(1)a through e of this section. The calculations set forth in this subsection (f) shall be
prepared by a registered professional land surveyor and contain his professional seal.
(2) Tank batteries, separators and compressors shall be located at least 600 feet from any public
play ground, competition athletic field, picnic area within a public park, or from any residence,
religious institution, public building, hospital building or school, or any other building used, or
designed and intended to be used, for human occupancy, for which a building permit has been
issued on the date of the application for a gas well permit is filed. The distance shall be calculated
from the closest tank batteries, separators or compressors, in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, to the closest part of the playground, competition athletic field,
picnic area, residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or schools, or any other
building used or designed and intended to be used for human occupancy.
(3) The distances set out in subsection (f)(1) and (2) of this section may be reduced at the
discretion of the city council pursuant to section 38-38, appeals, but never less than 300 feet except
as provided by subsection (f)(4) of this section. All distance reductions shall be documented as
exceptions to the requested permit prior to issuance.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, wells may be drilled no closer than 150 feet
from existing residences that are occupied by persons who in writing consent to the request to drill
the well if approved by a majority vote of the city council pursuant to section 38-38. Said written
consent is required from all residences occupied by persons within 300 feet of a proposed well bore
prior to an application for a well permit being processed by city staff. Wells may be redrilled,
deepened, re-entered, activated or converted if no closer than 150 feet from any residence
constructed after the well was originally drilled without such consent. The term “consent,” required
by this subsection. means the written consent of every adult claiming an ownership or leasehold
interest in such residence.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, new residences may be built no closer than 150
feet from an existing well.
(g) A gas well permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended, if drilling is not commenced within 90
days from the date of the issuance of the permit. A well permit may be extended by the gas inspector for an
additional 90 days upon written request by the operator and proof that the regulatory standards of the
requested permit for such location have not changed.
(h) Permits required by this article are in addition to and are not in lieu of any permit which may be required
by any other provision of this Code or by any other governmental agency.
(i) No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within the floodway identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on the most current federal insurance rate map (FIRM). Gas wells
proposed in the floodplain outside of the floodway shall comply with the requirements for development in
chapter 24, flood damage prevention.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/554
(j) No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled that is not in compliance with any standard,
provision, procedure and/or recommendation as described in the city's public works design manual as adopted
and as may be amended.
(k) By acceptance of any permit issued pursuant to this article, the operator expressly stipulates and agrees
to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this article. The terms of this article shall be deemed to be
incorporated in any permit issued pursuant to this article with the same force and effect as if this article was set
forth verbatim in such permit.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-6; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-26. Notice for gas well permit.
(a) Every application for a gas well permit issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing signed by the
operator, or some person duly authorized to sign on his behalf, and filed with the city manager, or the city
manager's designee, and shall be processed consistent with the city's zoning ordinance for specific use
permits, as adopted and as may be amended, and incorporated therein for all purposes.
(b) Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established in section 38-39. The
application shall include the following information:
(1) The date of the application and type of permit requested.
(2) An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for the operation site, the parcel
and the production unit and name of the geologic formation as used by the commission. Property
recorded by plat shall reference subdivision, block and lot numbers.
(3) Map showing proposed transportation routes and roads for equipment, chemicals or waste
products used or produced by the gas operation. This proposed truck route shall include a traffic
management plan, and identify all on-and off-site city thoroughfares and infrastructure.
(4) Proposed well name and well depth,
(5) Surface owner name, telephone number, fax number, physical address, and, if possible, e-mail
address, of the lease property.
(6) Mineral lessee name, telephone number, fax number, physical address, and, if possible, e-mail
address.
(7) Operator/applicant name, telephone number, fax number, physical address. and if possible, email
address and if the operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a
partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners.
(8) Name, telephone number, fax number physical address of individual designated to receive
notice, and/or registered agent, and, if possible, e-mail address.
(9) Names and address of representatives or operator's agent with supervisory authority over all
gas operation site activities and a 24-hour telephone number.
(10) Location and description of all improvements and structures within 800 feet of the well. Name
of the owner and address of each parcel of property within 600 feet of proposed site. Such locations
and descriptions shall be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor and shall contain his
professional seal.
(11) A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of all improvements and
equipment, including the location of the proposed wells and other facilities, including, but not limited
to, tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators and storage tanks or storage sheds. All site plans must
include the following criteria and shall be submitted for approval as part of the specific use permit:
a. Property boundaries with dimensions and setback lines.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/554
b. Location of proposed buildings and structures indicating sizes in square feet.
c. The location and intensity of exterior lighting fixtures.
d. The location of mechanical equipment.
e. Outside storage areas.
f. Curb cut locations.
g. Parking. loading. and maneuvering areas.
h. The location, materials and dimensions of screening improvements as required by section
38-34, fences; screening.
i. A separate plan sheet showing the location, materials and dimensions of all screening
improvements as require by section 38-34, fences; screening.
j. Waste disposal locations with screening.
k. Adjacent property lines, streets, easements immediately adjacent to the operation site.
l. Names of owners of property immediately adjacent to the operation site.
m. Names of subdivisions immediately adjacent to the operation.
n. Site plans shall be submitted on a sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches minimum.
o. City boundaries where applicable.
p. Date the drawing was prepared with name, address, and phone number of preparer.
q. Location, width, purpose of all existing easements.
r. North arrow, at a maximum scale of 1:50 immediately adjacent to the operation site.
s. All existing street names immediately adjacent to the operation site.
t. Dimensions of all existing rights-of-way as specified on the city's thoroughfare plan.
u. Title block identifying gas well site location.
v. Vicinity location map at one inch equals 2,000 feet.
w. Zoning classifications of all properties shown on the site plan.
x. Location of 100-year flood limits where applicable.
y. Texas NAD83 State Plane Coordinates for at least two comers.
z. As a minimum, a preliminary drainage study as identified in the public works design
manual.
(12) Name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person to be notified in case of emergency.
(13) Exact acreage and number of wells, if applicable, included in the gas well permit application.
(14) Copies of all reports required by the commission, specifically including a copy of the
approved commission form W-1 and/or P-4.
(15) A signed right-of-way maintenance agreement supplied by the city that provides that the
operator shall repair, at his own expense, any damage caused by any activity associated with the
preparation, drilling, production, and operation of wells.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/554
(16) A description of public utilities required during drilling and site operations.
(17) A description of the water source to be used during drilling.
(18) A copy of the storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as required by the commission,
the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (USEPA) and/or the city. A copy of the notice of intent (NOI) shall be submitted to
the public works department at least three days prior to the commencement of any onsite activity.
(19) A copy of the determination by the TCEQ of the depth of useable quality groundwater.
(20) Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this article.
(21) A statement, under oath, signed by the operator or designated representative, that the
information submitted with the application is, to the best knowledge and belief of the operator or
designated representative, true and correct, and as such is a government record.
(22) All required application and permit fees.
(23) A tree preservation plan that conforms to chapter 58, pertaining to tree preservation.
(24) A copy of a hazardous materials management plan and additionally, all material safety data
sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials that will be located, stored, transported and/or
temporarily used on the drilling site shall be provided to the gas inspector and the fire department.
(c) Vehicle routes for gas well permit. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three
tons shall be restricted to such streets designated as either truck routes or commercial delivery routes by this
Code wherever capable of being used. All vehicles shall be operated on a truck route wherever capable of
being used; they shall be operated on a commercial delivery route only when it is not possible to use a truck
route to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. In the event that an approved route is
unavailable, the operator shall propose an alternative route that may be approved by the city manager or city
manager's designee, if temporary. Any permanent alternative route must be approved by the city council as an
amendment to the specific use permit. The term “commercial delivery route” means any street or highway so
designated by the city council for the use by any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer or
any combination thereof .
(d) Building permit required.
(1) No building or structure regulated by this Code shall be erected, constructed, enlarged,
altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate permit for
each building or structure has first been obtained from the director of the planning and development
department, or the director's designee. No subdivision plat will be required.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of any person, firm, or corporation, upon submittal of an
application for a building permit for work regulated by this current Code, to register as a general
contractor with the city. Work regulated includes, but is not limited to, construction of gates, fencing,
plumbing, irrigation, electricity, roadways, entrances, compressors, flow lines, pipelines, gathering
lines, tank batteries, and buildings. Such registration shall be upon forms supplied by the director of
the planning and development department, or the director's designee, and shall become null and
void on December 31 of each year. An appropriate fee for registration shall be assessed in
accordance with the city fee schedule. Copies of any and all state licenses required for the
performance of any activity to be conducted shall be submitted with the application.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-7; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-27. Gas well permit applications; specific use permit.
(a) A gas well permit shall be required in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(b) Notice for a gas well permit:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/554
(1) At least ten days prior to the date of filing of an application for a gas well permit with the gas
inspector under this article, the operator shall notify, at the expense of the operator, each surface
owner of property, as shown by the current tax roll, within 600 feet of the proposed well not owned
by or under lease to the operator. Such notice, as outlined in subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall
be by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. The
operator shall file with the application an affidavit showing the name and last known address, as
identified by the current tax roll, of each owner of property to whom notice was mailed and the
names of each owner of property to whom notice is required to be given, but whose address is
unknown. Notice shall be sent to all registered neighborhood associations within one-half mile of the
proposed drill site.
(2) At least ten days prior to the date of filing of an application for a gas well permit under this
article with the gas inspector, the operator shall publish a copy of the notice as outlined below, at the
expense of the operator, in one issue of a daily newspaper of the city for ten consecutive days. An
affidavit by the printer or publisher of the newspaper indicating publication of the notice shall be filed
with the application and will be prima facie evidence of such publication. The notice shall read as
follows:
“Notice is hereby given that, acting under and pursuant to the Ordinances of the City of Forest Hill,
Texas, on the _____ day of _____________, 20___, _______________, will file with the gas
inspector of the City of Forest Hill, an application to drill, complete and operate a well for gas upon
property located at _______________, Forest Hill, Tarrant County, Texas, more particularly shown
on the map of record in Volume _____, Page _____, Plat records of County, Texas or per Tax Tract
Number _____, Tarrant County, Texas.”
(3) At least 20 days prior to the date of filing of an application for a gas well permit under this
article with the gas inspector, the operator, at operator's expense, shall erect at least one sign, no
less than three feet by three feet, upon the premises upon which a gas well permit has been
requested. Where possible, the sign or signs shall be located in a conspicuous place or places upon
the property at a point or points nearest any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare
adjacent to such property.
a. The sign shall substantially indicate that a gas well permit to drill for gas has been
requested and shall further set forth that additional information can be acquired by telephoning
the operator at the number indicated on the sign.
b. The continued maintenance of any such sign shall not be deemed a condition precedent
to the holding of a public hearing or to any other official action concerning this article.
c. Any sign shall be removed subsequent to final action by the gas inspector.
(4) All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient upon substantial compliance
with this section.
(c) Processing of gas well permit. The gas inspector shall not be required to accept or process a gas well
permit application until the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed activities are in compliance with the
provisions of the city's comprehensive zoning Ordinance No. 820, as it may be amended.
(d) All other provisions outlined in this article shall be required.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-8; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-28. Permitting procedure.
(a) All gas well permit applications will be filed with the city manager, or the city manager's designee. The city
manager, or the city manager's designee, shall refer such applications to fire department and other city
departments which the city manager deems appropriate.
(b) It is the responsibility of the city manager, or the city manager's designee, to review and approve or
disapprove all applications for gas well drilling permits based on the criteria established by this article and in
accordance with the specific use permit.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/554
(c) The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall within 45 days after the filing of a completed
application and remittance of all fees, insurance, bond and security per the requirements of this article for a gas
well permit, shall determine whether the permit application shall be approved or denied.
(d) The provisions of this article shall apply to any dwellings or buildings for which an application for a
building permit has been submitted on the date the application for a gas well permit is filed with the city
manager or the city manager's designee.
(1) All new and/or proposed construction of any buildings, structures, streets, roads, and/or
applicable improvements to the property upon which any gas well is located must be in compliance
with all applicable setback requirements enumerated in this article.
(2) If all the requirements of this article and the specific use permit are met, the city manager, or
the city manager's designee, shall issue a permit for the drilling of the well or the installation of the
facilities for which a permit application was made consistent with the terms and conditions of the
specific use permit.
(3) If the city council denies a permit application for the requested gas well permit, the city
manager, or the city manager's designee, shall notify the operator in writing of such denial stating
the reasons for the denial. Within 30 days of the date of the written decision to deny the permit, the
operator may cure those conditions that caused the denial and resubmit the application to the city
manager, or city manager's designee, for reconsideration of approval and issuance of the permit.
Additionally, the operator may file an appeal to the city council under the provisions outlined in this
article pursuant to section 38-38
(4) The failure of the city manager, or the city manager's designee, to review and issue a permit
within the time limits specified of this subsection (d) shall not cause the application to be deemed
approved. The failure of the city manager, or the city manager's designee, to act within the time limit
shall be deemed a disapproval. The operator may file an appeal to the city council under the
provisions outlined in this article pursuant to section 38-18
(e) If an application for a permit is denied by the city, nothing contained in this section shall prevent a new
permit application from being submitted to the city manager, or the city manager's designee, for the same well.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-9; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-29. Amended gas well permits.
(a) An amended permit may be issued for, but not limited to, the following changes in drill and/or operational
site activities:
(1) Redrilling;
(2) Deepening beyond 150 feet of the permitted depth;
(3) Site access;
(4) Locations and/or quantities of equipment as determined by the gas inspector;
(5) Locations and/or number of drilling fluid or other types of pits; and
(6) Locations and/or number of buildings and structures.
(b) Applications for amended permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the operator, and shall include the
following:
(1) An application fee in the amount as established in section 38-39
(2) A description of the proposed amendments;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/554
(3) Any changes to the information submitted with the application for existing permit (if such
information has not previously been provided to the city);
(4) Such additional information as is reasonably required by the gas inspector to demonstrate
compliance with the applicable permit;
(5) Such additional information as is reasonably required by the gas inspector to prevent imminent
destruction of property or injury to persons; and
(6) An amended site plan will be required.
(c) All applications for amended permits shall be filed with city manager, or the city manager's designee, for
review by the city. Incomplete applications may be returned to the applicant, in which case the city shall provide
a written explanation of the deficiencies; however, the city shall retain the application fee. The city may return
any application as incomplete if there is a dispute pending before the commission regarding the determination
of the operator.
(d) If the activities proposed by the amendment are not materially different from the activities covered by the
existing permit then the city manager or the city manager's designee, shall approve or disapprove the
amendment within 15 days after the application is filed.
(e) If the activities proposed by the amendment are materially different from the activities covered by the
existing permit, and do not create a risk of destruction of property or injury to persons, then the city manager, or
the city manager's designee, shall approve or disapprove the amendment within 45 days after the application is
filed. If, however, the activities proposed by the amendment are materially different and, in the judgment of the
gas inspector, the city manager, or the city manager's designee, might create a risk of destruction of property or
injury to persons that were not associated with the activities covered by the existing permit or that were not
otherwise taken into consideration by the existing permit, the city manager or the city manager's designee, may
require the amendment to be processed as a new permit application.
(f) The failure of the city manager or the city manager's designee, to review and issue an amended permit
within the time limits specified in this section shall not cause the application for the amended permit to be
deemed approved. Further, the decision of the city manager, or the city manager's designee, to deny an
amendment to a permit shall be provided to the operator in writing within the time period indicated in
subsections (d) and (e) of this section, including an explanation of the basis for the decision. The operator may
appeal any such denial to the city council, if such an appeal is filed within ten days after such denial, as
provided by section 38-38
(1998 Code, sec. 64-10; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-30. Suspension or revocation of gas well permits.
(a) If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or representatives) fails to comply with any
requirement of a permit (including any requirement incorporated by reference as part of the permit), the gas
inspector shall give written notice to the operator specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a
reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the failure, the extent of the efforts
required to cure, and the potential impact on the health, safety and welfare of the community. In no event,
however, shall the cure period be less than ten days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent danger of
property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as
required by this article.
(b) If the operator fails to correct the noncompliance, the city may suspend or revoke the permit pursuant to
the provisions of this article.
(c) No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of the permit issued under this article
during any period of any permit suspension or revocation or pending a review of the decision or order of the city
in suspending or revoking the permit. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the necessary,
diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or revocation
of the permit was ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the commission.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/554
(d) If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the city, upon
written notice to the operator, may notify the commission and request that the commission take any appropriate
action.
(e) An operator may, within ten days of the date of the decision of the city in writing to suspend or revoke a
permit, file an appeal to the city council under the provisions outlined in this article pursuant to section 38-38
(1998 Code, sec. 64-11; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-31. Periodic reports.
(a) The operator shall notify the gas inspector of any changes to the following information within ten days
after the change occurs:
(1) The name, physical address, telephone number, and fax number, of the operator;
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the person designated to receive notices from
the city (which person must be a resident of the state that can be served in person or by registered
or certified mail) and/or its registered agent; and
(3) The operators emergency action response plan (including “drive-to-maps” from public rightsof-
way to each drill site).
(b) The operator shall notify in writing the gas inspector and the city manager, or the city managers designee,
of any change to the name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person with supervisory authority over
drilling or operations activities within one business day of said change.
(c) The operator shall provide a copy of any incident reports or written complaints submitted to the
commission and a copy to the city within 15 days after the operator has notice of the existence of such reports
or complaints.
(d) Beginning on December 31 after each well is completed, and continuing on each December 31 thereafter
until the operator notifies the gas inspector and the city manager, or the city managers designee, in writing, that
the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall submit a written report to the city
manager or the city managers designee, identifying any changes to the information that was included in the
application for the applicable permit that have not been previously reported to the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-12; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-32. Bond, letters of credit, indemnity, insurance.
(a) General requirements. The operator shall be required to:
(1) Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the permit issued hereunder.
(2) Promptly clear drill and operation sites of all litter, trash, waste and other substances used,
allowed, or occurring in the operations, and after abandonment or completion grade, level and
restore such property to the same surface conditions as nearly as possible as existed before
operations.
(3) Indemnification and express negligence provisions. Operators shall sign each permit and the
city shall retain a signed original. Each such permit issued by the city shall include the following
language:
“Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge all claims, demands, actions, judgments,
and executions which it ever had, or now has or may have, or assigns may have, or claim to have,
against the City of Forest Hill, Texas, and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, successors,
assigns, sponsors, volunteers, or employees, created by, or arising out of personal injuries, known
or unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in any way incidental to or in connection
with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a permit. The operator shall fully
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/554
defend, protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Forest Hill, Texas, its departments, agents,
officers, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from and against each
and every claim, demand, or cause of action and any and all liability, damages, obligations,
judgments, losses, fines, penalties, costs, fees and expenses incurred in defense of the City of
Forest Hill, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees, including, without
limitation, personal injuries and death in connection therewith which may be made or asserted by
operator, its agents, assigns, or any third parties on account of, arising out of, or in any way
incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a
permit. The operator agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Forest Hill, Texas, its
departments, its officers, agents, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers
from any liabilities or damages suffered as a result of claims, demands, costs, or judgments against
the city, its departments, its officers, agents, servants or employees, created by, or arising out of the
acts or omissions of the City of Forest Hill, Texas, occurring on the drill site or operation site in the
course and scope of inspecting and permitting the wells including, but not limited to, claims and
damages arising in whole or in part from the negligence of the City of Forest Hill, Texas, occurring on
the drill site or operation site in the course and scope of inspecting and permitting gas wells. It is
understood and agreed that the indemnity provided for in this section is an indemnity extended by
the operator to indemnify and protect the City of Forest Hill, Texas, and/or its departments, agents,
officers, servants or employees from the consequences of the negligence of the City of Forest Hill,
Texas, and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees, whether that negligence is
the sole or contributing cause of the resultant injury, death and/or damage.”
(4) Promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments imposed due to breach of any terms
of the permit.
(5) Promptly restore to its former condition any public property damaged by the gas operation.
(6) An operator may not commence or continue with drilling operations unless and until all
requirements relative to the bond, letter of credit and/or insurance are satisfied. Any permit will be
suspended consistent herein for failure to maintain in full force and effect any such requirements as
stated herein or in the specific use permit and it shall be a specific element of default for such failure.
(b) Bond, irrevocable letter of credit. Prior to the issuance of a gas well permit the operator shall provide the
city manager, or the city manager's designee, with a security instrument in the form of a bond or an irrevocable
letter of credit as follows:
(1) Bond. A bond shall be executed by a reliable surety, bonding or insurance institution
authorized to do business in the state, acceptable to the city. The bond shall become effective on or
before the date the gas well permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period
of six months after the expiration of the permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and
the site is restored, whichever occurs last. The operator shall be listed as principal and the
instrument shall run to the city, as obligee, and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with
the terms and regulations of this article, the specific use permit and all applicable city ordinances.
The original bond shall be submitted to the city manager, or the city manager's designee, with a
copy of the same provided to the city secretary.
(2) Letter of credit. An irrevocable letter of credit shall be issued by a reliable bank authorized to
do business in the state and shall become effective on or before the date the permit is issued. The
letter of credit shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six months after the expiration
of the permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored, whichever
occurs last. The city shall be authorized to draw upon such letter of credit to recover any fines,
penalties or costs assessed under this article or for purposes stated herein. Evidence of the
execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted to the city by submitting an original signed letter of
credit from the banking institution, to the city manager, or the city manager's designee, with a copy
of the same provided to the city secretary.
(3) The principal amount of any security instrument shall be $50,000.00 for any single well. If,
after completion of a well, the applicant/operator, who initially posted a $50,000.00 bond or letter of
credit, has complied with all of the provisions of this article and whose well in the producing stage
and all drilling operations have ceased, may submit a request to the city manager or the city
manager's designee to reduce the existing bond or letter of credit to $10,000.00 for the remainder of
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/554
the time the well produces without reworking. During reworking operations, the amount of the bond
or letter of credit shall be maintained at $50,000.00. If at any time after no less than a 15-day written
notice to the operator and a public hearing, the city council shall deem any operator's bond or letter
of credit to be insufficient, it may require the operator to increase the amount of the bond or letter of
credit up to a maximum of $250,000.00 per well.
(4) Whenever the city manager, or the city manager's designee, finds that a default has occurred
in the performance of any requirement or condition imposed by this article, the specific use permit,
or applicable city ordinance a written notice shall be given to the operator and in accordance with the
requirements of the bond and/or letter of credit. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the
estimated cost and the period of time deemed by the city manager, or the city manager's designee,
to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the
operator shall, within the time therein specified, either cause or require the work to be performed, or
failing to do so, shall pay over to the city 125 percent of the estimated cost of doing the work as set
forth in the notice. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than 30 days unless the failure
presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves
the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article. The city shall be
authorized to draw against any irrevocable letter of credit or bond to recover such amount due from
the operator. Upon receipt of such monies, the city shall proceed by such mode as deemed
convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be
incurred other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well has not been
properly abandoned under the regulations of the commission, such additional money may be
demanded from the operator as is necessary to properly plug and abandon the well and restore the
drill site in conformity with the regulations of this article.
(5) In the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or refuses to pay
over to the city the estimated cost of the work to be done as set forth in the notice, or the issuer of
the security instrument refuses to honor any draft by the city against the applicable irrevocable letter
of credit or bond, the city may proceed to obtain compliance and abate the default by way of civil
action against the operator, or by criminal action against the operator, or by both such methods.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall avail itself of all available legal remedies against all
potential parties, including, but not limited to, persons with an interest in the property, operator,
surety and financial institution.
(6) When the well or wells covered by said irrevocable letters of credit or bond have been properly
abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this article, and in conformity with all regulations of
the commission, and notice to that effect has been received by the city, or upon receipt of a
satisfactory substitute, the irrevocable letter of credit or bond issued in compliance with these
regulations shall be terminated and cancelled.
(7) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the bond and/or letter of credit may be used
for the following nonexhaustive purposes in conjunction with other purposes stated herein: to
mitigate public losses suffered by the city associated with a well-based operation emergency, road
repair or other infrastructure damages, and/or sales tax losses.
(c) Insurance. In addition to the bond or letter of credit required pursuant to this article, the operator shall
carry a policy or policies of insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business
in the state. In the event such insurance policy or policies are cancelled, the permit shall be suspended on such
date of cancellation and the operator's right to operate under such permit shall immediately cease until the
operator files additional insurance as provided herein.
(1) General requirements applicable to all policies.
a. The city, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an additional
insured to all policies except employer's liability coverage under the operator's workers
compensation policy.
b. All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for environmental pollution
liability (seepage and pollution coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be on a
claims-made basis.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/554
c. All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-: VIII or better rating by the most
current version of the A.M. Best Key Rating Guide or with such other financially sound
insurance carriers acceptable to the city.
d. Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and shall be on a per occurrence
basis unless otherwise stipulated herein.
e. Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the City Manager, City of Forest Hill, 6800
Forest Drive, Forest Hill, Texas 76140, evidencing all the required coverages, including
endorsements, prior to the issuance of a permit.
f. All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery in
favor of the city.
g. Any failure on part of the city to request required insurance documentation shall not
constitute a waiver of the insurance requirement specified herein.
h. Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum 30-day notice of
cancellation, nonrenewal, and/or material change in policy terms or coverage.
i. During the term of the permit, the operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the city
manager, or the city manager's designee, any known loss occurrence which could give rise to
a liability claim or lawsuit or which could result in a property loss.
j. Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the city.
(2) Standard commercial general liability policy. This coverage must include premises, operations,
blowout or explosion, products, completed operation, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket
contractual liability, underground resources damage, broad form property damage, independent
contractors protective liability and personal injury. This coverage shall be a minimum combined
single limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence location for bodily injury and property damage.
(3) Excess or umbrella liability. If the operator has a standalone environmental pollution liability
(EPL) policy, $5,000,000.00 excess. If the operator does not have a standalone environmental
pollution liability (EPL) policy, $10,000,000.00 excess. Coverage must include an endorsement for
sudden or accidental pollution. If seepage and pollution coverage is written on a claims-made basis,
the operator must maintain continuous coverage and purchase extended coverage period insurance
when necessary.
(4) Environmental pollution liability coverage. Operator shall purchase and maintain in force for
the duration of the permit, insurance for environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury,
property damage, including loss of use of damaged property or of property that has not been
physically injured or destroyed; cleanup costs; and defense, including costs and expenses incurred
in the investigation, defense or settlement of claims; all in connection with any loss arising from the
insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least $1,000,000.00 per loss, with an
annual aggregate of at least $10,000,000.00.
a. Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the
escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases,
waste material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants.
b. The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage
period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that
any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the
issuance of the permit by the city.
(5) Control of well. The policy should cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control,
redrilling or restoration expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the
operator and related expenses, including, but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and
evacuation of residents.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/554
a. $5,000,000.00 per occurrence/no aggregate, if available, otherwise an aggregate of
$10,000,000.00.
b. $500,000.00 sublimit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the
operator has care, custody and control.
(6) Workers compensation and employers liability insurance. Workers compensation benefits shall
be state statutory limits. Employer's liability shall be a minimum of $500,000.00 per accident. Such
coverage shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city and provide coverage in
accordance with applicable state and federal laws.
(7) Automobile liability insurance. Combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for
bodily injury and property damage. Coverage must include all owned, hired and not-owned
automobiles.
(8) Certificates of insurance. The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the
state, unless the coverage is written by a surplus lines insurer. The insurance set forth by the
insurance company must be underwritten on forms that have been approved by the state board of
insurance or insurance services office (ISO), or an equivalent policy form acceptable to the city, with
the exception of environmental pollution liability and control of well coverage, shall set forth all
endorsements and insurance coverage according to requirements and instructions contained herein,
and specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination or change in coverage provisions to
the city. All policies shall be endorsed to read:
“This Policy Will Not be Cancelled or Nonrenewed Without 30 Days' Advance Written Notice to the
Owner and the City Except When this Policy is Being Cancelled for Nonpayment of Premium, in
Which Case 10 Days' Advance Written Notice is Required.”
Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section shall be furnished with the
certificates of insurance.
(9) Notice. The individual designated to receive notice shall be a resident of the state upon whom
all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified
mail. Every operator shall within ten days notify the city manager, or the city manager's designee, in
writing of any change in such agent or mailing address unless operations in the city are discontinued
and abandonment is complete.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-13; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-33. On-site and technical regulations.
(a) Abandoned wells. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the commission; however,
all well casings shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least ten feet below the surface unless the surface
owner submits a written agreement otherwise. No structures shall be built over an abandoned well.
(b) Blowout prevention. In all cases, blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled,
worked over or in which tubing is being changed. Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during gas
operations as required by and in conformance with the requirements of the commission and the
recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute (API). The operator must equip all drilling wells with
adequate blowout preventers, flow lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures involved as
required by the commission. The operator must conduct daily testing of the operation and pressure, providing a
copy of the resulting of said testing to the city on a weekly basis.
(c) Chemical and materials storage. All chemicals and/or hazardous materials shall be stored in such a
manner as to prevent, contain, and facilitate rapid remediation and cleanup of any accidental spill, leak, or
discharge of a hazardous material. The operator shall have all material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all
hazardous materials on site. All applicable federal and state regulatory requirements for the proper labeling of
containers shall be followed. Appropriate pollution prevention actions shall be required and include, but are not
limited to, chemical and materials raised from the ground (e.g., wooden pallets), bulk storage, installation and
maintenance of secondary containment systems, and protection from stormwater and weather elements.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/554
(d) Fracture stimulation operations. The following requirements shall apply to all fracture stimulation
(fracturing) operations performed on a well:
(1) At least 48 hours before operations are commenced, the operator shall post a sign, which
complies with subsection (z) of this section, signs, at the entrance of the well site advising the public
of the date the operations will commence and an anticipated completion date;
(2) Flowback operations to recover fluids used during fracture stimulation shall be performed
during daylight hours only unless the gas inspector approves in writing such operations during
nondaylight hours and be continued until completed to prevent damage to formation;
(3) A watchperson shall be required at all times during such operations; and
(4) At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to the atmosphere without first
directing the flow through separation equipment or into a portable tank.
(e) Compliance. The operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city requirements.
(f) Discharge. No person shall place, deposit discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or
discharged, any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse including
wastewater or brine from any gas operation or the contents of any container used in connection with any gas
operation in, into, or upon any public right-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain
or any body of water or any private or public property in the city.
(g) Drilling fluids. Low toxicity glycols, synthetic hydrocarbons, polymers, and esters shall be substituted for
conventional oil-based drilling fluids.
(h) Drill stem testing. All open hole formation or drill stem testing shall be done during daylight hours. Drill
stem tests may be conducted only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate gas
separator to storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to
the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe.
(i) Drip pans and other containment devices. Drip pans and other containment devices shall be placed or
installed underneath all tanks, containers, pumps, lubricating oil systems, engines, fuel and chemical storage
tanks, system valves, connections, and any other areas or structures that could potentially leak, discharge or
spill hazardous liquids, semiliquids or solid waste materials.
(j) Dust, vibration, odors. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to
minimize, so far as practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best
accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of gas and other hydrocarbon substances. All
equipment used shall be so constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or
annoying substances or effect will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or
from anything incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity, nor shall the site or
structures thereon be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements
as identified by the gas inspector in industry standards of drilling and production in this area may be adopted as
they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor.
(k) Electric lines. All electric lines to production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those
already installed in the surrounding area or subdivision.
(l) Electric motors. Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells.
No electric power shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to the
city's ordinances and the appropriate national codes.
(m) Emergency response plan. Prior to the commencement of any gas or other hydrocarbons production
activities, operator shall submit to the city manager or city manager's designee an emergency response plan
establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or producing of gas
wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the commission, TCEQ, state department of
transportation and/or the USEPA. The emergency response plan shall be kept current with any additions,
modifications and/or amendments concerning all construction-related activities, natural gas operations and,
and/or natural gas production. Updated plans shall be submitted to the gas inspector within two business days.
A copy of the emergency response plan shall be kept on site.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/554
(n) Explosive charges. Under no circumstances shall explosives of any type be used during any phase of
drilling, redrilling, deepening, reentering, activating, converting, fracturing or completing a gas well without the
prior consent of the fire department. The operator shall provide notice to the gas inspector at least ten days
prior to such activities. The notice shall identify the date that the explosive charges will be used, the date and
means of transporting the explosive charges, and the transportation route to and from the drill and/or operation
site that will be used for the delivery of the explosive charges. A special use permit shall be issued from the fire
marshal.
(o) Fire prevention; sources of ignition. Firefighting apparatuses and supplies as approved by the fire
department and required by any applicable federal, state or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the
operator's cost, and shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations.
The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be
equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating
pressure. All well heads shall contain an emergency shutoff valve to the well distribution line.
(p) Flaring operations. The agent must notify gas inspector, fire marshal and the city's dispatch no later than
48 hours before flaring will commence. Flaring must be located at a safe distance, with piping secured. The onsite
supervisor or responsible party must be on site once flaring has commenced and until flaring is completed.
A separate watchperson shall be posted at gate and be responsible for accountability during these operations.
(q) Gas emission or burning restricted. No person shall allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the
atmosphere or to be burned by open flame except as provided by law or as permitted by the commission. If the
venting of gases into the atmosphere or the burning of gases by open flame is authorized as provided by law or
as permitted by the commission, then such vent or open flame shall not be located closer than 500 feet from
any building not used in operations on the drilling site and such vent or open flame shall be screened in such a
way as to minimize detrimental effects to adjacent property owners.
(r) Grass, weeds, trash. All drill and operation sites shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds and combustible
trash.
(s) Lights. No person shall permit any lights located on any drill or operation site to be directed in such a
manner so that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the
operation site. To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be
directed downward and shielded so as to both prevent direct illumination of and minimize glare on public roads
and adjacent dwellings and buildings within 600 feet.
(t) Muffling exhaust. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in
connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the
open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible
materials sufficient to suppress noise and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or
soot. All formation fracturing operations shall be conducted during daylight hours unless the operator has
notified the gas inspector that fracturing will occur before or after daylight hours to meet safety requirements.
(u) Organic solvents. Organic solvents, such as trichloroethylene and carbon tetrachloride, shall not be used
for cleaning any element, structure, or component of the drilling rig, platform, and/or associated equipment,
tools, or pipes. To the maximum extent practicable, high flashpoint Varsol shall be used.
(v) Pipe dope. Lead-free, biodegradable pipe dope shall be substituted for API specified pipe dope.
(w) Pits. All reserve pits, completion/workover pits, drilling fluid disposal pits, fresh makeup water pits, gas
plant evaporation/retention pits, mud circulation pits or water condensate pits shall be lined with plastic or
stored above ground in tanks. The water surface elevation of the pit may not exceed 12 inches above the
existing ground elevation prior to any on-site construction of the pit. One foot of freeboard is required between
the surface elevation and the top of berm. Such pits and contents shall be removed from the premises and the
drilling site within 40 days after completion of the well, unless otherwise authorized by the gas inspector. No
washout pits shall be located within the city, unless all fluid, sludge, solid waste materials, drilling fluids, waste
oil, spent completion fluids, all other liquids, semiliquids, mud, including hazardous waste inseparable by simple
mechanical removal processes, and is made up primarily of natural material is immediately captured within a
fully enclosed, aboveground containment tank.
(x) Private roads and drill sites. Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used
for access to the drill site and the operation site itself shall be at least 26 feet wide, have an overhead clearance
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/554
of 14 feet and shall be an all-weather hard surface and maintained to prevent dust, mud and rutting. In
particular cases these requirements governing surfacing of private roads may be altered at the discretion of the
public works department after consideration of all circumstances, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Distances from public streets and highways;
(2) Distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by
the operation;
(3) The purpose for which the property of such owners is or may be used;
(4) Topographical features;
(5) Nature of the soil; and
(6) Exposure to wind.
The minimum approach shall be concrete for 50 feet and have a minimum turn radius of 12 feet on the
approach.
(y) Salt water wells. No salt water disposal wells shall be located within the city.
(z) Signs.
(1) A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at the gate on the temporary and
permanent site fencing erected pursuant to this article. Such sign shall be durable material,
maintained in good condition and, unless otherwise required by the commission, shall have a
surface area of not less than 16 square feet with contrasting lettering not less than four inches tall
and shall be lettered with the following:
a. Well name and number;
b. Name of operator;
c. The emergency 911 number; and
d. 24-hour telephone numbers of two persons responsible for the well who may be
contacted in case of emergency.
(2) Permanent weatherproof signs reading “Danger No Smoking Allowed” in both English and
Spanish shall be posted immediately upon completion of the well site fencing at the entrance of each
well site and tank battery or in any other location approved or designated by the fire department of
the city. Sign lettering shall be four inches in height and shall be red on a white background or white
on a red background. Each sign shall include the emergency notification numbers of the fire
department and the operator, well and lease designations required by the commission.
(aa) Storage of equipment. On-site storage is prohibited on the operation site. No equipment shall be stored
on the drilling or production operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber,
pipes, tubing and casing shall not be left on the operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations
are being conducted on the site. No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street, rightof-
way or in any driveway, alley or upon any operation site which constitutes a fire hazard or an obstruction to
or interference with fighting or controlling fires. The fire department shall be the entity that determines whether
equipment on the site shall constitute a fire hazard. No refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating or absorption
plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the premises. This shall not be deemed to
exclude a conventional gas separator or dehydrator.
(bb) Storage tanks. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the API specifications unless other
or additional specifications are approved by the fire department. All storage tanks shall be equipped with a
secondary containment system including lining with an impervious material. The secondary containment system
shall be a minimum of three feet in height and I½ times the contents of the largest tank in accordance with the
fire code, and buried at least one foot below the surface. Drip pots shall be provided at the pump out connection
to contain the liquids from the storage tank. All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/554
commission and the National Fire Protection Association. Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level
control device that will automatically activate a valve to close the well in the event of excess liquid accumulation
in the tank. No meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, or other aboveground facilities, other than the well
head and flow lines, shall be placed in a floodway identified by FEMA on the most current FIRM. Meters,
storage tanks, separation facilities, or other aboveground facilities proposed in the floodplain shall be outside of
the floodway and shall comply with the requirements for development in chanter 24, flood damage prevention.
(cc) Tank battery facilities. Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam line and a lightning
arrestor system.
(dd) Surface casing. Surface casing shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable rules and
regulations of the commission.
(ee) Valves. Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production. The fire department shall
have access to the well site to enable it to close the shutoff valve in an emergency.
(ff) Waste disposal. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to
the following:
(1) Operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons.
(2) Tanks must meet the API standards.
(3) All tanks must have a vent line, flame arrester and pressure relief valve.
(4) All tanks must be enclosed by a fence applicable to the issued permit classification.
(5) Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting from or
connected with the drilling, reworking or deepening of any well shall be discharged into an
aboveground self-contained tank, or, after authorization by the city manager or designee, a lined pit.
(6) All disposals must be in accordance with the rules of the commission and any other
appropriate local, state or federal agency.
(7) Unless otherwise directed by the commission and approved by the gas inspector waste
materials shall be removed from the site and transported to an of f-site disposal facility not less of
ten than every 30 days.
(8) Water stored in on-site tanks shall be removed as necessary.
(9) All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the applicable federal and
state air and water pollution control regulations, this article and any other applicable ordinance of the
city.
(gg) Watchperson. The operator must keep a watchperson or security personnel on site during the drilling or
reworking of a well when other workers are not on the premises.
(hh) Installation of pipelines on, under or across public property. The operator shall apply to the city for a
right-of way use agreement on, over, under, along or across the city streets, sidewalks, alleys and other city
property for the purpose of constructing, laying, maintaining, operating, repairing, replacing and removing
pipelines. The operator shall:
(1) Not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer or gas lines or the facilities of public utilities
located on, under or across the course of such rights-of-way.
(2) Be responsible for the repair of any existing water, sewer or gas lines damaged as a result of
use of the right-of-way.
(3) Furnish to the city manager or the city manager's designee, a site plan showing the location of
such pipelines.
(4) Construct such lines out of pipe in accordance with the city codes and regulations.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/554
(5) Grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly as practicable,
as existed prior to the laying of the pipeline.
(ii) Public streets. No permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any of the streets or alleys of the
city and/or projected streets or alleys shown by the current comprehensive plan of the city, and no street or
alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed due to any exploration, drilling or production operations unless
prior written consent is obtained from the city manager or the city manager's designee. Any consent from the
city manager or the city manager's designee shall be temporary in nature and state the number of hours and/or
days that any street or alley may be blocked, encumbered or closed. The site must not conflict with the city's
thoroughfare plan.
(jj) Vehicle routes for gas well permits. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three
tons shall be restricted to state arterials, and where local access is required, to those arterials, collectors or
commercial routes designated on the city's thoroughfare plan and shall be identified on the site plan submitted
as part of the specific use permit.
(kk) Work hours for gas well permits. Site development, other than drilling, fracturing, shall be conducted only
between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials
associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on
the well site shall be limited to between the same work hour restrictions set forth in this subsection except in
cases of fires, blowouts, explosions, and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is
necessary to prevent the cessation of drilling or production. The operator may request an exception from work
hours and days from the city council, pursuant to section 38-38, or be set forth in the specific use permit as a
condition of approval.
(ll) Noise restrictions for gas well permits. A noise management plan shall be submitted with the specific use
permit and shall constitute a condition of approval. In addition to any restrictions or requirements set forth in the
specific use permit, the following restrictions shall apply:
(1) During drilling, redrilling or reworking, and flaring no on-site activity shall produce a sound level
greater than 78 dBA when measured at a distance of 300 feet from the drilling equipment in
question.
(2) During fracturing, no on-site activity shall produce a sound level greater than 85 dBA when
measured at a distance of 300 feet from the drilling equipment in question.
(3) During production, no on-site activity shall produce a sound level greater than 65 dBA when
measured at a distance of 300 feet from any onsite equipment in question.
(4) Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter conforming as a minimum,
to the requirements of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
(5) If sound levels exceed the dBA levels referenced in this subsection, the gas inspector may
require additional sound reducing techniques and devices including, but not limited to, sound
reducing mufflers, including, but not limited to, hospital grade mufflers on equipment.
(mm) Tank specifications for gas well permit. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the API
specifications unless other specifications are approved by the fire department. The top of the tanks shall be no
higher than 12 feet above the terrain surrounding the tanks.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-14; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-34. Fences; screening.
(a) Requirements generally. Throughout the entire exploration, drilling, and production process there shall be
screening improvements (fences, walls, berms and landscaping) required during each phase of the process,
including, but not limited to, the following; provided, however, additional landscaping, buffers and noise barriers
may be included as conditions of approval of the specific use permit:
(1) Rig-up exploration through completion (drilling phase) to production. Once the pad site is
prepared, a temporary chain link fence with all weather screening fabric at least six feet in height
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/554
shall be established around the entire operation site to obscure view of the gas drilling activities. The
temporary fence shall remain standing and in a serviceable condition throughout this phase. A
secured entrance gate shall be required. All gates are to be kept locked when the operator or
employees are not within the enclosure. A Knox padlock or Knox Box with a key shall be provided to
access the well site to be used only in case of an emergency. Once drilling of the hole is complete,
the operator shall install a permanent masonry wall within 90 days if no further work is to be
accomplished.
(2) Completion through abandonment (production phase). Once gas has entered the pipeline, the
production phase begins and a masonry wall with landscaping shall be required to enclose and
visually screen the well and all associated equipment. An earthen berm may also be required. The
masonry walls, berms, and landscaping shall be in compliance with standard engineering and
design practices and shall meet the following minimum requirements:
a. The masonry wall material and design shall be generally compatible with the design of
similar facilities, buildings and structures on and/or adjacent to the site;
b. Masonry walls shall be at least eight feet in height;
c. Masonry walls shall be placed upon earthen berms in order to prevent viewing of the well
and associated equipment from a public street, playground, competition athletic field or picnic
area within a public park, existing residences and residentially zoned undeveloped property
contiguous to the well site where practicable as determined by the city manager or city
manager's designee. However, the berms mentioned in this subsection shall not be required
unless needed to augment the height of an eight-foot masonry wall in order to prevent the
viewing of the well or any associated equipment from the places set forth in this subsection;
d. All landscape improvements shall be maintained in an attractive and healthy state by the
applicant and/or operator so as to ensure the effective visual screening of the site throughout
its use for gas production and associated activities; and
e. Screening shrubs and trees shall be evergreen species and shall be installed in
conjunction with the required masonry walls and or berms in order to supplement both the
visual screening and noise mitigation of the well site and associated equipment. Screening
shrubs shall be a minimum of five feet in height at planting, having the potential to grow to a
mature height of at least eight feet, be planted four feet on-center and must have an irrigation
system that provides total water coverage to all plant materials. Screening trees shall be
planted 20 feet on-center. Trees must be a minimum of three-inch caliper at time of planting
and be irrigated as set forth in this subsection. All screening shrubs and trees will comply with
a list of shrubs and trees approved by the city council. Plans for landscape and irrigation shall
be submitted to the planning and development department for approval.
(b) Gate specifications. All temporary fences and masonry walls shall be equipped with at least one gate.
The gate shall meet the following specifications:
(1) Each gate shall be not less than 12 feet wide and be composed of two gates, each of which is
not less than six feet wide, or one sliding gate not less than 12 feet wide. If two gates are used,
gates shall latch and lock in the center of the span;
(2) The gates shall be of chainlink construction, with all-weather screening fabric, that meets the
applicable specifications, or of other approved material that, for safety reasons, shall be at least as
secure as a chainlink fence;
(3) The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a
padlock, and shall be kept locked except when being used for access to the site;
(4) Operator must provide the fire department with a Knox padlock or a Knox Box with a key to
access the well site to be used only in case of an emergency; and
(5) At each gate there shall be a sign that reads “No Trespassing.”
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/554
(1998 Code, sec. 64-15; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-35. Cleanup and maintenance.
(a) Cleanup after well servicing. After the well has been completed or plugged and abandoned, the operator
shall clean the drill site or operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property
caused by such operations within 60 days.
(b) Cleanup after spills, leaks and malfunctions. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove
or cause to be removed to the satisfaction of the fire department and the gas inspector all waste materials from
any public or private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. Cleanup operations must begin
immediately. If the owner fails to begin site cleanup within 24 hours, the city shall have the right to contact the
commission in order to facilitate the removal of all waste materials from the property affected by such spill, leak
or malfunction.
(c) Painting. All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads,
pumping units, tanks, and buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such facilities, the gas inspector
shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the
degree of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral
colors shall include sand, gray and unobtrusive shades of green, blue and brown, or other neutral colors
approved by the planning and development department.
(d) Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, operator shall immediately take all reasonable
steps to regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify the gas inspector and fire
department as soon as practicable. The gas inspector shall certify in writing, briefly describing the same, to the
city manager. If the city manager, in his opinion, believes that danger to persons and property exists because of
such loss of well control and that the operator is not taking or is unable to take all reasonable and necessary
steps to regain control of such well, the city may then employ any well control expert or experts or other
contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and material which the
city deems necessary to regain control of such well. The city shall then have a valid priority lien against the
interest in the well of all working interest owners to secure payment of any expenditure made by the city
pursuant to such action of the gas inspector in gaining control of said well.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-16; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-36. Plugged and abandoned wells.
(a) Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned well. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the
requirements of the commission, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the well
site to its original condition as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this article.
(b) Approval of city manager required. Abandonment shall be approved by the city manager or city manager's
designee, after restoration of the drill and/or operation site has been accomplished in conformity with the
following requirements at the discretion of the city manager or the city manager's designee:
(1) The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from the site;
(2) All tanks, towers and other surface installations shall be removed from the site;
(3) All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials regardless of
depth, except surface casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise directed by the
commission;
(4) If any soil was contaminated, it shall be removed from the site in accordance with city, state
and federal regulations;
(5) All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, co mp actable soil;
(6) All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the site; and
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/554
(7) During abandonment, operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this article.
The operator can only abandon a well if the city manager or the city manager's designee has reviewed and
approved the abandonment.
(c) Abandoned well requirement. The operator shall furnish the following to the gas inspector:
(1) A copy of the approval of the commission confirming compliance with all abandonment
proceedings under the state law; and
(2) A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such
work will be commenced.
Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the dates so stated.
(d) Abandonment requirements prior to new construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall
meet the most current abandonment requirements of the commission prior to the issuance of any building
permit for development of the property. No structure shall be built over an abandoned well.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-17; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-37. Technical advisor.
The city may from time to time employ technical advisors who are experienced and educated in the gas
industry or the law as it pertains to gas matters. The function of such advisors shall be to advise, counsel or
represent the city on such matters relating to gas operations within the city as the city may want or require and
the effect thereof, both present and future, on the health, welfare, comfort and safety of the citizens of the city.
In the event such technical advisors are employed for the purpose of advising, counseling or representing the
city relative to an operator's unique and particular set of circumstances, case or request relating to this article,
then the cost for such services of such technical advisors shall be assessed against and paid for by such
operator in addition to any fees or charges assessed pursuant to this article. Prior to the employment of a
technical advisor, the city shall inform the operator of the intended scope of work and the estimated costs and
expenses. The employment of a technical advisor shall be approved by the city council. (1998 Code, sec. 64-
18; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted 11/6/07)
Sec. 38-38. Appeals.
(a) The city council shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the city
manager, or the city manager's designee, relative to the application and interpretation of this article.
(b) The city council shall decide by majority vote requests for deviations specifically authorized by this article,
such as distance of drilling sites from certain structures and improvements, and hours of operation. The city
council is likewise authorized to decide by majority vote requests for deviations from landscape and screening
requirements. Relevant considerations in determining whether such requests should be granted include the
nature and remoteness of the site, the wishes of the owners of the immediately adjacent property impacted by
the request, and any proposed measures to offset the impact of the request. The city council may impose
restrictions to offset the impact of the requests. Requests shall be in writing stating the rationale for the
deviation and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount established in section 38-39
(c) The city council shall have and exercise the authority to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged
there is error or abuse of discretion regarding the issuance of a gas well permit or the revocation or suspension
of any permit issued hereunder, and as provided by this article. Any person or entity whose application is
denied by the city manager or the city manager's designee, or whose permit is suspended or revoked may file
an appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing, specifying the error or abuse of discretion and
shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount established in section 38-39. The city council may request
additional information and take testimony from fact and expert witnesses. The city council shall review the
appeal and any other related information. The city council, in deciding appeals regarding the issuance of a gas
well permit or its revocation or suspension, shall consider the grounds for the action appealed from and whether
an error of fact or in interpretation of these regulations occurred. The city council may reverse or modify the
action appealed from by a majority vote. The only basis for a reversal or modification shall be error in applying
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/554
these regulations; hardship shall be irrelevant. Appeals of any condition of the specific use permit shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the city's zoning ordinance, as it exists and as it may be amended.
(d) Notice shall be provided of the date, time and place of a hearing for each request for a deviation and
appeal by mailing such notice to the owner of record of each parcel of property located within 600 feet of the
well within the city and to the city secretary of each city within such distance. Such notice shall be mailed at
least ten days prior to such hearing.
(e) Judicial review of council decisions on appeals.
(1) Any of the following persons may present to a district court of the county, a verified petition
requesting that a writ of certiorari be issued stating that the decision of the city council is illegal in
whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality:
a. The person whose appeal was denied; or
b. A city taxpayer.
(2) The petition must be received for filing by the clerk of the district court within ten days after the
date the decision is made by the city council.
(3) On the presentation of a verified petition meeting the foregoing requirements, the court may
grant a writ of certiorari directed to the city council to review the city council's decision. The writ must
indicate the time by which the council's return must be made and served on the petitioner's attorney,
which must be after ten days and may be extended by the court. Granting of the writ does not stay
the proceedings on the decision under appeal, but on application and after notice to the city council
the court may grant a restraining order if due cause is shown.
(4) The city council's return must concisely state any pertinent and material facts that show the
grounds of the decision under appeal. The council is not required to return the original documents on
which the council acted but may return certified or sworn copies of the documents or parts of the
documents as required by the writ.
(5) If after receiving the return the court determines that there is substantial evidence in such
return to constitute grounds for reasonable persons to differ as to whether the action of the city
council in denying the appeal was lawful, the court shall affirm the decision. If the court finds that
there is insufficient information contained in such return to make such a determination, and that
testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a
referee to take evidence as directed. The referee shall report the evidence to the court with the
referee's findings of fact and conclusions of law. The referee's report constitutes a part of the
proceedings on which the court shall make its decision.
(6) The court may reverse or affirm, in whole on in part, or modify the decision that is appealed.
Costs shall not be assessed against the city council.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-19; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Sec. 38-39. Gas well fees.
(a) For services rendered, the following schedule of fees and charges is hereby adopted: New gas well
permit, each: $10,000.00
Amended permit: 540.00
Extended permit: 270.00
Supplemental permit: 180.00
Operator transfer: 720.00
Seismic site inspection: 360.00
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/554
Seismic test of city property, fee determined by city council
Annual inspection fee (per well): 2,000.00
Appeal to city council fee: 500.00
Request to city council for deviation: 500.00
Sup for perforation: 1,000.00
Sup for wire line logging: 1,000.00
(b) The city council or city manager shall pass through the actual cost of any nonemployee expert deemed
necessary to advise or provide a service to the city to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
city.
(c) No blanket well permits will be issued.
(1998 Code, sec. 64-20; Ordinance 2007033, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/07; Ordinance 2007104, sec. 2, adopted
11/6/07)
Secs. 38-40–38-66. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PIPELINE REGULATION
Sec. 38-67. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to acknowledge federal and state regulatory schemes
governing the safety of certain pipeline facilities, as defined herein, and to the extent permitted by state and
federal law, to establish registration requirements consistent with those regulatory schemes for present and
future operations related to transporting oil, gas, and other substances produced in association with oil and gas
within public rights-of-way and properties within the corporate limits of the city to minimize the potential
aesthetic and financial impact to adjacent property and property owners; to provide certain regulations for
pipeline facilities in private residential areas to minimize burdens on residential tracts of land caused by
easements and utility uses that unreasonably burden the use and development of such residential tracts; to
enhance the aesthetic quality of the environment within the city; to encourage the orderly development of
private and public infrastructure resources; and to establish a structure for the licensing of city-owned streets,
rights-of-way and other property for the use by pipeline operators. (1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A,
sec. II(39-1), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-68. Definitions.
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of wells not specifically defined
shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators or professionals in the oil and
gas industry. For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
Affiliate means any person directly or indirectly controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the
owner. As used herein, the term “control” means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or
cause the direction of the management and policies of a person, whether through ownership of voting
securities, by contract or otherwise.
Ambient noise level means the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a
composite of sounds from all sources at the location, constituting the normal or existing level of environmental
noise at a given location prior to the development activities subject to regulation by this article.
Applicant means a person requesting a license to use city rights-of-way or property including, but not limited to
the applicant's heirs, legal representatives, successors or assigns.
Critical infrastructure has the meaning set forth in Texas Government Code sec. 421.001.
Existing pipeline corridor means either:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/554
(1) An area within a public right-of-way in which city-owned and/or franchised utilities are already
located or within which franchised utilities are to be located; or
(2) A utility easement created to contain either:
a. A utility other than a pipeline; or
b. A pipeline which preexisted the pipeline under consideration.
Franchised utility.
(1) The term “franchised utility” means an entity authorized to provide utility services to the city
pursuant to a franchise agreement with the city.
(2) The term “franchised utility” does not extend to any pipelines or other utility lines which collect
or transport gas. hazardous liquids or chemicals from wells located within the city into a larger
pipeline system. regardless of whether such pipelines are owned by an entity which holds a
franchise within the city for other purposes.
Gas compressor station equipment means those pipeline facilities that are ancillary to and located on the site of
one or more gas compressor units.
Gas compressor unit means a device or equipment that compresses natural gas after production which is part
of the pipeline facility.
Gas regulator station equipment means those facilities that regulate the pressure of natural gas after
production.
Landscape administrator means the city manager or the city manager's designated representative assigned to
administer the city's landscape ordinance, as codified in this Code, and later amended by the city council.
License means an authorization which is not an interest in real property granted by the city council to use city
right-of-way or other city property pursuant the terms and conditions approved by the city council.
Pipeline has the same meaning as set forth in 49 CFR 192.3.
Pipeline administrator means the city manager or the city manager's designated representative assigned to
administer this article.
Pipeline facility has the same meaning as set forth in 49 CFR 192.3.
Pipeline operator means any person owning. operating or responsible for operating a pipeline facility.
Private residential area means any lot, property. or area which is within the territorial limits of the city which is
subject to a temporary or permanent residential or multifamily zoning classification or which is currently being
used for residential purposes.
Record drawings means as-built drawings of a pipeline facility for which a registration was approved with the
requirements of this article.
Structure means, without limitation, any building. or combination of related components constructed in an
ordered scheme that constitutes a work or improvement constructed on or affixed to land. including, but not
limited to habitable structures. partially enclosed structures and enclosed tanks.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. 11(39-2), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-69. Violations, penalties and remedies.
(a) Any pipeline operator subject to this article who shall have failed to comply with this article shall be
deemed to be maintaining a nuisance and the city may take such measures to remedy such nuisance,
including, but not limited to, revocation of the pipeline operator's license and/or registration, filing a complaint
with the railroad commission or successor agency and/or injunctive relief.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/554
(b) It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly make a misrepresentation of any information
to be reported pursuant to this article. It shall also be a violation of this article if the person makes such
misrepresentation as a result of failure to exercise such due diligence of investigation or inquiry, as would a
reasonably prudent pipeline operator conducting business in the jurisdiction of the city.
(c) Each violation of any provision of this article shall be a separate offense. Each day of ongoing violation
shall be a separate offense, and shall carry with it an administrative penalty of not more than $2,000.00 per day.
If the administrative penalty is are not paid within 30 calendar days of issuance, any applicable pipeline license
and/or registration may be suspended or revoked by the city. A pipeline operator may appeal an alleged
violation pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article. Such appeal shall stay enforcement of the action
until after a final decision is rendered in accordance with the appellate procedures set forth in this article.
(d) The city shall be entitled to injunctive relief or any other appropriate relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction to prevent violation of or to compel compliance with this article, including, but not limited to, payment
of administrative penalties.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-19), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-70. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, acting either for himself or as an agent, representative, employee,
independent contractor or servant of any other person, to commence to install, construct, reconstruct, modify,
replace, or operate pipeline facility or any section of pipeline facility, or to assist in the installation, construction,
reconstruction, modification, replacement or operation of a pipeline facility in, over, under, along, or across a
city street, alley or other right-of-way or in, over, under, along, or across a private residential area, unless such
person first registers such pipeline and obtains approval of such a registration in accordance with this article.
The purpose of this registration requirement is to establish conditions for mapping, inventorying, locating or
relocating pipelines in, over, under, along, or across a city street, alley or other right-of-way or a private
residential area. Nothing herein shall constitute a permit within the terms of Texas Local Government Code ch.
245, unless specifically so identified by applicable law. (1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. 11(39-
3), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-71. Waiver procedure.
(a) A pipeline operator submitting a registration request for approval as required by this article may apply for
a variance from the requirements of this article by submitting a written request for waiver to the pipeline
administrator. The request must include the following, where applicable:
(1) A description of the requested waiver and an explanation of why it should be granted;
(2) A brief description of alternatives considered and why the requested waiver is the preferred
alternative;
(3) A description of the economic consequences if the waiver is not granted;
(4) A description of how the waiver is consistent with the goals and purposes of this article;
(5) A site plan of the site visually depicting the requested waiver if the waiver requested involves
locating the proposed pipeline contrary to the requirements of this article; and
(6) A consent agreement signed by all owners of the surface estate of any lot or property upon or
under which the pipeline is to be placed, or a recorded deed or easement that evidences that the
pipeline operator owns the lot or property.
(b) The pipeline administrator shall review the application for completeness, and if the pipeline administrator
determines that the application is incomplete, the pipeline administrator shall return the application, within 14
calendar days of receipt, to the applicant unfiled with a written description of the deficiencies in the application.
Should applicant fail to reapply and satisfy all deficiencies within 30 days of the date of the written description,
such application shall have expired and be deemed withdrawn, such that any subsequent application will be
treated as a new application for all purposes herein, including review and payment of fees.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/554
(c) If the pipeline administrator determines that the application is complete, the pipeline administrator shall
place the waiver request on the city council agenda for consideration with any recommendations and notations
the pipeline administrator deems appropriate. In considering the waiver the city council may take into account
the following:
(1) Whether the waiver proposed is reasonable under the circumstances and conditions prevailing
in the area, considering the particular location and the character of the improvements located there;
(2) Available alternatives;
(3) Whether the waiver proposed would conflict with the orderly growth and development of the
city based on the city's comprehensive plan, the city's current development plans for stormwater
drainage, streets, sanitary sewers or other public infrastructure, or any applications for other
development then currently pending;
(4) The economic consequence if the waiver is not granted; and
(5) Whether the operations proposed adequately protect the public interests and goals and
objectives of this article.
(d) In order to be approved, a proposed waiver must receive the affirmative vote of a majority of the members
of the city council then present. The vote, including any conditions for granting the requested waiver, shall be
executed, recorded and entered in the files of the city secretary within five business days, and the pipeline
administrator shall notify the operator as to whether the city council has approved or denied the waiver request
and identify any conditions placed upon an approval as reflected in the council order.
(e) If the city council does not act upon any waiver application accepted for filing as complete within 45
calendar days of such filing. the, pipeline operator may request that the waiver application be placed upon the
next city council agenda for action.
(f) A waiver application that accompanies an application for a specific use permit may be considered with and
granted as part of the specific use permit application.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. 11(39-4), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-72. Appeal procedure; aboveground facilities.
(a) A pipeline operator or the owner of any property interest in the surface of any real property located
adjacent to or within 660 feet of any proposed aboveground pipeline improvements or structures may appeal a
decision of the pipeline administrator by filing written notice of such appeal to the pipeline administrator within
14 calendar days of notice of such decision. Appeal by the owner of any property interest in the surface of any
real property located adjacent to or within 600 feet of any proposed aboveground pipeline improvements or
structures shall be limited to decisions of the pipeline administrator with regard to compliance with the
protection and preservation of aesthetics within the city herein. The notice of appeal must state the appellant's
desire to appeal, the ruling from which the appellant desires to appeal and the relief or ruling sought. Any such
appeal shall be to the city council. The decision of the city council concerning an appeal under this article shall
be final. The decision being appealed shall not be suspended pending such appeal.
(b) Any appeal under this article shall be governed by the following rules and procedures:
(1) Such appeal shall be set as an item on the regular city council agenda.
(2) The appellant shall bear the burden of persuasion that the ruling being appealed is in error and
shall bear the burden of proof on such manner.
(3) No formal testimony or swearing of witnesses shall be required, and the city council may
consider facts or evidence as the city council determines is appropriate. The pipeline administrator
or the pipeline administrator's designee shall present the facts and evidence relied upon by the
pipeline administrator and the reasons for the ruling; the appellant shall then have an opportunity to
present the facts and evidence relied upon by the appellant; the city council shall then consider any
facts or evidence from the public or other interested persons. The city council may ask questions of
the pipeline administrator or the pipeline administrator's designee, appellant and any other
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/554
interested persons as the city council determines is appropriate. The city council may limit the time
for any presentation in its sole discretion.
(4) Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall then render its decision affirming,
reversing or modifying the decision of the pipeline administrator. Any appeal shall be determined by
majority vote of the members of the city council then present.
(5) Written documents or evidence which any party wishes to submit must be filed with the
pipeline administrator and submitted to the city council no less than three business days prior to the
appeal hearing; provided, however, a party may provide, and city council may accept, such
additional evidence or documents during the hearing, provided copies of the evidence or documents
are provided to the opposing party to the appeal. The opposing party shall be provided an
opportunity to present rebuttable evidence and city council may grant a continuance in order to
provide each side with an opportunity to review and rebut evidence.
(6) The decision of the city council shall be final.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-5), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-73. Registration procedure and requirements.
(a) Not less than 30 calendar days prior to the scheduled commencement of the installation, construction,
modification, replacement or commencement of operation of a pipeline facility, the pipeline operator shall
submit an application to the pipeline administrator and pay a fee to the city in the amount set in the city's fee
schedule for a conceptual routing registration application.
(b) A conceptual routing registration application shall include five paper sets and one electronic set of plans
including the information required in this section.
(c) The following information shall be provided in the application for a conceptual routing registration:
(1) Preliminary construction alignment sheets identifying in concept all of the following:
a. The proposed pipeline facility;
b. All tracts crossed, or contiguous to and within 300 feet of, the proposed centerline of the
proposed pipeline facility route, including, but not limited to, all public streets, alleys, and
rights-of-way and other city property;
c. To the degree known, the location and depth of all existing public or private infrastructure
and utilities, including, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer, wastewater, gas, electric,
telephone, cable, and fiber optic lines and other public utilities improvements located on, over,
under, along or across such city streets, rights-of way and other city property within the
proposed pipeline easement; and
d. The location of all proposed aboveground improvements and structures;
(2) The names and addresses of all owners of the surface estate of all tracts crossed by or within
300 feet of the proposed pipeline facility route, as disclosed by a title search or the county appraisal
district;
(3) The name, business addresses and telephone numbers of the pipeline operator;
(4) The names, titles and telephone numbers of the following:
a. The person signing the application on behalf of the pipeline operator;
b. The person designated as the principal contact for the submittal; and
c. The person designated as the 24-hour emergency contact;
(5) The origin point and the destination of the proposed pipeline facility;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/554
(6) A text description of the general location of the proposed pipeline facility;
(7) A description of the substance to be transported thro ugh the proposed pipeline facility;
(8) An aerial map or a description of the distance from the nearest existing habitable structures
(residences and commercial structures) and congregated areas (such as parks and parking lots);
and
(9) A binder or certificates of all bonds and insurance to the extent require d under this article or a
license or agreement with the city.
(d) The pipeline administrator shall review any complete application under this section within 30 calendar
days after the date of filing of said application pipeline administrator shall be permitted a 15-day extension or
such longer period that may be agreed upon by the parties, and shall provide a status of the review and
anticipated completion date, with identification of any deficiencies noted as of that date. Should the pipeline
operator disagree with the extension, the pipeline operator may file a request with the pipeline administrator to
have the application placed on the next city council meeting agenda, consistent with the Open Meetings Act, for
decision on the next city council meeting. If the pipeline administrator determines that the application complies
with the requirements of this article, the pipeline administrator shall approve the application and accept the
registration. If the pipeline administrator determines that the application does not comply with the requirements
of this article, the pipeline administrator may deny the application. If an application is denied, the pipeline
administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the denial with an explanation of all deficiencies. The
applicant may file an amended or completed application within 30 calendar days of such denial or deficiency
notice without paying a new registration fee. After 30 days, any application submitted shall be treated as a new
application for purposes of review and fees.
(e) Upon the filing of an administratively complete pipeline facility registration application, the pipeline
administrator may request the pipeline operator to attend an administrative conference to seek resolution of any
substantive, nonresolved issues.
(f) If there is any change in any of the items required in the pipeline facility registration application after the
filing of the application, the applicant must immediately inform the pipeline administrator and file an amended
pipeline registration application. If the pipeline administrator has not yet approved the application, no new
registration application fee shall be required. If the pipeline administrator has already approved the application,
the amended permit shall be considered a new registration application, and the applicant shall pay a new
registration application fee.
(g) If construction of a pipeline facility subject to a particular registration has not commenced within six
months of the date of approval of the pipeline conceptual routing registration, or if the pipeline facility subject to
a particular registration has not been completed and the surface restored within one year of the date of
approval of the pipeline conceptual routing registration, the applicable pipeline conceptual routing registration
shall expire; provided, however, that the pipeline administrator may grant an extension of time not to exceed
one year if the pipeline administrator determines that weather or other unexpected conditions justify such an
extension. If the pipeline conceptual routing registration expires as provided herein, and construction of the
pipeline facility has commenced but has not yet been completed, the pipeline operator shall immediately file
another application or cease construction and complete any site remediation required by this article or other
applicable law, regulation or Ordinance.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-6), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-74. License required.
(a) Nothing in this article shall constitute permission for the use of any street, right-of-way or property of the
city, and any such use shall be subject to the city's approval of a license or easement permitting the use at its
sole discretion. Prior to installing, constructing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, modifying, removing or
operating a pipeline facility on, over, under, along or across any affected city streets, rights-of-way or other city
property, the pipeline operator shall obtain a license or easement to use such city-owned streets, rights-of-way
and other property. Pipeline facility operations shall continue only while such easement or license shall continue
and such easement or license shall continue as long as the pipeline operator maintains pipeline facilities within
the area subject to the easement or license and shall terminate when the pipeline operator expressly abandons
the pipeline facilities within the area subject to the easement or license. No license shall be approved or issued
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/554
if the proposed pipeline facility does not fully conform to all provisions of this article and all other applicable city
Ordinances, and all applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
(b) Each such license or easement agreement shall include a requirement that the pipeline operator place
and maintain in good repair and condition permanent line markers as close as practical over the pipeline facility
at each crossing of a city street or right-of-way in order to assist the city public works department and other
utility providers in identifying the exact location of such pipeline facility and avoid costly damages and timeconsuming
repairs.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-7), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-75. Protection of present and future utility infrastructure.
(a) Prior to installing, constructing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, modifying, removing or operating a
pipeline facility on, over, under, along or across any affected city streets, rights-of-way or other city property,
and prior to any license or easement agreement becoming effective, the pipeline operator shall certify that the
proposed routing will either have no impact on any public or private infrastructure located on, over, under, along
or across such city streets, rights-of-way and other city property, or reach an agreement with the pipeline
administrator as to the means by which the operator will address any impacts on such infrastructure. The
pipeline operator shall also comply with any bond requirements established in this article or otherwise required
by the city. In any event, the pipeline operator shall be responsible for all interference with or damages caused
by the operator's activities in or around such city right-of-way or property to any existing public or private
infrastructure and utilities, including, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer, wastewater, gas, electric,
telephone, cable and fiber optic lines, and other public utilities improvements located on, over, under, along or
across such city streets, rights-of-way and other city property.
(b) The pipeline operator shall install line markers at each point a pipeline facility crosses a city street, alley
or right-of-way or other city property, in order to assist the city public works department and other utility
providers in identifying the exact location of such pipeline facility and avoid costly damages and timeconsuming
repairs. Each such line marker shall be of permanent type construction and contain labeling
identifying:
(1) The pipeline operator;
(2) The 24-hour contact telephone number;
(3) The size of such pipeline facility identified by decal on existing signage unless federal or state
laws require other identification or designation; and
(4) A general description of the product transported in the pipeline; e. g., natural gas, oil,
petroleum.
(c) The pipeline operator shall maintain all such line markers in good condition, shall promptly replace any
such line markers that are lost or stolen, and shall promptly repair any such line markers that require repainting
or other repair.
(d) It shall be a violation of this article for any person to tamper with, deface, damage or remove any pipeline
marker, except the pipeline operator, in strict accordance with federal, state and local laws.
(e) No city streets, rights-of-way or other city property may be crossed by open cut without prior written
agreement by the city. During the backfill of any pipeline excavations on city streets, rights-of-way or other city
property, the pipeline operator shall bury “Buried Pipeline” warning tape one foot above any such pipeline to
warn future excavators of the presence of a buried pipeline. Such warning tape is required only in situations in
which open trenching is used and is not required in other installation methods including, without limitation,
boring; provided, however, such pipeline shall be appropriately marked as required by federal and state
guidelines.
(f) The pipeline administrator may require that sections of a proposed pipeline facility to be located in or
under a city street, alley or other right-of-way or other city property be constructed at deeper depths or be
relocated based upon a conflict with a planned or anticipated city infrastructure improvement.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-8), adopted 8/18/09)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/554
Sec. 38-76. Protection and preservation of aesthetics within the city.
(a) Within 30 calendar days after completion of pipeline facility construction on any property within the city,
the pipeline operator shall backfill all trenches and pits, and grade, level and restore the affected property to the
same surface condition, as nearly practicable, as existed before operations were first commenced, or such
better condition as agreed by the pipeline operator and the owners of the surface estate of such property,
unless the pipeline operator files with the city a written agreement signed by all owners of the surface estate of
such property providing other terms, but in no event shall such written agreement permit the continuation of any
open pit, mound of dirt or debris, or other evidence of pipeline facility construction unless approved in advance
in writing by the pipeline administrator for good cause shown. In no event shall financial considerations alone
be considered good cause.
(b) The pipeline operator shall take reasonable steps to preserve all trees within the city easement or right-ofway
in which the pipeline operator's pipeline facility is located, and shall replace any trees which are removed
or which, in the determination of the landscape administrator, die because of pipeline facility construction,
modification or repair operations, with approved trees of equal size up to four caliper inches in size. The
pipeline operator may provide a maintenance bond and/or escrow account for this purpose. For each tree larger
than four caliper inches in size which is removed or, in the determination of the landscape administrator, dies
because of pipeline facility construction, modification or repair, the pipeline operator may elect to plant a single
approved tree of equal or greater size, or multiple trees which collectively total an equal or greater number of
caliper inches as the tree which is removed or dies. The pipeline operator shall refer to chapter 58 for a list of
approved trees. Any replacement trees need not be planted in the same location or even within the pipeline
easement, but instead may be planted as follows:
(1) At other locations on the affected lot as agreed between the pipeline operator and the lot
owner;
(2) If the lot owner elects to forego planting any such replacement trees on the affected lot, at
such other location owned by the lot owner within the city as agreed upon by the pipeline operator
and the lot owner; or
(3) If the lot owner elects to forego planting any such replacement trees on property within the
city-owned by the lot owner, at such location on city property as designated by the landscape
administrator.
If the pipeline operator fails to plant such replacement trees within 90 calendar days of the completion of
construction of the pipeline facilities, the pipeline operator, or such later time as agreed upon by the pipeline
administrator has agreed to in writing, shall pay to the city an amount equal to the fair market value of such
replacement trees, including planting costs, as determined by the landscape administrator, and such amount
shall be placed in a tree mitigation fund to be used by the city for landscaping and tree planting.
(c) Design requirements.
(1) In all zoning districts except the “HI” Heavy Industrial Zoning District, the pipeline operator
shall enclose all gas compressor units within sound attenuation structures compatible with the visual
appearance of the surrounding development as set forth in this section.
(2) A pipeline operator shall design and construct all aboveground pipeline-related improvements
and structures in accordance with all landscaping, setback, and height requirements applicable in
the zoning district where such equipment is located, and in accordance with all landscaping, design
and materials requirements of city Ordinances and standards, including, but not limited to,
landscape Ordinances tree Ordinances, as such Ordinances and standards exist and as they may
be adopted and amended. All aboveground pipeline-related improvements not fully enclosed in a
structure shall be screened from any public right-of-way and any residentially or commercially zoned
property either by a masonry fence, or by a wrought iron fence and approved evergreen trees and/or
shrubs. All shrubs shall be no less than 48 inches in height when planted, and no less than 72
inches when mature. All trees shall be a minimum of two caliper inches in size when planted. If
pipeline-related improvements are to be screened by landscaping, and such improvements exceed
72 inches in height, such improvements will be screened by both shrubs and trees meeting the
requirements specified in this subsection. All such landscaping shall be in addition to and not in lieu
of other landscaping required by this article or other city Ordinance.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/554
(3) All landscaping required shall be maintained by the pipeline operator for so long as such
aboveground pipeline related improvements or structures remain on the property. Any landscaping
required herein shall be maintained in good condition so as to provide effective screening. Any
required landscaping that is diseased or dies shall be replaced during the next growing season.
Should the pipeline operator fail to do so, the city may utilize the maintenance bond and/or funds in
the escrow account for this purpose.
(4) If such gas compressor unit is located in a residential zoning district, the required sound
attenuation structure unit shall have the visual appearance of a sloped roof with a slope or pitch
which is no less than the greater of 5/12, or the average roof pitch of existing residential structures
located within 1,000 feet of the lot on which such structure will be constructed. The pipeline operator
may achieve the desired appearance by application of one of the following design devices:
a. A flat roof with a sloped structural element along the perimeter of the roof to provide the
appearance of a sloped roof; or
b. If no roof is provided, a sloped structural element is provided along the perimeter of the
top of the structure to provide the appearance of a sloped roof.
(5) Prior to commencing construction of such aboveground improvements and/or structures, the
pipeline operator must first obtain a pipeline aboveground improvement permit allowing construction
of such improvements and/or structures. Any application for such permit shall be filed with the
pipeline administrator, and shall be accompanied by the required fee and three copies of proposed
design and landscape plans showing compliance with the requirements of this article. If the permit
complies with the requirements in this article, the pipeline administrator shall approve the permit and
provide a copy of such plans to the chief building official and the landscape administrator. All
construction shall comply with the design and landscape plans approved by the city. Such
application, if not approved or denied within 30 calendar days of the date of the application, shall be
placed on the next city council agenda for decision.
(6) Except to the extent expressly permitted otherwise in this article, structure facades shall be
constructed to comply with the design and exterior masonry and materials requirements of the
zoning district in which such structure is located. For purposes of this article, the term “masonry”
refers to brick or stone. Alternative material may be used if approved by the city council as an
exception to the application.
(7) Any screening required around a compressor station may be located immediately adjacent to
compressor pad site as opposed to the entire tract of land upon which the compressor station is
located.
(d) All aboveground pipeline facilities and any related equipment and improvements, including all gas
regulator and compressor station equipment shall comply with the city's lighting and noise Ordinance
standards, as they exist and as they may be adopted and amended, and shall not create any noise that causes
the exterior noise level to exceed the predevelopment ambient noise levels as measured at the property line of
the lot upon which such pipeline facilities, equipment or improvements are located by more than five decibels in
commercial and industrial zoning districts, and zero decibels in residential zoning districts and/or adjacent to a
residential use. The pipeline operator shall be responsible for contacting the city code enforcement department
and arranging for the establishment of the predevelopment ambient noise level prior to issuance of the building
permit for the pipeline facility.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-9), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-77. Facilities installation conditions.
(a) A pipeline operator shall comply with the conditions established in this section governing mapping,
inventorying, locating or relocating of the pipeline facility within private residential areas within the territorial
limits of the city.
(b) All new or relocated pipeline facilities within private residential areas shall be located within existing
pipeline corridors within the city, or if there is no existing pipeline corridor available for such installation, along
the perimeter of such existing pipeline corridor, and as far from any existing or planned buildings as physically
possible, unless the pipeline operator of the pipeline facility is able to demonstrate to the pipeline administrator,
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/554
that such alignment is infeasible. In addition to the criteria for a waiver set forth in this article, the pipeline
administrator may consider the following criteria when determining the feasibility of locating the pipeline facility
in existing pipeline corridors in the city:
(1) The availability and preclusive cost of existing pipeline corridor space;
(2) The availability and preclusive cost of easement rights to and from the existing pipeline
corridor;
(3) Environmental, aesthetic, safety and development cost issues related to building, operating
and maintaining both the portion of the pipeline facility that would be located in the existing pipeline
corridor and the lengths of the pipeline facility required to gain access to and from the existing
pipeline corridor;
(4) Any delays in right-of-way acquisition or construction of the pipeline facility that may result
from routing through an established pipeline corridor; and
(5) The availability of an alternative easement path to the pipeline operator.
(c) If the pipeline administrator determines it is not feasible for a pipeline facility to be located within an
existing pipeline corridor within private residential areas, and unless tree preservation regulations dictate
otherwise, the pipeline operator of such pipeline facility must:
(1) For platted property, be located within mandatory front, side yard or rear setback areas;
(2) For unplatted property, be contiguous and adjacent to the property boundaries of fee parcels
or existing easements to avoid unnecessary fragmentation of land and avoid diagonal routes that
would create unusable slivers of land; and
(3) Avoid conflict with the location and opening of existing and planned future streets and laying of
planned water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer lines.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-10), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-78. Bond and insurance requirements.
(a) In the event that a license is issued for pipeline facility or other operations under this article for installing,
constructing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, modifying, removing or operating a pipeline facility on, over,
under, along or across any affected city streets, rights-of-way or other city property, no actual operation shall be
commenced until the pipeline operator files with the city secretary a performance bond meeting the following
requirements:
(1) A duly executed bond executed by the pipeline operator or, if approved by the pipeline
administrator, by the pipeline operator's general contractor as principal, and by a surety company
with an A.M. Best Financial Strength Rating of “A-” or better that is acceptable to the city and is
licensed to conduct business in the state, such bond to be in the sum of $50,000.00 or double the
amount of the city's estimate of cost of restoration, whichever is greater, unless another amount is
agreed to in writing by the city pursuant to a license agreement.
(2) The surety company shall have and maintain at all times the bond is in effect an A.M. Best “A”
rating for the policy period. Said bond shall include conditions that the pipeline operator, its heirs,
assigns and successors will do the following:
a. Comply with the terms and conditions of the application and this article in the
construction, operation and maintenance of the pipeline and related structures and facilities;
b. Restore all streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sanitary sewers, stormwater sewers and
other drainage facilities, and all other public improvements and public or franchised utilities,
and live vegetation and trees that may be injured or damaged in the construction of any
pipeline facilities permitted under the license to their condition immediately preceding the
commencement of such construction activities, or better; and
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/554
c. Remove all litter, machinery, buildings, trash and waste used, accumulated or allowed in
the course of such construction activities within ten calendar days of the completion of such
construction activities.
(3) The bond must be approved by the pipeline administrator and filed with the city secretary. A
separate maintenance bond or escrow account may be established in such amount and under such
terms as agreed upon between the pipeline operator and pipeline administrator for minor obligations
such as tree preservation and replacement as set forth in the license agreement. Such bond shall
become effective upon the granting of the license and must remain in full force and effect so long as
such pipeline is in operation, and until all work under the terms of such license has been completed
and the license is terminated. Such bond may later be amended to include other pipeline facilities
operated by the pipeline operator upon the request of the pipeline operator, and upon prior written
approval of the pipeline administrator, upon the same or more advantageous terms for the city.
(4) A pipeline operator that operates or plans to operate multiple pipeline facilities in the city may
utilize a blanket bond in a form and amount mutually agreed upon by the pipeline administrator and
the pipeline operator.
(b) In the event that a license is issued for a pipeline facility or other operations under this article for
installing, constructing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, modifying, removing or operating a pipeline facility on,
over, under, along or across any affected city streets, rights-of-way or other city property, unless alternative
policy limits or terms is otherwise agreed upon and set forth in such license agreement, no actual operation
shall be commenced until the pipeline operator files with the city secretary the following insurance policies:
(1) Workers compensation at statutory limits;
(2) Employer's liability, including bodily injury by accident and by disease, for $500,000.00
combined single limit per occurrence and a 12-month aggregate policy limit of $1,000,000.00;
(3) Commercial general liability coverage, including blanket contractual liability, products and
completed operations, personal injury, bodily injury, broad form property damage, operations hazard,
pollution, explosion, collapse and underground hazards, with minimum personal injury/bodily injury
limits of$ 1,000,000.00 per person and $5,000,000.00 per occurrence, minimum property damage
limits of $10,000,000.00 per occurrence, and a 12-month aggregate policy limit of 10,000,000.00;
and
(4) Automobile liability insurance (for automobiles used by the pipeline operator in the course of its
performance under the license, including employer's nonownership and hired auto coverage) for
$2,000,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence.
(c) Each such policy shall:
(1) Name the city and its officers, officials, employees, agents, representatives, successors and
assigns as additional insured parties;
(2) Be issued by a carrier with an A.M. Best Financial Strength rating of “A-” or better; and
(3) Remain in full force and effect and be carried so long as such pipeline facility is operated and
until all work under the terms of such license has been completed and the license is terminated.
A certificate of insurance shall be furnished annually by the applicant or the affiliate pipeline operator showing
that such insurance is and continues in effect. If any such policy is written as claims made coverage and the
city is required to be carried as an additional insured, then the pipeline operator subject to this article shall
purchase policy period extensions so as to provide coverage to the city for a period of at least two years after
the last date that the license is in effect.
(d) The city may adjust the bond and insurance policy limits described above every five years during the term
of the license, or sooner as determined by city council, to compensate for the effects of inflation with the
objective to maintain the value of coverage as of the effective date of the Ordinance from which this article is
derived.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/554
(e) Each policy or an endorsement thereto, except those for worker's compensation and employer's liability,
shall name the city and its officers, officials, employees, agents, representatives, successors and assigns as
additional insured parties, but limited to risks indemnified pursuant to the license agreement. No deductible
shall exceed $1,000,000.00 per occurrence or one percent of the consolidated net worth of such pipeline
operator and its affiliates, whichever is greater.
(f) Each pipeline operator subject to this article shall assume and bear any claims or losses to the ex. tent of
deductible amounts.
(g) All such policies and certificates shall contain an agreement that the insurer shall notify the city in writing
not less than 30 calendar days before any material change, reduction in coverage or cancellation of any policy.
Each pipeline operator subject to this article shall give written notice to the city within seven calendar days of
the date upon which total claims by any party against such pipeline operator reduce the aggregate amount of
coverage below the amounts required by this article. Should the policy coverage fall below acceptable limits,
the pipeline operator shall, at the direction of the pipeline administrator, provide supplemental coverage for the
remainder of the applicable term, in amounts and form acceptable to the city.
(h) Each policy must contain an endorsement to the effect that the insurer waives any claim or right in the
nature of subrogation to recover against the city, its officers, officials, employees, successors and assigns.
(i) Each policy must contain an endorsement that such policy is primary insurance to any other insurance
available to the city as an additional insured with respect to claims arising thereunder.
(j) In the event a pipeline operator and its affiliates install multiple pipeline facilities within the city, then the
pipeline operator and its affiliates shall only be required to obtain one blanket bond and one certificate of
insurance, provided that the cumulative coverage provided is at least as great as the total that would be
provided using separate bonds in the amounts required herein for all facilities within the city, and such blanket
bond and insurance is approved by the city in a license agreement, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld. Individual bonds and separate insurance certificates for each individual pipeline facility shall not be
required.
(k) Each pipeline operator may comply with the insurance requirements of this section through a combination
of self-insurance, primary and excess insurance policies, provided that for any self-insurance component, the
pipeline operator provides the administrator with evidence reasonably satisfactory to the city establishing the
existence of sufficient self-insurance funds.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-11), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-79. Notice requirements; preconstruction.
(a) The pipeline operator shall give written notice to the city and to all owners of structures that are located
within 300 feet of the proposed centerline of the pipeline facility at least 72 hours prior to the commencement of
pipeline facility construction or nonemergency repair or modification. Notice to the city shall be sent to the
pipeline administrator. Notice to the city may be by hand delivery, facsimile transmission, United States express
mail or other reliable expedited delivery service, and shall be deemed delivered when actually received by the
city. Notice to owners of structures that are located within 300 feet of the proposed centerline of the pipeline
facility may be by hand delivery, United States express mail, other reliable expedited delivery service, or United
States regular mail. Notice by hand delivery or facsimile transmission shall be deemed delivered when actually
received by the addressee, or if sent by United States express mail or other reliable expedited delivery service,
at 5:00 p. m., on the first business day after mailing, or if by United States regular mail, at 5:00 p. m., three
business days after date of mailing.
(b) In lieu of written notice to persons within 300 feet, the pipeline operator shall notify the city, which shall
than make a good faith effort to place and disseminate the pertinent information on the city's website and
Connect CTY, or other global, electronic citizen notification system. Further, the pipeline operator shall place
notification signage, of a size and at locations designated or approved by the city, to advise commuters of
negative traffic impact of the construction activity, within five days of such activity.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-12), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-80. Approved registration post-construction filing requirements.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/554
(a) Within 18 calendar days after completion of pipeline facility construction under or through city rights-ofway,
easements, or fee properties, the pipeline operator shall provide the city with record drawings for such
pipeline facility that is constructed under or through city rights-of-way, easements, or fee properties. This
requirement shall be deemed a requirement of any license agreement authorizing any pipeline facility that is
constructed under or through any city right-of-way, easement, or fee property, whether contained in the license
agreement. Such record drawings shall comply with the following:
(1) Accuracy of record drawings shall meet a survey level of one foot to 50,000 feet.
(2) The scale of record drawings shall be a minimum of one inch to 40 feel
(3) Record drawings shall also be supplied in a DFF digital file format with the location tied to at
least one nearby GPS (global positioning system), city monument.
(4) If the new pipeline facility length exceeds 1,000 feet within the city-owned right-of-way,
easement, or fee property, then such pipeline facility shall be tied to at least two GPS city
monuments.
(5) Record drawings shall include:
a. The exact pipeline facilities easement boundaries and pipeline facilities location within the
respective city-owned right-of-way, easement, or fee property;
b. To the extent that information can be obtained, the horizontal location, covering depths,
and exact geographic location of all existing public or private infrastructure and utilities,
including, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer, wastewater, gas, electric, telephone, cable,
and fiber optic lines and other public utilities improvements located within, on, over, under,
along or across the proposed pipeline easement within the respective city-owned right-of-way,
easement or fee property;
c. The horizontal location, covering depths, and exact geographic location of any shutoff
valves within the respective city-owned right-of-way, easement or fee property;
d. Detailed cross section drawings for all public street right-of-way, easement and fee
property crossings and encroachments; and
e. Summarized specifications for pipeline facilities within city-owned rights-of-way,
easement, or fee property.
(b) The pipeline operator shall file such post-construction documents containing all of the information
submitted to the Texas Railroad Commission that relates to the pipeline operator facilities within the boundaries
of the city.
(c) The pipeline operator shall appropriately mark as “Privileged,” “Proprietary” and/or “Confidential” and the
city shall take reasonable efforts to prevent any information required herein that is privileged under federal or
state law (such as in the instance in which pipeline facilities are critical infrastructure) from disclosure to the
public or any member thereof, including obtaining a determination that such information is exempt from
disclosure as a public record under Texas Government Code ch. 552.
(d) The pipeline operator shall update all information required in this section promptly upon any change at
any time during the operation of the pipeline facility within the city.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-13), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-81. Retention of technical advisor.
The pipeline administrator may retain, on behalf of the city, one or more technical advisors or consultants to
assist the pipeline administrator in reviewing the registration application. The pipeline operator shall pay to the
city, as an additional registration application processing fee, the amount equal to the amount necessary to
reimburse the city to cover the actual costs of such technical advisors or consultants. If such amount is not
known at the time of the filing of the registration application, the amount shall be estimated by the pipeline
administrator, provided that any excess will be refunded to the pipeline operator and any deficiency shall paid
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/554
by the pipeline operator upon completion of the registration process and ascertainment of the actual costs, so
that the costs of such technical advisors or consultants shall be borne by the pipeline operator as an additional
registration application processing fee. (1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-14), adopted
8/18/09)
Sec. 38-82. Information reporting requirements.
Each time a pipeline is subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test, including, but not limited to, prior to
commencing operation of any pipeline, each pipeline operator subject to this article shall provide the pipeline
administrator and the fire chief written notice of such test at least 72 hours before the commencement of such
test, shall permit the administrator and/or fire chief, or their designees, an opportunity to observe such tests,
and shall, as soon as practical following such test, provide a copy of the test results to the pipeline administrator
and the fire chief. (1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-15), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-83. Emergency response plan reporting.
In order to provide for orderly education, planning and staffing by the city's emergency services personnel, each
pipeline operator subject to this article shall meet annually with the pipeline administrator and fire chief to
discuss and review emergency response plans. As part of this review, and at any such other time upon request
of the pipeline administrator, the fire chief or the police chief, the pipeline operator shall furnish a copy of its
emergency response plan and/or any updates. (1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-16),
adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-84. No assumption of responsibility by city.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as an assumption by the city of any responsibility of a pipeline
operator, of pipeline facilities not owned by the city, or a waiver of the city's governmental immunity or the
official immunity of any city officer, employee or agent. No city officer, employee or agent shall have authority to
relieve a pipeline operator from their responsibility under applicable law or regulation. (1998 Code, ch. 39;
Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-17), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-85. No waiver of other right-of-way regulations implied.
(a) In the event pipeline facilities are to be placed within any city street or right-of-way, the pipeline operator
shall comply with the right-of-way use regulations as provided in this Code, as they currently exist and as they
may be adopted and amended.
(b) To the extent that the provisions of this article conflict with the city's other right-of-way use Ordinances,
this article shall control.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-18), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 38-86. Termination of license.
(a) Any violation of the provisions of any or all sections of this article with regard to license requirements shall
be grounds for the suspension or termination of any license subject to the procedure set forth in this section.
The suspension or termination of any license shall require the immediate cessation of all operations subject to
such license and the termination of such license shall require the pipeline operator subject to this article to file a
new license in full accordance with the provisions of this article.
(b) If the pipeline administrator determines that a pipeline operator has violated any of the provisions of any
or all sections of the license requirements, the pipeline administrator shall give the pipeline operator written
notice of such violations. If the pipeline operator has not cured such violations or appealed the decision of the
pipeline administrator within 30 calendar days of receipt of the written notice from the pipeline administrator,
then the pipeline administrator shall notify the city council of such violation, and any city council member may
request that a hearing be held before the city council as to whether the pipeline operator's license at issue
should be suspended or terminated. In such event, the pipeline administrator shall notify the pipeline operator
of such setting, and the pipeline operator shall be given an opportunity to present any facts and arguments the
pipeline operator wishes to the city council as to why such license at issue should not be suspended or
terminated.
(c) Prior to any hearing, the Texas Railroad Commission, or successor agency, shall be notified.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/554
(d) Any hearing on suspension or termination of a license shall be governed by the following rules and
procedures:
(1) Such hearing shall be set as an item on the regular city council agenda.
(2) The city shall bear the burden of persuasion that the license at issue should be suspended or
terminated.
(3) No formal testimony or swearing of witnesses shall be required, and the city council may
consider facts or evidence as the city council determines is appropriate. The pipeline administrator
or the pipeline administrator's designee shall present the facts and evidence relied upon by the
pipeline administrator; the pipeline operator shall then have an opportunity to present the facts and
evidence relied upon by the pipeline operator; the city council shall then consider any facts or
evidence from the public or other interested persons. The city council may ask questions of the
pipeline administrator or the pipeline administrators designee, the pipeline operator and any other
interested persons as the city council determines is appropriate. The city council may limit the time
for any presentation in its sole discretion.
(4) Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall then render its decision. Any decision
shall be determined by majority vote of the members of the city council then present.
(5) Written documents or evidence which any party wishes to submit must be filed with the
pipeline administrator and submitted to the city council no less than three business days prior. to the
appeal hearing; provided, however, the city council may determine to receive and consider additional
evidence at the time of hearing, and the opposing party shall be provided a reasonable opportunity
to present rebuttable evidence, and the city council may continue the hearing to allow the parties an
opportunity to review and rebut the evidence.
(6) The decision of the city council shall be final.
(e) Upon termination of a license, unless otherwise provided by city council, the pipeline operator may file a
new application for a new license without prejudice; provided, however, that the circumstances of the
termination of the prior license shall be an additional factor which may be considered by the city in determining
whether to grant the new license.
(1998 Code, ch. 39; Ordinance 2009019A, sec. II(39-20), adopted 8/18/09)
CHAPTER 40
PARKS AND RECREATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 40-1. Motorcycles and other motor vehicles prohibited in parks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorcycle, a motor vehicle, or any other motorized vehicle,
including a motorbike, on any unpaved public property within the boundaries of a city park or on any paved
surface unless designated as a parking area. This section shall not be deemed to prevent the operation of
vehicles in the park by city employees or agents for the purpose of maintenance and upkeep of the park. (1976
Code, sec. 21-1; 1998 Code, sec. 90-1)
Sec. 40-2. Vandalism reporting award.
The mayor is hereby required, authorized and empowered to offer a reward of $25.00 payable to the person or
persons who shall be responsible for the apprehension of any person damaging or defacing any public
property. (1976 Code, sec. 21-2; 1998 Code, sec. 90-2)
Sec. 40-3. Park hours of operation.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/554
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Members of the public means and includes any person or user of a municipal park other than persons
employed by the city for park maintenance and construction or authorized law enforcement officers conducting
official law enforcement activities.
Municipal parks means any portion of a city park which has been dedicated for park purposes, including walks,
drives, roads and parking facilities within and adjacent to park facilities if such areas have been dedicated for
park purposes.
(b) All municipal parks located within the city will be open to members of the public and accessible, used, and
entered only between the hours of 6:00 A.M. and 11:00 p. m., Monday through Sunday.
(c) It shall be prohibited and a violation of this section for a member of the public to access, use, be present,
enter or remain within any municipal park between the hours of 11:01 p. m. and 5:59 a.m., on any day of the
week or closed by order of the city manager.
(d) Notwithstanding this section, the city shall remain entitled to close parks or extend the hours of operation
when deemed reasonable or necessary by the city council, city manager or a city manager designee and
authorized in writing. Notice to the public of such closure shall be by those means deemed reasonable and
necessary, including but not limited to posting of temporary signs, utilization of the public access notification
system, website and/or community bulletin board.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person, except a member of the police or fire departments, or other employees
of the city engaged in the performance of official duty to be in or within the boundaries of a park in the city
between the hours of 11:01 p.m. and 5:59 a.m.
(Ordinance 500-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/22/09; Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.57), adopted 12/15/09)
Secs. 40-4–40-24. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RESERVED*
Secs. 40-25–40-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PARK POLICIES, RULES AND REGULATIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 40-51. Enforcement of article; violations, penalties and culpable mental state.
(a) The city manager or his designated representative shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of all
codes and Ordinances regulating the conduct and use of city parks including but not limited to this article.
(b) Any conduct expressly prohibited or unauthorized herein shall be considered unlawful and a violation of
this article. Failure to comply with any requirement herein shall also be deemed to be unlawful and a violation of
this article.
(c) Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by
this article.
(d) The placement of a schedule or sign by the city manager or his designee shall be prima facie evidence of
the hours of operation or approved schedule pursuant to the authority granted herein, and in full force and
effect.
(e) Violations of this article may result in the applicant's loss of the security deposit as an offset against city's
costs in rectifying the violations. The retention of the security deposit does not preclude any additional lawful
action being taken, including but not limited to criminal and injunctive relief.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.51), adopted 12/15/09)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/554
Sec. 40-52. Restrictions and violations.
(a) The city manager or his designee may establish and post a schedule of visiting/occupancy hours and/or
restrictions on the public's use of park land. The city manager or his designee may close or restrict the use of a
park when necessitated by reason of public health, public safety, maintenance, resource protection or other
reasons in the public interest. Entering or using park land in a manner which is contrary to the schedule of
visiting hours, closures or restrictions is prohibited.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit any act that is prohibited by this article.
(c) Excessive noise between the hours of 10:00 p. m. and 7:00 A.M., which unreasonably disturbs persons is
prohibited.
(d) Any act or conduct by any person which interferes with, impedes or disrupts the use of the park or impairs
the safety of any person is prohibited. Individuals who are loud, boisterous, rowdy, disorderly or otherwise
disturb the peace, may be requested to leave or be subject to ejection, consistent with state and local laws and
Ordinances.
(e) The operation or use of any sound producing, amplification or motorized equipment, including but not
limited to vehicles, in such a manner as to unreasonably annoy or endanger persons at any time, violate or
exceed state or local laws governing noise levels from motorized, or sound amplification equipment is
prohibited.
(f) The possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages on any portion of park land is prohibited.
(g) The police chief, or his designee, may refuse entry to any person for a period of up to one year on the
following basis:
(1) Any breach of the peace that has occurred on public lands within the preceding 90 days;
(2) Any person who has violated any term or condition of the park facility application;
(3) Any person who has violated any term or condition of this article.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.52), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-53. Liability.
All of the regulations provided in this article are hereby declared to be governmental and for the preservation
and protection of the health, safety and welfare of the general public in accordance with the city council's police
powers. Any member of the city council or any city official or employee charged with the enforcement of this
article, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and he
is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. (Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.53), adopted
12/15/09)
Sec. 40-54. Fees.
(a) Reduction or waiver of fees may be considered by the city manager or his designee, upon approval of
application by person seeking the waiver or reduction.
(b) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to fail to pay required recreation use fees, or maintain the
requisite insurance coverage as established herein or by separate city Ordinance relative to fees.
(c) Currently seated city council members are exempt from all fees except security deposits.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.54), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-55. Priority use.
(a) The city has priority use of all parks and park facilities (“facilities”). Facilities are available to anyone on a
first come, first-serve basis for times not scheduled or reserved for city use, and as set forth in this article.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/554
(b) Residents shall have priority over nonresidents for use of parks and recreation facilities unless deposits
have already been accepted but the city.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.55), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-56. Refunds.
Refunds of fees paid are available due to inclement weather; provided, however, that a request for refund is
submitted to the department that oversees parks and recreation, in writing, within one business week after the
scheduled session. Failure to timely submit a written request for refund forfeits the refund. Telephone requests
for refunds will not be accepted. Rescheduling in lieu of a refund is permitted based upon availability of time
slots. There shall be no refunds for cancellations unless expressly allowed by the city manager or his designee.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.56), adopted 12/15/09)
Secs. 40-57–40-85. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PARK USAGE
Sec. 40-86. Rental of pavilions.
(a) All special event users, except city-related users, shall make a deposit and pay a fee to the city. Such
deposit is to cover the cost of any necessary cleanup or vandalism. The city manager or his designee shall
designate a person or persons to inspect all premises after usage after which the deposit will be refunded within
ten days unless vandalism or other types of damages have occurred. In the event vandalism or damage has
occurred, including cleanup of the site, the deposit shall be forfeited and if deemed necessary, the user will be
billed for the other damages.
(b) City-related or-sponsored functions shall have first priority on the pavilion and shall use the pavilion
without charge.
(c) Fees for the use of the park pavilions shall be listed on the attached fee schedule.
(d) All applicants who reserve the facility for business, commercial or professional gatherings may rent said
pavilion during daytime hours between 8:00 am. and 8:00 p. m. The applicant may not charge, nor solicit, for
money of any kind or character from any person attending an event for the use of the pavilion. A liability
insurance policy naming the city as an additional insured shall be purchased by all business, commercial or
professional renters. Coverage amounts must meet those specified by the city manager or his designee.
(e) A request for a reservation must be made to the city no earlier than 60 days in advance of the intended
use. City staff shall determine the priority of the requests if more than one is received for the same date and
time period. Requests made within 60 days of the event will be considered on an availability basis.
(f) A permit shall be issued by the city stating the time, date, fee and amount of deposit and any other
pertinent information desired by the city.
(g) Music may be played only between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 10:00 p. m., unless otherwise approved by
the city manager or his designee, or as permitted under the city's noise and nuisance Ordinances. No event
shall create a noise or other nuisance as defined by applicable Ordinance. The applicant shall be responsible
for ensuring that no noise or other nuisance is created.
(h) Vehicles will not be allowed off designated parking areas and drives except for police, fire emergency or
maintenance vehicles from city departments. Parking may only occur in designated parking locations on
improved surfaces.
(i) Decorations shall not be attached to any structure that would tend to deface the structure including, but
not limited to, staples, tacks, crepe paper or any material that will stain. Approval shall be obtained from the city
manager or his designee for any special decorations.
(j) Any open flames, candles (other than birthday cake candles), torches, etc., shall not be used in any
structure, are strictly prohibited and use of any decoration or equipment that requires electricity must meet
applicable fire and electrical codes and not create a fire hazard.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/554
(k) A permit shall be issued by the city stating the time, date, fee and amount of deposit and any other
pertinent information desired by the city. The permit must be available during the event and presented upon
request.
(l) All decisions concerning the applicable fee, the nonrefund of any portion of the deposit, or the denial of the
use of the pavilion may be appealed to the city manager or his designee. If applicant is not pleased with the
decision of the city manager or his designee, the applicant has ten business days to file a written appeal to the
city council. The appeal will be scheduled for the next regularly scheduled city council meeting.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.58), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-87. Use of parks and facilities.
(a) The use of picnic areas and play equipment (other than pavilion renters) shall be on a first-come, firstserve
basis. No reservations are allowed.
(b) Any group not sponsored by the city and desiring to use a city park as a gathering place or for an event or
function of any kind shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) The organizer or representatives of the group desiring use of the park for an event or function
shall file an application for a special permit with the city at least 60 days prior to the proposed date of
the event or function.
(2) The applicant is to use the form provided by the city and shall include the following
information:
a. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons responsible for the
event or function;
b. A description of the event and its proposed date and hours of duration;
c. Estimated number of people who will be in attendance;
d. A description of any special features which may be involved (e.g., pony rides, petting
zoos, bounce machines, port-a-johns, tents, etc.);
e. The park and park area being requested for use;
f. A description of any voice or musical amplification equipment to be used; and
g. Any other information that may be required by the city council, city manager or any
affected department of the city in order to establish additional requirements for the preservation
of the public health, safety and welfare.
(c) Within three business days of the time the application has been filed with the city, the city manager or his
designee will be notified of the event or function and will be provided copies of the application for the purposes
stated above and for the purpose of assessing the demand placed upon city services by the event and the
impact upon the area surrounding the park.
(d) In addition to the requirements set forth in this section, the group shall comply with any and all other
applicable laws, statutes, Ordinances, resolutions and rules governing use of the park. These requirements
include, but are not limited to, the payment of any fees or deposits which may be required for the use of the city
parks by this Code, state or federal laws.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.59), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-88. Sports clinics.
(a) Any individual or group seeking use of a park or playing field to conduct a sports clinic shall reserve the
park or playing field by filling out the appropriate application forms with the city and pay a fee for each hour the
clinic is to be held. If, after the clinic is completed, the number of hours during which the park or field was
actually in use exceeds that allowed for the fee paid, the applicant shall be liable and responsible to pay an
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/554
additional fee as determined by the city, within five days after completion of the clinic. If the actual number of
hours is less than that allowed for the fee paid, the applicant shall receive a pro rata refund. The application
forms and all fees must be submitted to the city at least 60 days before the clinic is scheduled to begin.
(b) Scheduling of clinics shall be determined and approved by the city. Clinics shall not conflict with any
scheduled league play.
(c) The applicant shall purchase a liability insurance policy naming the city as an additional insured, in an
amount to be determined by the director of the department of parks and recreation or his designated
representative.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.60), adopted 12/15/09)
Secs. 40-89–40-119. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. MOTOR VEHICLES
Sec. 40-120. Motorized vehicles and bicycles.
Motorized vehicles including, but not limited to, go-carts, motorcycles, mini bikes, pocket bikes, four-wheelers,
automobiles, pickup trucks and trucks, save and except city officials, official park maintenance vehicles and
police and fire vehicles, are hereby prohibited from driving or being driven in each and every park within the
city, except on designated hard-surfaced parking areas. (Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.61), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-121. Nonmotorized scooters, bicycles, in-line skates, etc., prohibited near recreational fields.
(a) During the hours of operation of the recreational fields in city parks, no person shall operate any
nonmotorized scooter, bicycle, in-line skates, skateboard or other recreational vehicle with wheels within 100
feet of any recreational field, on any paved or unpaved surface.
(b) The city manager or his designee shall designate the area within 100 feet of a recreational field by
appropriate “no bicycle” or other similar signs.
(c) Notwithstanding other penalty provisions to the contrary, upon conviction for an offense under this section
the maximum fine that may be imposed for the first offense is $25.00. Each citation shall be considered a
separate offense. Subsequent offenses are subject to the maximum penalty provided herein.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.62), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-122. Vehicles.
(a) Vehicles shall obey posted restrictions and regulations and shall not be parked or operated in a manner
as to obstruct or impede normal or emergency traffic movement or the parking of other vehicles, create a safety
hazard, or endanger any person, property or environmental feature. Vehicles so parked are subject to removal
and impoundment at the owner's expense.
(b) The operation and/or parking of a vehicle off authorized roadways is prohibited except at locations and
times designated by the city manager or his designee. The operation or placement of any vehicle through,
around or beyond a restrictive sign, barricade, fence or traffic control device is prohibited.
(c) Any motorized vehicle shall be operated only with a proper and effective exhaust muffler as defined and
required by state and local laws.
(d) All vehicles shall be operated in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.63), adopted 12/15/09)
Secs. 40-123–40-142. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. RULES AND REGULATIONS
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/554
Sec. 40-143. Alcoholic beverages.
The consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages including, but not limited to wine, beer, ale and mixed
drinks, is prohibited in each and every park owned or leased by the city. (Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.64),
adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-144. Bounce houses.
Bounce houses or other temporary play structures designed to be inflated are permitted on city park property,
upon the completion of the permit application and a waiver of liability. The bounce house may only be inflated
on the day of the scheduled event and must be deflated within two hours after the conclusion of the event. The
applicant and all participants understand and agree that the city is not approving the use of bounce houses and
shall not hold the city responsible for its use or misuse. (Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.65), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-145. Control of animals.
(a) Domesticated animals, such as dogs and cats, shall be permitted in park areas provided the animal is
penned, caged, on a leash under six feet in length, or otherwise physically restrained, and has been properly
tagged and vaccinated in accordance with city Ordinances. Animals shall not be allowed to impede or restrict
full and free use of park land by the public. Unattended animals shall not be permitted on park land. Animals,
except properly trained animals assisting those with disabilities (such as Seeing-eye dogs), are prohibited in
sanitary facilities, playgrounds and any other areas so designated by the city manager or his designee.
Abandonment of any animal on city-owned land is prohibited. Unclaimed or unattended animals are subject to
immediate impoundment in accordance with city Ordinances.
(b) No person shall allow animals to bark or emit other noise, which unreasonably disturbs persons on park
property. It shall be prima facie evidence of unreasonable disturbance if the animal barks, or emits other noise,
for longer than 15 consecutive minutes.
(c) Persons bringing or allowing animals in designated public use areas shall be responsible for proper
removal and disposal of any waste/feces produced by these animals.
(d) No person shall bring or allow cattle or other livestock except horses being used for equestrian purposes
onto park land, except as designated by the city manager or his designee as part of an approved special event.
(e) Ranging. grazing, watering of, or allowing livestock on park land is prohibited except when authorized by
lease, license or other written agreement with the city.
(f) Unauthorized livestock are subject to impoundment in accordance with city Ordinances.
(g) Any animal impounded under the provisions of this section shall be subject to all appropriate fees and
expenses upon recoupment by the owner or other person with care, custody or control of the animal. All fees
shall be paid before the impounded animal is returned to its owner.
(h) Wild or exotic pets and animals (including but not limited to cougars, lions, bears, bobcats, wolves and
snakes), or any pets or animals displaying vicious or aggressive behavior or otherwise posing a threat to public
safety or deemed a public nuisance, are prohibited from park land, unless otherwise permitted by Ordinance,
and are subject to removal in accordance with federal, state and local laws.
(i) No owner or possessor of any animal shall permit any animal to enter or remain in any area of a city park
which is posted to indicate such restriction.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.66), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-146. Golfing in the parks.
No person shall play or practice the game of golf in any city park, which shall include but not be limited to
driving, putting and chipping. (Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.67), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-147. Swimming prohibited in streams or lakes of parks.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/554
No person shall swim or wade in any lake, stream, or pond in the city park system, unless designated
otherwise. (Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.68), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-148. Picnicking.
Picnicking and related day-use activities are permitted, except in those areas where prohibited by the city
manager or his designee and so designated by a posted sign. (Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.69), adopted
12/15/09)
Sec. 40-149. Hunting, fishing and trapping.
(a) Hunting and discharging firearms is prohibited in all park land.
(b) Trapping is prohibited in all park land.
(c) All applicable federal, state and local laws will regulate these activities on city-owned or city-leased
property.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.70), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-150. Sanitation.
(a) Garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, graywater or any other waste material or waste liquid generated on park
land and incidental to authorized recreational activities shall be either removed from park land or deposited in
receptacles provided for that purpose. The improper deposit or disposal of such wastes, human and animal
waste included, on park land is prohibited. For all purposes hereunder, the disposal of such waste shall be the
responsibility of the person renting the park space, or using the facilities, when the waste was created or the
registered owner of the vehicle from where the waste came from or was transported by, unless a specific
violator can be identified.
(b) No person may dispose of or dump onto park land any household or commercial garbage, trash, rubbish,
debris, dead animals or litter of any kind. Park land trash receptacles shall only be used for approved waste
disposal as stated herein and not be used for waste generated by nonpark land users. No person shall bring
trash, rubbish, garbage or waste of any kind onto park land for disposal.
(c) The spilling, pumping, discharge or disposal of contaminants, pollutants, graywater or other wastes,
including, but not limited to, human or animal waste, petroleum, industrial and commercial products and
byproducts, on park land is prohibited.
(d) Picnickers and all other persons using city-owned property shall keep their sites free of trash and litter
and shall remove all personal equipment and clean their sites upon departure. Failure to do so shall be a
violation of this section.
(e) The discharge or placing of sewage, waste, garbage, refuse or pollutants onto park land from any vehicle
is prohibited.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.71), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-151. Fires.
(a) Gasoline and other accelerants, except that which is contained in the factory installed storage tanks of
vehicles, shall not be carried onto or stored on the park land without written permission of the city manager or
his designee.
(b) Fires, open flames, and barbeques are prohibited on all park property except in designated grills sites
provided by the city. Applicant must provide a method of extinguishment that is approved by the fire
department.
(c) Use of tobacco or other smoking materials, matches or other burning material is prohibited, except as
otherwise provided herein.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.72), adopted 12/15/09)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/554
Sec. 40-152. Explosives, firearms, other weapons and fireworks.
(a) The possession of loaded firearms, ammunition, loaded projectile firing devices, bows and arrows,
crossbows, or other weapons is prohibited unless:
(1) In the possession of a federal, state or local law enforcement officer;
(2) The person is in possession of the firearm consistent with the state's concealed handgun law,
Texas Government Code ch. 411, subch. H, as it exists and may be amended.
(b) Possession of explosives or explosive devices of any kind, including fireworks or other pyrotechnics, is
prohibited. Fireworks may be allowed in conjunction with a city sponsored event by a licensed pyrotechnic
company.
(c) All such activities and possession shall be regulated by the applicable federal, state and local laws.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.73), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-153. Public property.
(a) Destruction, damage, defacement, removal or any alteration of public property including, but not limited
to, developed facilities, signs, structures and vegetative growth, is prohibited.
(b) Cutting or gathering of trees or parts of trees and/or the removal of wood from city-owned lands is
prohibited without written permission of the city manager or his designee consistent with cha, pertaining to tree
preservation.
(Ordinance 2009026; sec. 2(90.74); adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-154. Abandonment and impoundment of personal property.
(a) The provisions of this section shall apply to all property not subject to Texas C.C.P. sec. 18.17.
(b) Lost and found articles. All articles found shall be deposited by the finder with the city's police department
Articles will be held for 30 days. Disposition of the property may be had in accordance with the abandoned or
unclaimed property procedures set forth herein.
(c) Personal property of any kind shall not be abandoned, stored or left unattended upon park land. After a
period of 24 hours, or at any time after a posted closure hour in a public area or for the purpose of providing
public safety or resource protection, unattended personal property shall be presumed to be abandoned and
may be impounded and stored at a storage point designated by the city manager or his designee, who may
assess a reasonable impoundment fee against any person who provides proof of ownership and seeks to
reclaim such property. Such fee shall be paid before the impounded property is returned to its owner.
(d) Abandoned or unclaimed personal property may be disposed after 30 days except that if it has a fair
market value of $100.00 or more the property may not be disposed of until 90 days after the date it is received
at the storage point designated by the city administrator. The net proceeds from the sale of property shall be
conveyed into any fund consistent with city policy and Ordinances.
(e) The city manager or his designee shall cause to, by public or private sale or otherwise, to dispose of all
lost, abandoned or unclaimed personal property that comes into city custody or control, consistent with city
policies and procedures. However, property may not be disposed of until diligent effort has been made to find
the owner, heirs, next of kin or legal representative. If the owner, heirs, next of kin or legal representative are
determined but not found, the property may not be disposed of until the expiration of 30 days after the date
when notice, giving the time and place of the intended sale or other disposition, has been sent by certified or
registered mail to the person at the last known address. When diligent efforts to determine the owner, heirs;
next of kin or legal representative are unsuccessful, the property may be placed in line for sale; upon the
expiration of30 days from the date of impoundment, consistent with city policies.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.75), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-155. Special events.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/554
(a) Special events including but not limited to music festivals; dramatic presentations or other special
recreation programs, are permitted only by written permission from the city manager or his designee, consistent
with city policies and Ordinances. The appropriate fees will be assessed in accordance with city Ordinances.
(b) The public may be charged a fee by the sponsor of special events. Proposed fee schedules must be
approved in writing by the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall have authority
to revoke permission, require removal of any equipment, and require restoration of an area to pre-event
condition, upon failure of the sponsor to comply with terms and conditions of the permit/authorization.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.76), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-156. Unauthorized occupation of structures; trespass.
(a) Occupation of any park lands shall be in strict conformance with the application for park use facility, the
policies set forth herein and as may be published by the city manager or adopted by city Ordinance or
resolution.
(b) Use of city-owned lands shall not be for agricultural purposes, unless set forth by city Ordinance or
agreement.
(c) It shall be unlawful for a person to enter onto or remain on park land if he receives notice to depart and
fails to do so. Notice for purpose of this section shall mean the oral or written communication by the city
manager, the police chief, or their designee. Such may also constitute criminal trespass in accordance with
Texas Penal Code sec. 30.05. Written notice shall be deemed delivered when personal delivery is
accomplished, a notice is posted on the vehicle occupying the site, on a public marker identifying the site, or on
a stake in the ground within the site.
(d) The construction, placement or existence of any structure of any kind, whether permanent or temporary,
under, upon, in or over the city-owned lands is prohibited unless a permit, lease, license or other appropriate
written documentation is provided. The design, construction, placement, existence or use of structures in
violation of the terms of the permit, lease, license, or other written authorization is prohibited. The city shall not
be liable for the loss of, or damage to, any private structures, placed on city-owned lands whether authorized or
not. Unauthorized structures are subject to immediate removal or impoundment by the city without notice. No
device shall be permanently affixed to any structure or tree on park lands and the nailing or affixing of any such
device to any tree or structure is prohibited.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.77), adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 40-157. Miscellaneous.
(a) Advertising and solicitation.
(1) Advertising and the distribution of printed matter must be in accordance with city Ordinance.
(2) Engaging in or soliciting business on city-owned land is prohibited. It is an exception to this
section if the solicitation is done by an approved vendor during a city sponsored event.
(b) State and local laws. These local laws and Ordinances may be enforced by the city police department,
fire department, public works department, animal control division, code compliance department, the building
official or other persons designated by Ordinance or the city manager and other federal, state and local
enforcement agencies established and authorized for that purpose.
(Ordinance 2009026, sec. 2(90.78), adopted 12/15/09)
CHAPTER 42
RAILROADS*
Sec. 42-1. Obstruction of railroad crossings.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/554
Any officer, agent, servant or receiver of any railroad company who willfully obstructs for more than ten minutes
at any one time any street, railway crossing or public highway by permitting his train to stand on or across such
crossing shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00. (1976 Code, sec. 26-2; 1998 Code, sec.
106-2)
State law reference–Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code sec. 471.007.
Sec. 42-2. Maintenance of crossings.
It shall be the duty of each railroad company whose lines of tracks are constructed within the corporate limits of
the city to put in good repair and maintain in a good condition all streets or parts of streets through or over
which its lines of tracks may run, and to keep the same free from obstructions of every kind, which repair shall
be made and constructed under the direction and supervision of the city. (1976 Code, sec. 26-3; 1998 Code,
sec. 106-3)
Sec. 42-3. Obedience to warning devices.
(a) Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the
circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15
feet, from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The requirements of
this subsection shall apply when:
(1) A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach
of the railroad train.
(2) A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the
approach of a railroad train.
(3) A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the highway crossing emits a
signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such
crossing, is an immediate hazard.
(4) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing.
(b) No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad
grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
(1976 Code, sec. 26-4; 1998 Code, sec. 106-4)
State law reference–Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code sec. 545.251.
Sec. 42-4. City drainage not to be obstructed.
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to obstruct the drainage of the city in any way or by any means
whatsoever. (1976 Code, sec. 26-5; 1998 Code, sec. 106-5)
CHAPTER 44
SIGN REGULATIONS
Sec. 44-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of these regulations is to encourage and promote a signage element of the city that is consistent
with the high aesthetic standards established in other standards of the city's development. These regulations
are intended to be a positive tool to accomplish this purpose for the benefit of the citizens, as well as the
business community, and are not designed to discourage or inhibit aesthetically pleasing signage design,
materials and placement. (Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-1), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-2. Applicability and scope.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/554
The following regulations shall govern the placement and construction of all outdoor advertising display within
the city. In accordance with state law, the provisions of this chapter are extended to the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city. (Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-2), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-3. Definitions.
To the extent not otherwise defined in the text of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Calendar days. All calendar days must run consecutively.
Changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS) means a sign which permits light to be turned on or off
intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any
illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times
when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or
color. A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control
device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)
approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the national standard.
Commercial billboard means structure directly attached to the land or a building, having one or more spaces
used to display a sign or advertisement, is leased or rented, and does not advertise the principal business
located on such premises.
Linear frontage or linear footage, relative to a building or property, means from the outer edge of a building wall
to opposite outer edge of a building wall, property line to property line, and for a multitenant building with
multiple store fronts or independent entrances, means the outer edge of the building wall for that leased or
occupied space to the opposite edge of the building wall for the leased or occupied space.
Off-premises sign means any sign commonly known as a billboard, that advertises a business, person, activity,
goods, products or services not located on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained, or that
directs persons to a location other than the premises where the sign is installed and maintained.
Secondary frontage means the part of a comer or end tenant property that is platted to extend and be adjacent
to an arterial or collector street and does not have the legal address.
Sign, agricultural, means any sign identifying the farm or ranch on which it is placed and advertising the
produce, crops, animals and poultry raised or quartered thereon.
Sign, awning or canopy, means any sign that is part of or attached to an awning or canopy or other fabric,
plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area.
Sign, ball field, means any temporary or permanent sign placed inside ball field fencing which is intended for
advertising to raise funds for recreation programs.
Sign code application area means the corporate limits of the city and the area of its extraterritorial jurisdiction as
defined by Texas Local Government Code sec. 42.021.
Through lot means a lot, other than a comer lot, having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel
streets.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-3), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-4. General provisions.
(a) Sign heights and setbacks. Unless otherwise stipulated in this Code of Ordinances for the specific sign
type or in the amending Ordinance establishing a PD zoning district, or as otherwise may be specified herein,
no sign shall be constructed to exceed the maximum building height permitted in the specific zoning district
where the sign is located except within shopping centers or similar commercial office centers containing six
acres or more. Within highway service oriented retail, commercial or industrial districts (i. e., districts located
adjacent to a highway), a pylon or major identification sign not to exceed 50 feet in height may be erected when
set back from all property lines a distance equal to the height of the sign. All such high-rise signs shall comply
with the building code and with other applicable codes/Ordinances of the city which pertain to design and
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/554
construction. All signs 25 feet in height and greater shall be set back a minimum distance of 25 feet, plus one
foot for each foot the sign exceeds 25 feet, from all property lines.
(b) Corner visibility. No signs in excess of two feet in height shall be placed within the following triangular
areas at the intersections of streets, driveways and alleys:
(1) At the intersection of two arterial streets or an arterial and collector street, the triangular area
formed by the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting them at points a minimum of 30 feet
from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. Depending on the curvature of intersecting roads, the
city engineer may require a larger triangular area.
(2) At all other street intersections, the triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines and a
line connecting them at points 25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines.
(3) At all intersections of streets with driveways or alleys, the triangular area formed by the street
right-of-way line and the alley right-of-way line or the driveway pavement edge and a line connecting
them at points ten feet from their intersection.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-4), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-5. Permanent signs-Permitted by land use.
Permanent signs shall be regulated by land use as follows:
(1) Single-family and duplex lots. Each lot developed with a single-family, detached or attached,
dwelling unit or a duplex shall be permitted one sign to identify family name, property name or street
address not to exceed six square feet in area.
(2) Residential subdivisions. Each residential subdivision shall be permitted one ground sign or
one wall sign mounted on a subdivision screening wall for identification of the subdivision for each
street frontage providing access to the subdivision. For the purposes of this subsection, identical
subdivision identification signs on both sides of the access street shall be considered one sign. Upon
recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, additional signage may be approved by
the city council in conjunction with the approval of the record plat for the subdivision.
(3) Multifamily developments. Multifamily developments of eight units or more shall be permitted
one ground sign or wall sign for identification of the development for each street frontage. One for
lease wall sign with a maximum sign area of six square feet for each street frontage shall also be
permitted.
(4) Schools. An elementary or secondary school or a college or university shall be permitted one
wall sign in addition to the following signage:
a. Schools that have less than 1,000 feet of continuous frontage on a street shall be
permitted one pole sign (if located in allowed area) or one ground sign.
b. Schools that have at least 1,000 feet of continuous frontage on a street shall be permitted
one pole sign (if located in allowed area) and one ground sign, provided that such signs shall
be separated by a minimum of 700 feet In addition, one small monument sign of a
commemorative or memorial nature shall be permitted, if not located within 200 feet of other
permitted signs, and provided that the sign face shall not exceed 20 square feet (per side if
double-faced sign).
(5) Nonresidential building (multitenant interior access). A multitenant nonresidential building with
interior access to individual business or office suites shall be permitted the following signage:
a. One pole sign or ground sign shall be permitted for identification of the building, provided
that a pole sign shall be permitted only if the site is located in an allowed area and if the site
has at least 200 feet of continuous frontage on a public street.
b. A multitenant interior access building complex comprised of more than one building shall
be allowed one additional ground sign for each additional building, subject to the spacing
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/554
requirements of section 44-6(2)a.
c. One wall sign shall be permitted per building wall not to exceed two walls to identify a
maximum of two tenants.
d. One additional wall or ground sign shall be permitted, to be utilized as a directory sign to
list building tenants, with uniform lettering and oriented so as not to be readable from a public
street. Such additional wall or ground sign shall not exceed six feet in height, shall not exceed
18 square feet of sign area, shall not contain lettering exceeding two inches in height, and shall
not be visible from any public street
(6) Nonresidential buildings (other). A nonresidential building, other than multitenant interior
access, shall be permitted the following signage.
a. One pole sign or ground sign shall be permitted for identification of the building and
tenants, provided that a pole sign shall be permitted only if the site is located in an allowed
area and if the site has at least 200 feet of continuous frontage on a public street.
Notwithstanding this subsection, a multitenant shopping center shall be permitted one pole
sign, if allowed, or two ground signs.
b. A multitenant building complex comprised of more than one building shall be allowed one
additional ground sign for each additional building, subject to the spacing requirements of
section 44-6(2)a.
c. One wall sign shall be permitted per tenant plus one additional wall sign for each end
tenant that has secondary frontage on an arterial or collector street.
d. Single-tenant buildings located on through lots as defined in the zoning Ordinance are
permitted one ground sign for each street frontage with a maximum of two ground signs,
subject to all other requirements in section 44-6(2), ground signs.
e. Single-tenant buildings located on through lots as defined in the zoning Ordinance are
permitted one wall sign for each street frontage with a maximum of two wall signs, subject to all
other requirements in section 44-6(3), wall signs.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-5), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-6. Same-Additional regulations.
Permanent signs shall be subject to the following additional regulations by sign type:
(1) Off-premises signs prohibited. No permanent off-premises signs shall be permitted, except for
existing off premises commercial billboards converted to CEVMS as allowed under section 44-20,
and the following:
a. All off-premises signs except for existing off-premises commercial billboards converted to
CEVMS shall be subject to the following stipulations:
1. All off-premises signs shall have a minimum front setback of 15 feet from the rightof-
way.
2. All class 2 off-premises detached signs shall provide a minimum of 1,000 feet
between all off-premises detached advertising signs measured along the street right-ofway.
3. Class 2 signs shall be located a minimum of 250 feet from major intersections and
100 feet from any other intersection.
4. Class 2 signs shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
5. Signs shall be limited to advertising only specific business and business locations
and shall not be utilized for product or brand advertising. Signs shall not advertise any
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/554
sexually orientated businesses or services.
6. Spacing and location restrictions shall be maintained. Each side of the street shall
be counted separately. Existing nonconforming signs shall be counted, as well as new
signs.
7. Sign structures shall be of all metal construction.
8. Class 2 signs shall not be illuminated.
9. Sign facings may be removed, replaced, or painted; but, any sign which does not
display a message during a 90-day period will be considered abandoned and may be
removed by the city at the cost of the sign owner, consistent with Texas Local
Government Code ch. 216, as it may be amended.
10. Application for off-premises detached sign permits shall be accompanied by a copy
of the lease agreement or a letter of authorization from the owner of the property on
which the sign is to be located.
b. Off-premises signs shall be permitted for a multitenant building complex, subject to the
following:
1. Only one such sign shall be permitted for any building complex.
2. The off-premises sign shall be located on a contiguous tract to the building complex.
3. A city-approved unity agreement between affected property owners shall be
required.
4. Any such sign shall comply with the distance requirements of subsection (2)a of this
section.
(2) Ground signs. Ground signs shall be permitted in accordance with section 44-5, permanent
signs permitted by land use, subject to the following:
a. A multitenant complex comprised of more than one building, with exterior or interior
access, shall be permitted one ground sign per building, provided that buildings separated by a
distance of less than 60 feet shall be considered a single building.
b. The height of a ground sign shall not exceed ten feet. The height of the ground sign shall
be measured from the adjacent street curb level or the mean street grade elevation if no curb
exists.
c. The width of a ground sign shall not exceed ten feet.
d. The sign area of a ground sign shall not exceed 60 square feet (per side if a double-faced
sign).
e. A ground sign shall identify only the following:
1. Churches shall be allowed to identify the name, church logo, address, name of
pastor, hours of major services, phone number, denominational affiliation and may
include a changeable panel of up to 16 square feet with a maximum height of two feet
and with letters being no more than 12 inches in height. The sign face of the changeable
panel shall be designed and constructed in a manner capable of changing characters or
panels attached to the face of the sign. Secondary signs, when allowed by Ordinance,
shall identify only the name, address and church logo.
2. Schools shall be allowed to identify the name of school and/or school district, school
logo or mascot, address, phone number and may include a changeable panel of up to 16
square feet with a maximum height of two feet and with letters being no more than 12
inches in height. The sign face of the changeable panel shall be designed and
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/554
constructed in a manner capable of changing characters or panels attached to the face of
the sign. Secondary signs, when allowed by Ordinance, shall identify only the name,
address and school logo or mascot.
3. Nonresidential uses other than schools or churches shall be allowed to identify the
name of the building or building complex and/or the names of tenants, provided that at
least 40 percent of the sign area of the sign shall be devoted to the name of the building
or building complex or the name of a single tenant therein.
f. All ground signs shall be set back at least 15 feet from any public street right-of-way line.
g. A ground sign shall be architecturally compatible with the colors and materials of the
building that it is identifying.
h. Ground signs shall be located at least 120 feet apart and at least 60 feet from the
property lines of any other lot.
(3) Wall signs. Wall signs shall be permitted in accordance with section 44-5, permanent signs
permitted by land use, subject to the following:
a. Wall signs shall only be attached to building walls, mansard roofs with slopes of 60
degrees or greater, or subdivision screening walls.
b. No wall signs attached to a mansard roof shall extend above the roofline, nor shall wall
signs attached to building walls or fences extend above those structures.
c. No wall sign shall protrude more than 12 inches from the principal structure to which it is
attached (i. e., the depth of the sign shall not exceed 12 inches).
d. No wall sign shall exceed 300 square feet of surface area Wall signs used for
identification of residential subdivisions shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area.
e. For tenants with 60 feet or more of linear frontage of building wall, one primary sign shall
be allowed, with up to two secondary signs allowed. The total dimensions for all primary and
secondary signs shall not exceed the maximum allowed dimensions shown in subsection (3)f
of this section. The primary sign shall amount to at least 80 percent of the total sign area.
f. The maximum allowable height and width of wall signs shall be as follows:
Linear Footage of
Building Wall
Maximum Sign
Width
Maximum
Sign Height
Less than 20 feet 80% of linear
footage
36 inches
20 feet up to 25
feet
75% of linear
footage
42 inches
25 feet up to 35
feet
70% of linear
footage
48 inches
35 feet up to 45
feet
65% of linear
footage
54 inches
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/554
45 feet up to 60
feet
60% of linear
footage
60 inches
60 feet or more 55% of linear
footage
72 inches
g. Nonresidential multitenant buildings with exterior access to more than two individual office
or business suites may be allowed more than two wall signs for tenant identification, subject to
the following:
1. Each tenant with exterior access shall be permitted one wall sign, with the height
and width of such sign based on the linear footage of the storefront and the standards set
forth in the table to subsection (3)e of this section.
2. End tenants with secondary frontage may place an additional wall sign on this side
wall, subject to the standards set forth in the table to subsection (3)e of this section.
3. Wall signs authorized in this subsection are to be allowed in lieu of, and not in
addition to, the general limitations on wall signs set forth in section 44-5(5)c, permanent
signs nonresidential buildings.
h. No wall sign shall be closer than one foot from the edge of the storefront on which the
sign can be placed.
(4) Window signs. Window signs shall be permitted in accordance with section 44-5, permanent
signs permitted by land use, subject to the following.
a. Window signs shall be limited to a maximum of 20 percent of window area.
b. No blinking, flashing, moving or neon signs shall be allowed as window signs; provided,
however, for retail or commercial uses, one interior nonintermittent and nonmoving neon
window sign stating “Open,” not exceeding five square feet in area as measured from the outer
dimensions of said sign and consisting of not more than two colors, shall be allowed
c. Signs located within the building (interior signs) and visible to the outside of the building
through the windows shall be located a minimum often feet from the building store front
containing said windows.
(5) Awning or canopy sign. An awning or canopy sign can be used as the primary sign in lieu of a
wall sign or neon sign, subject to the following:
a. The maximum height of the lettering of a canopy or awning sign shall not exceed eight
inches.
b. One business logo is permitted to be applied to the slope portion of the canopy, centered
over the primary entrance.
c. A second logo is allowed if the storefront wraps a comer, one per frontage.
d. The logo shall not exceed four feet in width and three feet in height.
e. Only gooseneck type full cut-off light fixtures shall be permitted when indirect lighting for
awning or canopy signage is preferred.
f. No backlighting of canopy or awning signs is allowed.
g. All outdoor lighting for canopy or awning signs must comply with the outdoor lighting
provisions set forth in this Code of Ordinances.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/554
h. The light fixture shall not extend more than four feet from the building facade from which it
is attached
i. The total sign area for an awning or canopy sign shall not exceed the maximum allowance
as outlined in subsection (3)f of this section, wall signs.
j. Multiple canopies shall be permitted provided the maximum sign area as outlined in
subsection (5)i of this section is not exceeded.
k. The following typefaces for awning or canopy signs shall be allowed as outlined in
appendix A, illustrations, attached to the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived:
1. Americana bold.
2. Bembo semibold.
3. Bodini.
4. Copperplate 30BC.
5. Helvetica medium.
6. Palatino.
(6) Neon sign. A neon sign can be used as the primary sign in lieu of a wall sign, or awning or
canopy subject to the following:
a. Neon signs shall be mounted inside a storefront area only.
b. Neon signs may not cover more than 50 percent of the transom area nor exceed 18
square feet in area.
c. Neon signs must be turned off at close of business.
d. Neon signs shall be limited to six-color palette. Allowable neon colors are:
1. Dark purple (EGL “Bromo Blue Coated Purple”).
2. Dark blue (EGL “Bromo Blue Coated”).
3. Dark red (EGL “Ruby Red Coated”).
4. Dark green (EGL “Emerald Green Coated”).
5. Gold (EGL “Novial Gold Coated E-50”).
6. White (EGL “Snowhite 6500”).
e. Only three of the colors set forth in subsection (6)d of this section are allowed per sign.
f. Neon signs must have an output of less than 150 lumens per foot.
g. If a neon sign is selected in a multitenant building, no more than two storefronts, side by
side may utilize a neon sign.
h. Neon pole or wall primary signs shall be approved on a case-by-case basis by the city
manager or his designee, with regard to safety; construction and legibility considerations.
i. In no case shall a neon sign be used for a ground sign.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-6), adopted 8/5/08; Ordinance 2009025A, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 44-7. Temporary signs.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/554
Any sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only, including by way of example but not of
limitation, any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth. canvas, light fabric,
cardboard, wallboard or other light materials, with or without frames. Temporary signs shall be subject to the
following:
(1) Temporary noncommercial signs. Temporary noncommercial signs are signs utilized for
supporting, encouraging, expressing or identifying a philosophy, theory, belief, view, principle,
concept, insight or opinion, political posture, position or event, public services or civic announcement
or advisory event and/or personal or individual use without a commercial intent Such signs may
include, but are not limited to political signs, ideological signs, no trespassing, special event or public
services announcements, alarm signs and beware of dog signs. All temporary noncommercial signs
shall be subject to the following:
a. Such signs may not be placed so as to impair the comer visibility of intersections of
streets, driveways and alleys pursuant to section 44-4(b).
b. Such signs shall not be placed within the public right-of-way.
c. Such signs shall not be placed on public property including but not limited to parks, public
facilities and public open spaces.
d. The sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet.
e. The height of such signs shall not exceed eight feet.
f. Such signs shall not be affixed to utility poles or official signs.
(2) Specific temporary noncommercial signs. Specific temporary noncommercial signs shall be
subject to be following:
a. Political signs. A temporary sign supporting, encouraging or identifying any candidate,
proposed amendment or bond proposal shall be permitted within the city provided: The
candidate, his campaign treasurer or assistant campaign treasurer or the campaign treasurer
of a political committee shall be responsible for the erection and removal of the political signs
or advertisements and for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the
state.
b. Special event or public announcement signs. A sign or notice posted to announce public
information concerning special events, bazaars, rallies or other similar activities sponsored by
charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational or civic institutions shall be allowed as
temporary signs, provided the following:
1. Such signs shall be allowed up to 30 days prior to such event, but shall be removed
within two days after the scheduled event.
2. All signs shall be on-premises only, provided that nonprofit organizations, upon proof
of tax-exempt status under federal or state laws, shall be allowed temporary off-premises
special event signs provided:
(i) The organization must have permission from the property owner to place the
sign on their property.
(ii) There will be a maximum of six off-premises signs advertising the nonprofit
organization function.
(iii) The advertised function must occur within the territorial limits of the city or an
adjacent municipality and be sponsored by a nonprofit organization located in the
city.
3. The city is excepted from the requirements of this chapter.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/554
(3) Temporary commercial signs. Temporary commercial signs are signs utilized for the purpose of
benefiting a for profit enterprise, person or activity and/or advertising the sale of a product, good or
service, or other similar venture with an economic purpose. Such signs may include but are not
limited to real estate signs, weekend real estate directional signs, special event signs, and personal
or incidental use signs such as garage sale signs and work in progress signs. All temporary
commercial signs shall be subject to the following:
a. Such signs may not be placed so as to impair the comer visibility of intersections of
streets, driveways and alleys pursuant to section 44-4(b).
b. Such signs shall not be placed within the public right-of-way.
c. Such signs shall not be placed on public property including but not limited to parks. public
facilities and public open spaces.
d. The sign area shall not exceed six square feet.
e. The height of such signs shall not exceed three feet.
f. All such signs must be placed on private property only. with written consent of the property
owner.
g. Only one sign for every 50 feet of linear frontage of private property shall be permitted.
h. Such signs shall not be affixed to utility poles or official signs.
(4) Specific temporary commercial signs. Specific temporary commercial signs shall be subject to
the following:
a. For sale (residential structures on small tracts). Real estate signs advertising the sale,
lease or rent of individual housing units on less than two acres shall be limited to the following
conditions:
1. All such signs shall be on-premises only.
2. Only one sign shall be permitted per residence.
b. Weekend real estate directional signs. Any temporary weekend directional sign placed for
off-premises advertising or direction of traffic or to call attention to a real estate project,
development or subdivision shall be limited to off-premises directional signs and model home
signs and shall contain no advertising. Weekend real estate directional signs shall be permitted
on a temporary basis provided: Weekend real estate directional signs are permitted to be
placed out only between the hours of 4:00 A.M. and 8:00 A.M. on Saturdays and must be
removed between the hours of 8:00 p. m. and 12:00 midnight the following Sunday.
c. Special event signs. A sign or notice posted to announce public information concerning a
for-profit special event including but limited to a circus, haunted house or fair shall be subject
to the following: Signs relative to a special events (circus, haunted house, and fairs) may be
placed 14 days prior to said event and must be removed no later than three days after the
event.
d. Personal and/or incidental use signs. Any permanent or temporary sign for personal
purposes or used to identify the sale of personal property; garage, yard or estate sales; and/or
incidental private signs identifying work in progress (including but not limited to small
subcontractors such as roofing repair, landscaping, pools, painting, etc.) shall be permitted in
any zoning district provided: Personal and/or incidental use signs may be placed 24 hours prior
to the commencement of the work, event or sale and must be removed within 24 hours after
the conclusion of the work, sale or event.
(5) For sale (nonresidential structures). Real estate signs advertising the sale, lease or rent of any
nonresidential structure shall be limited to the following conditions:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/554
a. All signs shall be on-premises only.
b. The sign area of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet.
c. The height of the sign shall not exceed ten feet.
d. No more than one sign shall be permitted per property for each arterial or collector street
frontage.
e. Temporary window signs are permitted up to 20 percent of the total window area.
(6) For sale (vacant or large tracts). Real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of
undeveloped land or developed land of two acres or more shall be limited by the following
conditions:
a. All signs shall be on-premises only.
b. The sign area of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet.
c. The height of the sign shall not exceed eight feet.
d. Only one sign shall be permitted for tracts up to five acres. Additional signs shall be
permitted for each additional five acres up to a maximum of four signs.
e. No signs may be placed closer than 500 feet to any other real estate sign on the same
property.
f. All signs shall be set back at least 20 feet from the public right-of-way.
(7) Development or project signs (on-premises). On-premises signs identifying residential, retail,
office, commercial, industrial, mixed land use or planned developments shall be permitted, but
limited by the following conditions; except as otherwise provided for in subsection (18) of this
section, temporary sign program:
a. The maximum sign area of such a sign shall be based on the size of the development as
follows:
Less than 5 acres 48 square feet
5 to 50 acres 64 square feet
50 to 100 acres 100 square feet
More than 100 acres 200 square feet
b. The height of the sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height
c. Only one sign shall be permitted for tracts up to five acres. Additional signs shall be
permitted for each additional five acres up to a maximum of two signs.
d. No signs may be placed closer than 500 feet to any other real estate sign advertising the
sale of the same property, unless it is attached to such sign. The attachment of two such signs
will be permitted only once for each tract of land for sale.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/554
e. All signs shall be setback at least 20 feet from the public right-of-way.
f. No sign may be erected until a record plat has been approved for the project or for the first
phase, if a multiphase project.
g. Permits for on-premises development or project signs shall be for a period of one year
from the date of issuance and shall be renewable by the city manager or his designee for
additional one-year periods, until the development is 80 percent sold or leased.
h. The sign permit fee for on-premises development or project signs initially erected without
a permit shall be double the amount set forth in section 44-17, sign permits.
(8) Development or project signs (off-premises). Off-premises signs identifying residential, retail,
office, commercial, industrial, mixed land use or planned developments shall be permitted but limited
by the following conditions; except as otherwise provided for in subsection (18) of this section,
temporary sign programs:
a. The maximum sign area of such a sign shall be based on the size of the development as
follows:
Less than 5 acres 48 square feet
5 to 50 acres 64 square feet
More than 50 acres 100 square feet
b. The height of the sign shall not exceed 20 feet.
c. Only one sign shall be permitted for tracts up to five acres. Additional signs shall be
permitted for each additional five acres up to a maximum of three signs.
d. No signs shall be placed closer than 500 feet of one another.
e. No sign shall be located within a platted residential subdivision or on a developed
nonresidential lot or tract.
f. All signs shall be setback at least 20 feet from the public right-of-way.
g. Permits for off-premises signs shall be for a period of one year from the date of issuance
and shall be renewable by the city manager or his designee for additional one-year periods,
until the development is 80 percent sold or leased.
h. No sign may be erected until a record plat has been approved for the project or for the
first phase, if a multiphase project.
i. The sign permit fee for off-premises development or project signs initially erected without a
permit shall be double the amount set forth in section 44-17, sign permits.
(9) Model home signs. Signs identifying model homes, and model home centers, including sales
offices, shall be permitted, but are limited to the following conditions:
a. Model home signs shall be on-premises and only allowed on the lot developed with the
model home or on any lot developed with an approved parking lot for such model home.
b. Only one sign advertising a model home may be permitted per builder or developer in the
subdivision.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/554
c. Model home signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area.
d. Model home signs shall be limited to a maximum of six feet in height.
e. All signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the public right-of-way.
f. No model home sign shall be erected until the final utilities have been approved and
released.
(10) Open house signs. Signs advertising the display of an open or unlocked unit for sale, lease or
rent shall be permitted in place of or in addition to a real estate sign, provided the following:
a. The sign area of an open house sign shall not exceed six square feet.
b. The height of an open house sign shall not exceed three feet.
c. Only one open house sign shall be permitted per residence.
d. The unit being advertised as open must be unlocked during the time the sign is displayed.
(11) Coming soon or now open signs. Signs announcing the coming or recent arrival of a new
development, facility or place of business shall be allowed on a temporary basis provided:
a. Only one such sign shall be permitted for each business.
b. Such signs shall be for on-premises advertising only.
c. Such signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of 20 square feet for buildings less
than 50,000 square feet.
d. The maximum sign area shall be 50 square feet for buildings over 50,000 square feet.
e. No such sign shall be illuminated in any manner.
f. No portion of such sign shall extend above or beyond the roof or building to which it is
attached.
g. Such signs shall be allowed for a maximum period of 45 calendar days, after which it
must be removed.
h. Such signs shall be attached to the building about which it is advertising.
(12) Grand opening signs. Signs announcing the grand opening of a new development, facility or
place of business shall be allowed on a temporary basis provided:
a. Such signs shall be allowed only one time for each business.
b. Such signs shall be for on-premises advertising only.
c. Such signs may include banners, balloons, flags, pennants, streamers or inflatable signs,
provided that no such sign shall exceed a height of 35 feet.
d. No such sign shall be illuminated in any manner.
e. No portion of any such sign shall be located in the street right-of-way.
f. No permit for such signs shall be issued more than 30 days after the date of the issuance
of the certificate of occupancy. A $25.00 permit fee shall be charged for each such application.
g. Such signs may be displayed for a maximum of 14 calendar days. after issuance of a
permit, after which they must be removed.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/554
(13) Now hiring signs. Signs announcing the employment opportunity for the recent arrival of a
new development, facility or place of business shall be allowed on a temporary basis provided;
a. Such signs shall be allowed only one time for each business.
b. Such signs shall be for on-premises advertising only.
c. Such signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of 20 square feet for buildings less
than 50,000 square feet.
d. The maximum sign area shall be 50 square feet for buildings over 50,000 square feet.
e. No such sign shall be illuminated in any manner.
f. No portion of such sign shall extend above or beyond the roof or building to which it is
attached.
g. Such signs shall be allowed for a maximum period of 45 calendar days, after which it
must be removed.
h. Such signs shall be attached to the building about which it is advertising.
i. No permit for such signs shall be issued more than 30 days after the date of the issuance
of the certificate of occupancy.
(14) Change of business/ownership. A temporary sign advertising a new business/ownership of
an existing building while a new sign is being made shall be permitted subject to the following:
a. Only one such sign shall be permitted for each business.
b. Such signs shall be for on-premises advertising only.
c. Such signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of 20 square feet.
d. No such sign shall be illuminated in any manner.
e. No portion of such sign shall extend above or beyond the roof or building to which it is
attached.
f. Such signs shall be allowed for a maximum period of 45 calendar days, after which it must
be removed.
(15) Agricultural signs. A temporary or permanent sign advertising produce, crops or animals shall
be permitted in any zoning district that permits agricultural uses subject to the following:
a. Only one such sign shall be permitted for each street frontage.
b. All such signs shall be on-premises only.
c. All such signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of 48 square feet.
d. The height of the sign shall not exceed 15 feet.
e. All such signs shall be set back at least 20 feet from the public street right-of-way.
(16) Gasoline price signs. Temporary gasoline price or credit card signs may be placed on
gasoline pump islands only. Only one sign per pump island shall be allowed and the maximum total
sign area of any single sign shall not exceed four square feet.
(17) Informational zoning or land use plan change signs. Temporary informational signs required
to be installed by applicants for a change to the comprehensive master plan land use category or
zoning on a parcel of land as may be required by the zoning Ordinance, shall be authorized
according to the provisions therein.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/554
(18) Temporary sign program. A temporary on-premises or off-premises uniform sign program
located within a mixed land use planned development containing a minimum of 200 acres,
identifying components of such mixed land use planned development, shall be permitted, but shall
be limited by the following conditions:
a. No weekend real estate directional signs, as defined in subsection (3) of this section, shall
be allowed within the city identifying a real estate project, development, or subdivision within
any planned development utilizing the provisions of this subsection.
b. The sign area of any sign shall not exceed 15 square feet (per side if a double-faced
sign).
c. The height of any sign shall not exceed five feet.
d. No sign shall be permitted within the city's right-of-way.
e. No sign may be erected until a record plat has been approved for the planned
development or for the first phase, if a multiphased planned development.
f. Permits for a temporary sign program within a mixed land use planned development, upon
submittal of an application for a uniform temporary sign program, shall be reviewed and
approved by the city manager or designee.
g. Permits for a temporary sign program shall be for a period of two years from the date of
issuance and shall be renewable by the city manager or designee for additional two-year
periods, until the development is 80 percent complete.
h. All signs and/or sign programs shall comply with all development standards set forth in the
applicable zoning Ordinance granting the planned development.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-7), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-8. Nonclassified outdoor display.
Any form of monument, statue or art work not specifically defined in this chapter as either permanent,
temporary or prohibited signs may be permitted provided they are approved by the city council through the
issuance of a specific use permit. (Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-8), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-9. Official signs.
Any permanent or temporary sign, notice, marker, or symbol required or authorized by the local, state or federal
government or a governmental agency shall be permitted as required or authorized in any zoning district
classification within the city. Such signs shall include but not necessarily be limited to:
(1) Traffic control signs required by any governmental agency designed and erected under
specifications set forth by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(2) Signs identifying public or private utility lines or easements.
(3) Air traffic control signs required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(4) Any sign or public notice required by any governmental agency or court of law.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-9), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-10. Prohibited signs.
The following types of signs or outdoor advertising display are prohibited within all zoning district classifications
in the city and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction:
(1) Projected signs. Signs that are projected more than 12 inches from a facade, wall, fence, roof
or other principal means of support shall be prohibited.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/554
(2) Billboards. Except for the conversion of existing off-premises commercial billboards CEVMS
as allowed under section 44-20, large, off-premises outdoor advertising signs primarily located along
arterials and highways and used for the express purpose of product advertisement shall be
prohibited. There shall be no procedure for obtaining a permit to erect or maintain a billboard in any
location in the city, or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(3) Portable signs.
a. Generally. Signs mounted on portable or movable frames or structures, including signs
placed on, but not affixed or attached to, the ground, shall be prohibited, except as approved
by city manager, upon issuance of a special permit. In no case shall a special permit be issued
more than four times per calendar year, for a period of time not to exceed 14 days per permit.
There shall be a minimum of 30 days between issuance of special permits.
b. Location of portable signs.
1. Portable signs may be located within nonresidential zoning districts, with only
nonresidential uses and public property. If approved by the city manager, no more than
one portable sign shall be allowed on any platted lot provided; however, if a multiuse lot
has more than 75 feet of street frontage, an additional sign may be located on such
property for each additional 75 feet of frontage. No portable sign shall be located closer
than 75 feet from adjacent residential property and shall be located no closer to any
street than ten feet from the back of the curb, or, if there is no curb, 15 feet from the edge
of the pavement but in no case shall any portable sign be placed in any public right-ofway
or on any sidewalk.
2. If approved by the city manager, no portable sign shall be located within 50 feet of
an intersection of any street or highway right-of-way and a minimum of 25 feet from any
driveway. Portable signs may be located in areas of required off-street parking. Portable
signs shall pertain to the specific use for which the particular property has already been
developed and then being used. Portable signs may not be located in areas that may, in
the judgment of the building inspection department, police chief or code enforcement
officer create a safety hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
3. Placement of portable signs shall be only upon issuance of a special permit, at the
direction and within the discretion of the city manager.
(4) Searchlights. Large lighting fixtures used to attract attention to a business or specific location
shall be prohibited.
(5) Vehicular signs. Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers that are parked on a
public right-of-way, public property, or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way
where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a business or activity
located on the same or nearby property shall be prohibited. However, this is not in any way intended
to prohibit signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and trailers, such as lettering on motor vehicles,
where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer.
(6) Balloon or inflatable device. Any sign or form of advertisement in the form of or attached to a
balloon or other inflatable, inflated or floating device shall be prohibited, except as provided for in
section 44-7(12), grand opening signs.
(7) Flags or banners. Any pole mounted flag, banner, or material of cloth, vinyl, plastic, canvass,
leather or other similar material used for the express purpose of attracting attention to a place of
business or location shall be prohibited, except as provided for in section 112-7(12), grand opening
signs. This shall not include public display of a state, national, local, religious or institutional flag or
emblem, or a registered corporate logo which shall be allowed in any zoning district classification
within the city, provided the number of flag poles does not exceed three flag poles per platted lot with
a maximum height of the flag pole not to exceed 25 feet and the maximum flag area does not
exceed 15 square feet per flag in a residential zoning district; and provided the maximum height of
the flag pole does not exceed 40 feet and the maximum flag area does not exceed 40 square feet
per flag in a nonresidential zoning district. A registered corporate logo shall be limited to one flag.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/554
Also not included as a prohibited sign is a “Now Open” or “Coming Soon” banner sign, provided it is
attached to the building as provided for in section 112-7(11), coming soon or now open signs.
(8) Nuisance signs. Any sign with moving parts, animated features, flashing, blinking or rotating
illumination or any other visual and/or audible features that cause a distraction or public nuisance
shall be prohibited.
(9) Illegal or unlawful signs. Any sign that shall be considered unlawful or illegal by this chapter
and including, but not necessarily limited to, the following signs shall be prohibited:
a. Signs containing obscene, indecent or immoral words, pictures, descriptions or other
matter.
b. Signs imitating governmental signs, including traffic control signs.
c. Signs blocking or obstructing public access, fire escapes, traffic visibility, utilities, etc.
d. Signs placed on or attached to other signs, utility poles, fire hydrants, trees, flag poles,
street lamps or other means of support of an outdoor advertising display.
e. Any painting, marking, or attachment of a sign to the street, sidewalk or building, other
than house numbers or occupant names or as provided by this chapter.
f. Any sign located within the public right-of-way unless specifically authorized herein or in a
city sign program.
g. Any sign, permanent or temporary, in violation of this chapter.
h. Any sign that is unsafe or insecure, abandoned or maintained in a dilapidated condition.
(10) V-signs. Any sign constructed of two panels in the form of a V, when viewed from above,
shall be prohibited.
(11) Glare. No sign shall be illuminated to such an intensity or in such a manner as to cause a
glare brightness to a degree that it constitutes a hazard or nuisance to traffic. Indirect lighting for
signs shall not overshoot the facade of the sign.
(12) Neon. There shall be no exposed neon except as provided in section 44-6(5) and (6).
(13) Changeable electronic variable message signs (CEVMS). CEVMS signs except for existing
off-premises commercial billboards converted to CEVMS as allowed under section 44-20
(14) Commercial billboards. Commercial billboards except for existing off-premises commercial
billboards converted to CEVMS as allowed under section 44-20
(15) Outdoor advertising displays. Off-premises outdoor advertising signs primarily located along
arterials, streets and highways and used for the express purpose of product advertisement or for the
advertisement of goods or services, not associated with the property upon which the sign is located
or otherwise permitted herein shall be prohibited.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-10), adopted 8/5/08; Ordinance 2009025A, sec. 3, adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 44-11. Changeable messages on sign faces.
Changeable messages on sign faces shall be permitted, subject to the following requirements:
(1) Electronic message sign faces. Electronic message sign faces may be placed on a permanent
sign in nonresidential districts provided:
a. The message conveyed by the sign face shall not blink, flash or be so designated to be
deemed a distraction to passing motorists.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/554
b. The message conveyed cannot change more than one time within any 15-second
timeframe.
c. All messages conveyed by an electronic message sign face shall be limited to a maximum
of 32 characters visible at any one time.
d. All electronic message sign faces shall be limited to a maximum of 32 square feet in area
or the maximum size of the type of permanent sign on which the face is placed, whichever is
less.
e. The requirements of this subsection (1) are not applicable to existing off-premises
commercial billboards converted to CEVMS as allowed under section 44-20
(2) Change panel sign faces. A sign face that is designed and constructed in a manner capable of
changing messages through a system of removable characters or panels attached to the face of the
sign may be placed on a permanent sign in nonresidential districts provided:
a. Change panel sign faces shall be governed by the height and area regulations specified
under the definition of the type of permanent sign on which the change panel sign face is
placed.
b. A change panel sign face shall not exceed 32 square feet in area or the maximum size of
the type of permanent sign on which it is placed, whichever is less.
c. In addition to a change panel sign face mounted on a permanent sign, establishments
engaging in the sale of gasoline may place gasoline price or credit card change panel signs on
pump islands. Only one sign face per pump island shall be allowed with a maximum area of
any single sign face to be four square feet.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-11), adopted 8/5/08; Ordinance 2009025A, sec. 4, adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 44-12. Sign illumination.
A sign may be lighted by internal lighting from a light source entirely within the sign or by a lighting source
located a distance away from the sign and projecting light onto the sign, subject to the following.
(1) The light source shall be continuous and uninterrupted so as not to be flashing.
(2) Lighting shall be in manner so as not to interfere with traffic safety or to pose other safety
hazards.
(3) All electrical wiring shall conform to the electrical codes of the city
(4) Shall not constitute a CEVMS except for existing off-premises commercial billboards converted
to CEVMS as allowed under section 44-20
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-12), adopted 8/5/08; Ordinance 2009025A, sec. 5, adopted 12/15/09)
Sec. 44-13. Double-faced signs.
A sign with a sign face message on both sides shall be counted as a single sign. The two sides of a doublefaced
sign shall be parallel to one another with only one side visible from any point. (Ordinance 200888, sec.
2(112-13), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-14. Sign permit requirement and exemptions.
No sign shall hereafter be erected, constructed. altered or maintained except as provided by this chapter, until a
permit for the same has been issued by the city manager or designee pursuant to section 44-17, sign permits;
provided, however, that no permit shall be required for the erection or alteration of the following types of signs,
providing such signs are in complete compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/554
(1) Official signs. No permit shall be required for signs required or authorized by the local, state or
federal government or a governmental agency.
(2) Real estate signs. No permit shall be required for signs not exceeding six square feet in sign
area and three feet in height advertising the sale, lease or rental of real estate.
(3) Open house signs. No permit shall be required for signs advertising the display of an open
house or unlocked unit for sale, lease or rent.
(4) Political signs. No permit shall be required for signs supporting, encouraging or identifying any
candidate, proposed amendment or bond proposal.
(5) Personal or incidental use signs. No permit shall be required for temporary signs for personal
or individual use to identify the sale of personal property or advertise garage, yard or estate sales
and/or incidental private signs identifying private ownership or a danger to the public.
(6) Name plates. No permit shall be required for wall or monument signs showing only the name
and address of the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is erected or placed not exceeding
a total sign area of six square feet.
(7) Memorial signs. No permit shall be required for memorial signs, markers, plates, plaques, etc.,
when deemed an integral part of a structure, building or landscape.
(8) Flags. No permit shall be required for public and/or private flag poles for the public display of a
state, national, local, religious, institutional flag or emblem or a registered corporate logo not
exceeding a height of 25 feet in residential zoning districts and 40 feet in nonresidential zoning
property.
(9) Holiday decorations. No permit shall be required for signs or materials displayed in a
temporary manner on or prior to traditional civic, patriotic or religious holidays.
(10) Interior signs. No permit shall be required for signs located inside a building and not visible
from outside the building. Signs located in covered mall buildings shall comply with the applicable
sections of the city's building code.
(11) Gasoline price signs. No permit shall be required for gasoline price or credit card signs
placed on pump islands not exceeding four square feet in sign area.
(12) Directional signs. No permit shall be required for small signs not exceeding five square feet in
sign area and three feet in height that are displayed on private property for the convenience of the
public, including signs to identify entrance and exit drives, location of drive-up windows, directions to
parking areas, one-way drives, restrooms, freight entrances and the like. These signs shall be
directional only and may contain advertising with registered corporate logos. Maximum height
applies to ground mounted signs and is not intended to prohibit placement of these signs over
doorways, freight entrances, etc.
(13) Menu signs. No permit shall be required for signs that display menus and related prices in
connection with outdoor drive-through food service windows. Such signs shall not exceed 32 square
feet in sign area and eight feet in height. These signs are strictly for on-site informational purposes
and, therefore, shall be oriented so as to not be readable from the fronting public street.
(14) Ball field fencing signs. Any temporary or permanent sign placed inside ball field fencing
which is intended for advertising to raise funds for recreation programs.
a. No permit application or fee shall be required for such signs.
b. All such signs shall be one sided and only face toward the interior of the field.
c. No portion of such signs shall project over the fence in which it is attached.
d. No such sign shall exceed the height of eight feet.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/554
e. Advertising on a scoreboard is not considered a sign for the purpose of this chapter and
no permit is required.
f. The backside of all such signs shall be protected with an application of paint or other
protective coating and must be uniform in color.
g. All such signs shall be maintained in good condition, as evidenced by lack of
deterioration.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-14), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-15. Licensing of sign installers.
Any person, firm, corporation or business engaging in the operation of erecting, installing, servicing or
maintaining signs for sale, rental or leasing purposes within the city must be registered to conduct such
business with the city, pursuant to section 44-17, sign permits. (Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-15), adopted
8/5/08)
Sec. 44-16. Maintenance and removal of signs.
(a) To the extent applicable any required removal of a sign shall conform to the provisions and satisfy the
requisites of Texas Local Government Code ch. 216, as amended.
(b) All signs and all components thereof, including without limitation supports, braces and anchors, shall be
kept in a state of good repair. The area within ten feet in all directions of any part of a pole or ground sign shall
be kept clear of all debris and all undergrowth more than five inches in height.
(c) If a sign advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction or other enterprise or
activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted, that sign shall be considered abandoned and
shall, within 30 days of such abandonment, be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where the
sign is located, or other party having control over such sign.
(d) If the message portion of a sign is removed, leaving only the supporting shell of a sign or the supporting
braces, anchors or similar components, the owner of the sign or the owner of the property where the sign is
located or other person having control over such sign shall, within 30 days of the removal of the message
portion of the sign, either replace the entire message portion of the sign or remove the remaining components
of the sign. This subsection shall not be construed to prevent the changing of the message of a sign.
(e) Should any sign become unsafe or in any way pose a public danger in the opinion of the city manager or
his designee, the owner thereof or the person or firm responsible for the maintenance of the sign shall upon
written notice of the code enforcement official or his designee, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in
any case within ten days, secure the same in a manner to be approved by the code enforcement official in
conformity with the provisions of this section or remove such sign. If such order is not complied with within ten
days, the code enforcement official shall remove such sign at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof.
Dilapidated or deteriorated condition shall include instances where:
(1) Elements of the surface or background can be seen, as viewed from a normal viewing
distance (i.e., the intended viewing distance), to have portions of the finished material or paint
flaked, broken off, missing and/or otherwise not in harmony with the rest of the surface;
(2) The structural support or frame members are visibly bent, broken, dented or torn;
(3) The sign panel is visibly cracked or, in the case of wood and similar products, splintered in
such a way as to constitute an unsightly or harmful condition;
(4) The sign and/or its elements are twisted or leaning or at angles other than those at which it
was originally erected (such as may result from being blown by high winds or from the failure of a
structural support);
(5) The message or wording can no longer be clearly read by a person with normal eyesight
under normal viewing conditions; or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/554
(6) The sign and/or its elements are not in compliance with the requirements of the city's electrical
code, and/or the current building code of the city, as adopted and as may be amended.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-16), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-17. Sign permits.
(a) Application. Application for a sign permit, where such permit is required by this chapter, shall be made
upon forms provided by the city and shall include the following information:
(1) A drawing to scale of the proposed sign and all existing signs located on the premises, visible
to the public.
(2) A drawing to scale of the site plan or building facade showing the proposed location of the
sign.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(4) Name, address and telephone number of the owner.
(5) Name, address and telephone number of the person or firm responsible for the erection of the
sign.
(6) Location of the building, structure or tract to which, or upon which, the sign is to be attached or
erected.
(7) Any written consent as required herein.
(b) Fees and procedures. No sign permit shall be issued until all appropriate sign permit fees have been paid
to the city as provided herein.
(1) Initial permit fee. Initial permit fees shall be as follows:
Sign Type or Characteristic Fee
Pole or ground sign $100.00
Wall or window sign 75.00
Changeable sign face (additional fee) 25.00
Off-premises project or development sign 250.00
On-premises project or development sign 100.00
Model home sign 50.00
Real estate sign greater than six square feet in area 50.00
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/554
Grand opening or coming soon signage 25.00
Special event sign* 20.00
Awning or canopy sign 75.00
Neon sign 25.00
Now hiring 25.00
Change of business/ownership 25.00
Portable sign 75.00
Off-premises class II mini-billboard 175.00
Off-premises, detached 175.00
*There shall be no permit fee for special event or public announcement signs for bona fide charitable
and other nonprofit organizations upon proof of tax exempt status under federal or state law.
(2) Renewal. A renewal permit fee of $25.00 shall be required for all on-and off-premises project
or development signs renewed in accordance with section 44-7(7), development or project signs
(on-premises), or 112-7(8), development or project signs (off-premises).
(3) Sign repair permit. Any repair or alteration to any sign requiring a permit by this section shall
require an additional repair permit obtained by the city manager upon application and payment of a
$10.00 repair permit fee.
(4) Electrical permit. Any sign in which electrical wiring and connections are used shall require an
electrical permit obtained according to the city's existing fee schedule. The electrical inspector shall
examine the plans and specifications submitted with the application to ensure compliance with
chapter 18, electrical code.
(5) Identification of signs. All signs erected, constructed or maintained that require a permit shall
be plainly marked with the name of the person, firm or corporation erecting and maintaining such
sign and shall have affixed on the front of the sign the number and date of issue of the permit issued
for such sign.
(6) Annual inspection. It shall be the duty of the city manager or his authorized designee to
inspect all permanent signs requiring a permit at least once annually.
(7) Expiration. Every permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire and become
null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 60 days from the date of
such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/554
the work is commenced for a period of more than 120 days. Before such work can be
recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained.
(8) Failure to pay permit fees. If a sign is installed, erected, replaced, altered or relocated without
a permit for such work, the applicable permit fee shall be doubled.
(c) Licensing of sign installers. Any person, firm, corporation or business engaging in the operation of
erecting, installing, servicing or maintaining signs within the city must be registered to conduct such business
with the city. For the purposes of this section, persons engaging in the business of erecting, installing and
maintaining signs, shall be designated as sign installers, including those responsible for erecting temporary
signs requiring a permit.
(1) Application. Registration shall require a completed application on a form supplied by the city.
(2) Nontransferable registration. No registration of a sign installer shall be transferable and no
holder of any license issued under provisions of this section shall allow his name or his company's
name to be used by any other party under penalty of forfeiting his license in addition to any fine
imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(3) Registration requirement. No permit for the erection or alteration of a sign shall be issued to
any person (other than a property owner erecting his own sign on his own property, providing all
requirements of this chapter are met) unless such person is registered pursuant to provisions of this
section. Such registration shall be $25.00 per year payable on January 1 of each year, which fee will
not be prorated.
(4) Revocation of registration. Any registration granted under the provisions of this section may be
revoked by the city manager or designee, upon violation on any provision of this chapter. Upon
revocation of registration, a new registration of that sign installer shall not be permitted for a period
of six months (180 days).
(d) CEVMS. From and after the effective date of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived, no new
construction permits shall be issued for the erection of an off-premises sign, including but not limited to a new
off-premises CEVMS or the conversion of an existing nonCEVMS off-premises sign to a CEVMS, within the city
limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-17), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-18. Waiver.
Upon application, the city council may consider waiver of the provisions of this chapter based upon findings
that:
(1) The sign package proposed is in harmony with the general requirement of the land use and
subdivision regulations;
(2) The waiver will enhance the project due to uniqueness of design or enhancement of economic
development;
(3) Will not create a public nuisance; and
(4) Any other factor deemed by the city council to be in the best interest of the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-18), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-19. Violations in or on public property; penalties; presumptions.
(a) It shall be unlawful to construct or install or permit to be constructed or installed any sign within the city
limits of the city, or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, except as is expressly permitted in this chapter.
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/554
committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur.
Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this
chapter.
(c) If any sign of any nature is erected, constructed or maintained on public property in violation of this
chapter, including but not limited to garage sales, neighborhood sales, weekend real estate directional signs,
real estate signs, moving services, housekeeping services, lawn care services or any other type of service or
sales:
(1) When the name of any person appears on such a sign, it shall be prima facie evidence that the
person so named is responsible for the offense of erecting, constructing or maintaining said sign,
and that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, upon conviction;
(2) When any address appears on such a sign, it shall be prima facie evidence that the record
property owner at the address so specified is responsible for the offense of erecting, constructing or
maintaining said sign, and that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, upon conviction; and
(3) In the event that such a sign contains no identifying information other than a telephone
number, such information shall be prima facie evidence that the record property owner at the
address so specified is responsible for the offense of erecting, constructing or maintaining said sign,
and that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, upon conviction.
(d) The following evidence relative to the name, address or telephone number contained in the following
records is prima facie evidence of the contents of the record:
(1) Name. An authenticated photograph of the sign showing the name of the person allegedly
responsible, or the sign itself.
(2) Address. A certified copy of that section of the most recent tax roll which shows the name and
address of the record property owner and an authenticated photograph of the sign or the sign itself.
(3) Telephone number. An authenticated photograph of the sign or the sign itself, showing the
telephone number, and a copy of the most recent telephone directory showing the listing, or a letter
or other document from the telephone company showing the listed person and address at that
telephone number.
(e) Any presumption contained herein is rebuttable and shall have the effects and consequences set forth in
Texas Penal Code sec. 2.05.
(Ordinance 200888, sec. 2(112-19), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 44-20. Off-premises commercial CEVMS billboards.
(a) Subject to the city council's approval, an existing off-premises commercial billboard may be modified to
support a CEVMS display provided that:
(1) Each message conveyed cannot change more than one time within any eight-second time
frame.
(2) The display shall contain a default mechanism that will freeze the sign in one position if a
malfunction occurs.
(3) The display may not display light of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare or otherwise
impair the vision of the driver, or results in a nuisance to the driver.
(4) The brightness specification for CEVMS displays is a limit of 0.3 footcandle over ambient light
conditions at a distance of 250 feet from the sign. To check if the level, a footcandle meter should be
held at a height of five feet from ground level and aimed towards the sign consistent with the sign-toviewer
distance as recommended by the manufacturer of the meter. A reading of 0.3 footcandle
above ambient light conditions indicates compliance.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/554
(5) The display shall not be configured to resemble a warning or danger signal or to cause a driver
to mistake the digital sign for a warning or danger signal.
(6) A display must not resemble or simulate any lights or official signage used to control traffic in
accordance with the 2003 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, with Revision No. 1 published
by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), as it exists and as it may be amended.
(7) A display must be equipped with both a dimmer control and a photocell, which automatically
adjusts the display's intensity according to natural ambient light conditions.
(8) Pursuant to the standard permitting process, an applicant shall provide to the city drawings
and details of the type and nature of the CEVMS display to be placed on an existing billboard prior to
installation for review and approval of the city engineer. The applicant shall provide any additional
information or details requested by the city engineer to ensure the safety and integrity of the
billboard. The applicant shall be responsible for the payment of all fees associated with this review,
which payment must be received prior to the installation.
(b) The city, through appropriate personnel, may exercise its police powers to protect public health, safety,
and welfare by requiring emergency information to be displayed via digital signs. Upon notification, the sign
operators shall display in appropriate sign rotations: Amber Alert emergency information or emergency
information regarding terrorist attacks, or natural disasters. Emergency information messages are to remain in
rotation according to the designated issuing agencies protocols.
(c) CEVMS signs may not be located, relocated or upgraded along a highway within the corporate city limits
or the extraterritorial jurisdiction so that any part of the relocated sign would be within 1,500 feet of another offpremises
CEVMS sign on the same side of the highway.
(d) Application for CEVMS sign permits shall be accompanied by a copy of the lease agreement or a letter of
authorization from the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located.
(Ordinance 2009025A, sec. 6, adopted 12/15/09)
CHAPTER 46
SOLID WASTE*
Sec. 46-1. Enforcement; violations; penalty.
(a) The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the city's code enforcement officer, code compliance
officer, or peace officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder city's code enforcement
officer, code compliance officer, or peace officer charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter, in the
exercise of their duties under this chapter. Any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter may
issue immediate notice of violation to persons violating any provision of this chapter and such criminal violations
shall be prosecuted in the city's municipal court and/or other court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly discard, deposit or dispose, or allow or
permit the discarding, depositing or disposal of litter, garbage, trash, debris or other solid waste upon any public
or private property which is not a solid waste disposal site or dumpster approved by the city or the state.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly allow or permit another person to discard,
deposit or dispose of litter, garbage, trash, debris or other solid waste on real property which such person owns,
occupies or is in control of, unless such real property is a solid waste disposal site or dumpster approved of by
the city or the state.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly fail to remove litter, garbage, trash, debris
or other solid waste on real property which such person owns, occupies or is in control of within 48 hours after
such litter, garbage, trash, debris or other solid waste has been placed on such real property unless such real
property is a solid waste disposal site or dumpster approved by the city or state; provided, however, that it shall
be an affirmative defense to the prosecution of an offense under this subsection if the person did not have
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/554
actual knowledge of the presence of such litter, garbage, trash, debris or other solid waste on such real
property.
(e) Any person who violates any of the provisions of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than
$2,000.00 and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(f) The owner of the real property is the primary responsible party for duties, obligations and for any violation
committed herein. An employee of the owner shall not be held responsible for violations of this chapter if the
employee provides the city with the name, address and telephone number of the owner. If the property owner is
out of state, the employee or management company is considered the agent for service of citation and service
upon said agent has the same legal effect as service on the owner for purposes of fines against the owner or
property, including a warrant or capias.
(g) In the event of nonpayment of the assessed fees on a commercial or industrial unit's account, or if the
water has been turned off for nonpayment the city or contractor may have the container removed in accordance
with city policy and procedures. In the event the container is removed for nonpayment, the commercial or
industrial customer may be assessed fees in accordance with city policy.
(h) The penalties and remedies stated herein are nonexhaustive and nothing herein shall prevent or preclude
the city from taking all appropriate action allowed by law, including but not limited to injunctive relief.
(1998 Code, sec. 62-1; Ordinance 2009008, sec. 2(62-1), adopted 5/5/09)
Sec. 46-2. Removal.
(a) Upon the failure of any person to remove litter, garbage, trash, debris or other solid waste which has been
deposited on real property within the city which is owned, occupied or controlled by such person, the city may
cause the removal of such offending matter if the:
(1) Person gives written consent and authorization for such removal; or
(2) City manager determines that the offending matter constitutes an immediate health hazard.
(b) The provisions of the section shall be cumulative of other provisions of law and city Ordinances and shall
not be constructed to replace, repeal or otherwise diminish the city's authority to enforce the provisions of other
laws which relate to the accumulation of trash and debris or the maintenance of a nuisance on private or public
property.
(1998 Code, sec. 62-2; Ordinance 2009008, sec. 2(62-2), adopted 5/5/09)
Sec. 46-3. Right of entry for collection.
Should it be necessary to remove the containers and/or any waste from a customer's property, the city, and/or
the contractor has a right of entry to the property in order to collect any waste in accordance with applicable
law. (1998 Code, sec. 62-3; Ordinance 2009008, sec. 2(62-3), adopted 5/5/09)
Sec. 46-4. Required collection service.
(a) All residences, institutions and commercial establishments or units within the city shall be required to
make use of the refuse collection, removal and disposal service offered by the city through the waste
management franchisee or interlocal agreement authorized by the city to provide such service.
(b) It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person with care, custody or control of a residence, institution
or commercial establishment to use a refuse or solid waste collection, removal or disposal service other than
that offered by the city through a waste management franchisee or interlocal agreement.
(1998 Code, sec. 62-4; Ordinance 2009008, sec. 2(62-4), adopted 5/5/09)
Sec. 46-5. Unlawful collection.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/554
It. shall be unlawful for any person to collect or remove solid waste within the city unless such person is an
employee, of the city or authorized contractor. (1998 Code, sec. 62-5; Ordinance 2009008, sec. 2(62-5),
adopted 5/5/09)
Sec. 46-6. Residential service.
All residential units within the city shall subscribe to the residential solid waste collection service. This service
provides for collection of solid waste stored in authorized private receptacles as stated herein and pickup of
bundled yard waste or trash. (1998 Code, sec. 62-6; Ordinance 2009008, sec. 2(62-6), adopted 5/5/09)
Sec. 46-7. Commercial and industrial service.
All commercial and industrial units shall subscribe to the solid waste collection services with contractor that
consists of scheduled pickup of waste from containers sized to meet the needs of the customer, as determined
by the city or contractor. (1998 Code, sec. 62-7; Ordinance 2009008, sec. 2(62-7), adopted 5/5/09)
Sec. 46-8. Scavenging prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized employee of the city, and/or the contractor to
collect. take, remove, tamper with, interfere with, scavenge from, carry away or otherwise disturb garbage or
trash which has been placed for collection at any authorized recycling site operated by the city or in any
container on public or private property, as provided by this chapter and any such prohibited action shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and subject the violator thereof to the penalties set forth in this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 62-8; Ordinance 2009008, sec. 2(62-8), adopted 5/5/09)
Sec. 46-9. Illegal use of another's container.
It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize garbage receptacles of another owner, including but not limited to,
polycarts, front-loader containers, roll-off containers, recyclable containers, and all other containers used by the
contractor in the collection of solid waste. (1998 Code, sec. 62-9; Ordinance 2009008, sec. 2(62-9), adopted
5/5/09)
Sec. 46-10. Penalty.
To the extent a fine to be imposed for an offense committed under this chapter does not exceed $500.00, and
unless otherwise specifically set forth herein or in state law as adopted, allegation and evidence of a culpable
mental state is not required for the proof of an offense set forth in this chapter. (1998 Code, sec. 62-10;
Ordinance 2009008, sec. 2(62-10), adopted 5/5/09)
CHAPTER 48
STORMWATER POLLUTION CONTROL*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 48-1. Purposes and objectives.
The purposes and objectives of this chapter are as follows:
(1) To maintain and improve the quality of surface water and groundwater within the city, the North
Central Texas Region and the state.
(2) To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from industrial, commercial,
residential, and construction sites into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and natural
waters within the city.
(3) To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of hazardous
substances, petroleum products, household hazardous waste, industrial waste, sediment from
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/554
construction sites, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers and other contaminants into the storm sewers
and natural waters of the city.
(4) To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer
products.
(5) To facilitate compliance with state and federal water quality standards, limitations, and permits
by owners and operators of industrial and construction sites within the city.
(6) To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to
stormwater discharges.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-1; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-1), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-2. Administration.
Except for public works construction projects, as provided herein, the building official shall implement and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. For public works construction projects that are administered, performed,
contracted, or funded (in whole or in part) by the city, the director of the city department that is administering,
performing, or contracting for the construction project shall implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed in this chapter upon the building official or the director of
another city department may be delegated by him to other city personnel. (1998 Code, sec. 113-2; 1998 Code,
sec. 113-1; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-2), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-3. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations when used in this chapter shall have the designated meanings:
BMP Best management practices
BOD5 Five-day biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
HHW Household hazardous waste
mg/l Milligrams per liter
MS4 Municipal separate storm sewer system
NOI Notice of intent
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/554
NOT Notice of termination
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
pH Measure of acidity or alkalinity
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
PST Petroleum storage tank
PE Licensed professional engineer
SWPPP Stormwater pollution prevention plan
TSS Total suspended solids
USC United States Code
(1998 Code, sec. 113-3; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-3), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Agricultural stormwater runoff means any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range
lands, and other nonpoint source agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding
operations as defined in 40 CFR 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as
defined in 40 CFR 122.24.
Article means a major subdivision of this chapter.
Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States.
The term “BMPs” also includes treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
City means the City of Forest Hill, Texas.
Commencement of construction means the initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading,
excavation, land filling, and other construction activities.
Commercial means pertaining to any business, trade, industry or other activity engaged in for profit.
Common plan of development means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction
activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules under one plan.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/554
Construction means any human activity that involves clearing, grading, excavation, land filling, or other
placement, movement, removal, or disposal of soil, rock or other earth materials.
Contaminated means containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
Director means the building official, or duly authorized representative, except in the case of public works
construction projects that are administered, performed, contracted or funded (in whole or in part) by the city. In
the case of such city public works projects, the term “director” means the director of the city department that is
administering, performing or contracting for the construction project, or duly authorized representative.
Discharge means any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater or any other substance whatsoever
into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters of the United States.
Discharger means any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for a discharge,
including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility.
Domestic sewage means human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing, bathing, showers,
dishwashing, and food preparation), other wastewater from household drains, and waterborne waste normally
discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories and institutions that is free from industrial waste.
Effluent means an out flowing of water or gas from a natural body of water, or from a manmade structure.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the
regional office thereof, any federal department, agency or commission that may succeed to the authority of the
EPA, and any duly authorized official of EPA or such successor agency.
Facility means any building, structure, installation, process or activity from which there is or may be a discharge
of a pollutant.
Fertilizer.
(1) The term “fertilizer” means a solid or nonsolid substance or compound that contains an
essential plant nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for its essential
plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality
of a crop, or a mixture of two or more fertilizers.
(2) The term “fertilizer” does not include the excreta of an animal, plant remains, or a mixture of
those substances, for which no claim of essential plant nutrients is made.
Final stabilization means the status when all soil disturbing activities at a site have been completed, and a
uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70 percent of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not
covered by permanent structures has been established, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such
as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
Fire department means the fire department of the city, or any duly authorized representative thereof.
Fire protection water means any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person
other than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire.
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or
consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of
produce and other food products.
Harmful quantity means the amount of any substance that will cause pollution of water in the state.
Hazardous substance means any substance listed in table 302.4 of 40 CFR 302.
Hazardous waste means any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40
CFR 261.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/554
Hazardous waste treatment, disposal and recovery facility means all contiguous land, structures, other
appurtenances and improvements on the land used for the treatment, disposal or recovery of hazardous waste.
Herbicide means a substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant or to inhibit plant growth.
Household hazardous waste (HHW) means any material generated in a household (including single and
multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic
grounds, and day use recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in 40 CFR
261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261.
Industrial waste means any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industry,
manufacturing, mining, production, trade or business.
Land filling means the deposition of soil and other inert materials on the land to raise its grade and/or smooth its
features.
Licensed professional engineer (PE) means a person who has been duly licensed and registered by the state
board of registration for professional engineers to engage in the practice of engineering in the state.
Motor vehicle fluid means any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid, differential
lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle.
Municipal landfill means an area of land or an excavation in which municipal solid waste is placed for
permanent disposal, and which is not a land treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an injection well, or a
pile (as these terms are defined in regulations promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality).
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means the system of conveyances (including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm drains)
owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not
used for collecting or conveying sewage.
Municipal solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial,
institutional, or recreational activities, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and other solid waste other than industrial waste.
Nonpoint source means any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a point source.
Notice of intent (NOI) means the notice of intent that is required by the baseline industrial general permit, the
construction general permit or the multisector general permit.
Notice of termination (NOT) means the notice of termination that is required by the baseline industrial general
permit, the construction general permit or the multisector general permit.
NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity or baseline industrial
general permit means the baseline industrial general permit issued by the EPA on August 27, 1992, and
published in volume 57 of the Federal Register at page 41304 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent
modifications or amendments thereto.
NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction sites or construction general permit means
the construction general permit issued by the EPA on August 27, 1992, and published in volume 57 of the
Federal Register at page 41217 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent modifications or amendments
thereto.
NPDES permit means a permit issued by the EPA or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC
1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
NPDES stormwater multisector general permit for industrial activities or multisector general permit means the
multisector general permit for stormwater discharges associated with specified industrial activities published by
the EPA in volume 60 of the Federal Register at page 51109 on September 29, 1995, and any subsequent
modifications or amendments thereto.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/554
Oil means any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction
thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, or sludge, oil refuse and oil mixed
with waste.
Operator means the person or persons who, either individually or taken together, meet either of the following
two criteria:
(1) They have operational control over the facility specifications (including the ability to make
modifications in specifications); or
(2) They have the day-to-day operational control over those activities at the facility necessary to
ensure compliance with pollution prevention requirements and any permit conditions.
Owner means the person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. The term “person” includes all federal, state and local governmental entities.
Pesticide means a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repeal, or mitigate any
pest, or any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant
(as these terms are defined in Texas Agriculture Code, section 76.001).
Petroleum product means a product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is capable
of being used as a fuel for the propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor gasoline, gasohol, other
alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil and No. 1 and No. 2 diesel.
Petroleum storage tank (PST) means any one or combination of aboveground or underground storage tanks
that contain petroleum products and any connecting underground pipes.
Point source.
(1) The term “point source” means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance including,
but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling
stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other
floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
(2) The term “point source” does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural
stormwater runoff.
Pollutant.
(1) The term “pollutant” means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage,
sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste
discharged into water.
(2) The term “pollutant” does not include tailwater or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff
from cultivated or uncultivated range land, pasture land, and farm land.
Pollution means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical or biological quality of, or the contamination of,
any water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation
or property, or to the public health, safety or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the
water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Post-construction. The term “post-construction” means the general time period beginning at the completion of
the construction phase of any construction activity.
Public works construction project means any construction performed or funded in whole or part, separately or
collectively, by the federal, state, county or local government, including the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/554
Qualified personnel means persons who possess the appropriate competence, skills and ability (as
demonstrated by sufficient education, training, experience and/or, when applicable, any required certification or
licensing) to perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the applicable
regulatory requirements and generally accepted industry standards for such activity.
Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping,
leaching, dumping or disposing, directly or indirectly, into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or
the waters of the United States.
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes that consist of combustible waste materials, including paper, rags,
cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves and similar materials, and
noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture and similar
materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit).
Sanitary sewer (sewer) means the system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial
waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the sewage treatment plant utilized by the city (and to
which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted).
Septic tank waste means any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers and septic tanks.
Service station means any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is
dispensed from stationary storage tanks.
Sewage or sanitary sewage means the domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the city
sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to the sewage treatment plant utilized by
the city for treatment.
Site means the land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including
adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity.
Solid waste means any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment
plant, or air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including, solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining and agricultural operations, and from
community and institutional activities.
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
Stormwater discharge, associated with industrial activity, means the discharge from any conveyance which is
used for collecting and conveying stormwater and which is directly related to manufacturing, processing, or raw
materials storage areas at an industrial plant which is within one of the categories of facilities listed in 40 CFR
122, and which is not excluded from the EPA's definition of the same term.
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a plan required by either the construction general
permit, the baseline industrial general permit, or the multisector general permit and which describes and
ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges
associated with construction or other industrial activity at the facility.
Uncontaminated means not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
Used oil or used motor oil means any oil that has been refined from crude oil or a synthetic oil that, as a result
of use, storage or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of
original properties, but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and
federal law.
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.
Water in the state means any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding
reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico, inside the
territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/554
salt, navigable or nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface
water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state.
Water quality standard means the designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable
uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as
specified in 31 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 307.
Waters of the United States.
(1) The term “waters of the United States” means:
a. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in
interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of
the tide;
b. All interstate waters, including interstate wetlands;
c. All other waters the use, degradation or destruction of which would affect or could affect
interstate or foreign commerce;
d. All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this
definition;
e. All tributaries of waters identified in this definition;
f. All wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and
g. Any waters within the federal definition of “waters of the United States” at 40 CFR 122.2.
(2) The term “waters of the United States” does not include any waste treatment systems,
treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act.
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The term “wetlands” generally includes swamps, marshes,
bogs and similar areas.
Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping
maintenance and land-clearing operations.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-4; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-3), adopted 7/20/10; Ordinance 2018-06-27, sec.
2, adopted 6/26/18)
Sec. 48-5. General prohibition; exceptions.
(a) Nonstormwater discharges. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
(b) Affirmative defense for violation of subsection (a) of this section. It is an affirmative defense to any
enforcement action for violation of subsection (a) of this section, upon presentation of evidence by the
discharger, that the discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the following categories of discharges:
(1) A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, an NPDES permit (other than the
NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4);
(2) A discharge or flow resulting from firefighting by the fire department;
(3) A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances
or materials that chapter 22, fire protection and prevention, requires to be contained and treated
prior to discharge, in which case treatment adequate to remove harmful quantities of pollutants must
have occurred prior to discharge;
(4) Agricultural stormwater runoff;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/554
(5) A discharge or flow from water line flushing, but not including a discharge from water line
disinfection by super chlorination or other means unless it contains no harmful quantity of chlorine or
any other chemical used in line disinfection;
(6) A discharge or flow from lawn watering, landscape irrigation or other irrigation water;
(7) A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring;
(8) A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater;
(9) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20)) to the MS4;
(10) Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl space pump or footing
drain;
(11) A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any harmful substance or
material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container;
(12) A discharge or flow from individual residential car washing (external surfaces only);
(13) A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland;
(14) A discharge or flow from water used in street washing that is not contaminated with any soap,
detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance, and
the temperature of which has not been elevated by induced heating.
(c) Determination of pollutant. No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b) of this section if
the discharge or flow in question has been determined by the director to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants
to the waters of the United States or to the MS4, written notice of such determination has been provided to the
discharger, and the discharge has occurred more than 15 calendar days beyond such notice. The correctness
of the director's determination that a discharge is a source of a pollutant or pollutants may be reviewed in any
administrative or judicial enforcement proceeding.
(d) Burden of proof. The burden of proof that a discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the
categories in subsection (b) of this section and that it was not a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters
of the United States or to the MS4 is upon the person or entity responsible for the discharge.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-4; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-4), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-6. Specific prohibitions and requirements.
(a) Noninclusive enumeration. The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of
all the discharges prohibited by the general prohibition in section 48-5
(b) Violation of water quality standard and NPDES and state permits. No person shall introduce or cause to
be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water
quality standard, the city's NPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4.
(c) Enumeration of prohibited substances. No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty,
discharge, leach, dispose or otherwise introduce or cause, allow or permit to be introduced any of the following
substances into the MS4:
(1) Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid;
(2) Any industrial waste;
(3) Any hazardous waste, including household hazardous waste;
(4) Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste or grit trap waste;
(5) Any garbage, rubbish, yard waste or other floatable material;
(6) Any wastewater from:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/554
a. A commercial carwash facility;
b. Any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other
vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop or maintenance facility; or
c. Any washing, cleaning or maintenance of any business or commercial or public service
vehicle, including a truck, bus or heavy equipment;
(7) Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, deicing, or other maintenance of aircraft;
(8) Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other
cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent or any other
harmful cleaning substance, or that is at a temperature that has been elevated by induced heating;
(9) Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning;
(10) Any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of any pavement:
a. Which contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier,
dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance, or that is at a temperature that has been
elevated by induced heating; or
b. Where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous
substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such released material have been
previously removed;
(11) Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions
filter or the blow down from a boiler;
(12) Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic or asphalt base material or hydro mulch material,
or any wastewater or substance from the cleaning of any vehicle or equipment containing, or used in
transporting or applying, such material;
(13) Any runoff or wash down water from any animal pen, kennel, or foul or livestock containment
area;
(14) Any filter backwash from a swimming pool;
(15) Any discharge from water line disinfection by super chlorination or other means if it contains
any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection;
(16) Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials that chapter 22,
fire protection and prevention, requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, unless
treatment adequate to remove pollutants occurs prior to discharge. This prohibition does not apply to
discharges or flow from firefighting by the fire department;
(17) Any wastewater from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment;
(18) Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle salvage yard or any other facility classified as
standard industrial classification 5015 or 5093;
(19) Any substance or material that will damage, block or clog the MS4;
(20) Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil
contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from
the remediation of any such PST release.
(d) Earth materials. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of
sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing. grading, excavation, land filling, or other
construction activities (including any placement, movement, removal, or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth
materials) in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control
measures to the maximum extent practicable.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/554
(e) Connection of interior floor drain or other source of wastewater. No person shall connect an interior floor
drain or any other source of wastewater, domestic or industrial, to the MS4, or allow such a connection to
continue.
(f) Regulation of pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers.
(1) No person shall use or cause to be use any pesticide or herbicide contrary to any directions for
use on any labeling required by state or federal statute or regulation.
(2) No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer in any manner
that the person knows, or reasonably should know, is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful
quantity of the pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer to enter the MS4 or waters of the United States.
(3) No person shall dispose of, discard, store, or transport a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer, or a
pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer container, in a manner that the person knows, or reasonably should
know, is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer to
enter the MS4 or waters of the United States.
(4) If provided with a display notice containing the provisions of this subsection, pertaining to the
regulation of pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers (or a reasonable description thereof) and the
information that any user of the product may obtain further information from the director, any person
selling pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers at retail or wholesale shall post the notice prominently
where it may be read by purchasers of the product.
(g) Used oil regulation.
(1) No person shall:
a. Discharge used oil into the MS4 or a sewer, drainage system, septic tank, surface water,
groundwater or watercourse;
b. Knowingly mix or commingle used oil with solid waste that is to be disposed of in a landfill
or knowingly directly dispose of used oil on land or in a landfill;
c. Apply used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar
use that introduces used oil into the environment.
(2) All businesses that change motor oil for the public, municipal waste landfills, and fire stations
are encouraged to serve as public used oil collection centers as provided by state statute in Texas
Health and Safety Code sec. 371.024.
(3) A retail dealer who annually sells directly to the public more than 500 gallons of oil in
containers for use off premises shall post in a prominent place a sign provided by the city or by the
state informing the public that improper disposal of used oil is prohibited by law. The sign shall
prominently display the toll-free telephone number of the state used oil information center. If a sign is
provided by the city, it shall also prominently display the city telephone number where information
concerning the proper disposal of used oil may be obtained.
(h) Prohibited discharge of stormwater. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sanitary
sewer system any discharge of stormwater, polluted or unpolluted, or any discharge that causes or contributes
to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, its agreements associated with the regional sewage
treatment plants or any state issued permit.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-5; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-5), adopted 7/20/10)
Secs. 48-7–48-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CONSTRUCTION SITE REGULATIONS
Sec. 48-31. Goal for erosion and sediment control at construction sites.
The goal for erosion and sediment control at sites over one acre disturbed by construction is achievement of at
least the minimum site rating of 0.70 using the site rating system as presented in section 3 of the Stormwater
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/554
Quality Best Management Practices for Construction Activities-North Central Texas, second edition, North
Central Texas Council of Governments, Arlington, Texas, June 1999. (1998 Code, sec. 113-6; Ordinance 2010-
05-003, sec. 2(113-6), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-32. General requirements for stormwater discharges from construction activities; best
management practices enumerated.
(a) Best management practices. All operators of construction sites shall use best management practices to
control and reduce the discharge to the MS4 and to waters of the United States of sediment, silt, earth, soil and
other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation, land filling and other construction activities to the
maximum extent practicable. Any best management practices capable of installation and/or implementation
prior to commencement of construction (for example, structural measures) shall be installed and/or
implemented prior to commencement of construction at the site or in compliance with a schedule for installation
and/or implementation in an applicable SWPPP. The best management practices used at construction sites
may include, but not be limited to, the following measures:
(1) Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved where feasible and that disturbed portions of the
site are stabilized as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities have
temporarily or permanently ceased.
(2) Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit
runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site to the extent feasible;
(3) Minimization of the tracking of sediments off site by vehicles, the generation of dust, and the
escape of other windblown waste from the site;
(4) Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including cement, lime, concrete, asphalt
and mortar, to the MS4 or waters of the United States;
(5) Measures to prevent and contain spills of paints, solvents, fuels, septic waste, and other
hazardous chemicals and pollutants associated with construction, and to ensure proper cleanup and
disposal of any such spills in compliance with state, federal and local requirements;
(6) Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management techniques, including
covering waste materials, minimizing ground contact with hazardous chemicals and trash, and
installing and maintaining covered receptacles for rubbish and garbage to ensure that such waste
materials are not blown or carried by rainfall runoff from the site;
(7) Timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures and other best
management practices to maintain them in good and effective operating condition; and
(8) Installation of structural measures during the construction process to control pollutants in
stormwater discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed. Structural
measures should be placed on upland soils to the degree attainable. Such installed structural
measures may include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. Stormwater detention structures (including wet ponds);
b. Stormwater retention structures;
c. Flow attenuation by use of open vegetative swales and natural depressions;
d. Other velocity dissipation devices;
e. Infiltration of runoff on site; and
f. Sequential systems which combine several practices.
Operators of construction sites are only responsible for the installation and maintenance of
stormwater management measures prior to final stabilization of the site, and are not responsible for
maintenance after stormwater discharges associated with construction activity have terminated.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/554
(b) Inspection. Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed
areas of any construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are
exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter or exit the site, at least
once every seven calendar days and within 24 hours of the end of a storm that is 0.5-inch or greater. All erosion
and sediment control measures and other identified best management practices shall be observed in order to
ensure that they are operating correctly and are effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters
and the MS4. Based on the results of the inspection, best management practices shall be modified as
appropriate, and as soon as is practicable.
(c) Responsibility for compliance with section provisions. Any owner of a site of construction activity, whether
or not he is an operator, is jointly and individually responsible for compliance with the requirements in this
section. Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity, who is not an owner or operator, but
who is responsible under his contract or subcontract, for implementing a best management practices control
measure, is jointly and individually responsible for any willful or negligent failure on his part to adequately
implement that control measure.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-7; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-7), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-33. Management plan submittal and review for stormwater discharges from construction
activity.
(a) Preparation and submission of documents. Unless within one or more of the exceptions specified in
subsection (f) of this section, all operators of sites of construction activity, including clearing, grading,
excavation and land filling activities, shall prepare and submit the following documents to the director at least 15
calendar days prior to the commencement of construction activities (unless, pursuant to subsection (b) of this
section, the director expressly allows construction to be commenced within a shorter period of time following
the document submittal):
(1) An identifying notice containing the following information:
a. The name, address and telephone number of each operator of the construction activity;
b. The name, address and telephone number of each owner of the construction site;
c. The location of the construction site, by street address and legal description; and
d. A description of the nature of the construction project
(2) Plans and specifications illustrating and describing the best management practices required by
this subsection (a) that will be implemented at the construction site. Such plans and specifications
shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer, except in instances of
land clearing or land filling disturbing less than 12,000 square feet of land without any existing plans
or present intention of erecting a building or other structure on the site.
(b) Required determinations by director to allow construction. The director may allow construction to be
commenced within fewer than 15 calendar days following submittal of the documents required by subsection (a)
of this section if he expressly determines that:
(1) The required identifying notice and management plans and specifications are complete and
satisfactory;
(2) The director has been afforded adequate time and opportunity to review the management
plans and specifications; and
(3) The management practices described in the plans and observed upon any site inspection
conducted are adequate to control and reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other
materials associated with construction activities to the maximum extent practicable.
(c) Issuance of orders. If, upon the director's review of the management plans and specifications required by
subsection (a) of this section (or any modified plans required by subsection (e) of this section) and any site
inspection that the director may conduct, the director determines that the management practices described in
the plans or observed upon the site inspection are not adequate to control and reduce the discharge of
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/554
sediment, silt, earth, soil and other materials associated with construction activities to the maximum extent
practicable, the director may issue an order prohibiting the commencement, or the continuation, of any
construction activity at the site. Any order issued by the director under the authority of this subsection may be in
the form of a compliance order under section 48-94, an emergency cease and desist order under section 48-96,
or a stop work order under section 48-97
(d) Denial of approval; grounds. The city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, or any
other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the grounds
that the management practices described in the plans or observed upon a site inspection by the director are
determined not to control and reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil and other materials associated
with construction activities to the maximum extent practicable.
(e) Modifications; submission. Whenever the management practices at a construction site are modified (as a
result of change in the construction project, in order to implement more effective management practices, in
response to an order or request from the city, or for any other reason), a written description of such
modifications of the management practices shall be submitted to the director as soon as possible, but in no
case later than seven calendar days following the change in the management practices.
(f) Nonapplicability of section provisions. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any of the
following activities:
(1) Any construction activity that results in the disturbance of five or more acres of total land area,
or that is part of a common plan of development or sale within which five or more acres of total land
area are disturbed, and any other construction activity for which an NPDES permit is required for
stormwater discharges associated with that construction activity. In such circumstances, the
requirements of section 48-34 apply in lieu of this section.
(2) Any public works construction project that is administered, performed, contracted or funded (in
whole or in part) by the city.
(3) Any construction activity, not a part of a larger plan of development of five acres or more,
related to the construction, alteration, or addition to a single-family, duplex or fourplex residential
structure, or an accessory use to any such structure, where one primary structure is constructed per
legal block and the construction activity does not result in the disturbance of more than 12,000
square feet of total land area.
(4) Any construction incident to repair or maintenance of a utility line (such as for
telecommunications, electricity, water, sewer, and natural gas). Construction incident to the laying of
new utility lines or replacement of existing lines is not exempted from this section by this subsection.
(5) Interior alteration of an existing building when the alteration does not increase the square
footage, area or height of the building.
(6) Construction of a fence, but no exemption is granted by this subsection for construction of a
retaining wall or a fence that may significantly obstruct or change the direction of flow of water.
(7) Any construction activity that the director expressly finds not to cause, or threaten to cause,
any discharge of any harmful quantity of any material associated with construction activity into the
MS4 or any other water in the state.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-8; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-8), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-34. Five-acre disturbances from construction activity.
All operators of sites of construction activity, including clearing, grading, excavation, and land filling activities,
that result in the disturbance of five or more acres of total land area, or that are part of a common plan of
development or sale within which five or more acres of total land area are disturbed, or who are required to
obtain an NPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity, shall comply with the
following requirements in addition to those in section 48-33:
(1) Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for stormwater discharges from a construction
site under the NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction sites (the
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/554
construction general permit) shall submit a signed copy of its notice of intent (NOI) to the building
official, and to any other responsible city departmental director, at least 15 calendar days prior to the
commencement of construction activities. If the construction activity is already underway upon the
effective date of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the NOI shall be submitted within
30 calendar days after the effective date of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived. For
stormwater discharges from construction sites where the operator changes, an NOI shall be
submitted at least two calendar days prior to when the new operator commences work at the site.
(2) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared and implemented prior to
the beginning of construction activities in accordance with the requirements of the construction
general permit or any individual NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the
construction site, and with any additional requirement imposed by or under this chapter and any
other city Ordinance.
(3) The SWPPP shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a licensed professional engineer. The
signature and seal of the licensed professional engineer shall constitute his attestation that the
SWPPP fully complies with the requirements of the construction general permit, or with any
applicable individual NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, and
with any additional requirement imposed by or under this chapter. The SWPPP shall contain the
name, title, and business address of the licensed professional engineer signing it, and the date that
he did so.
(4) The SWPPP shall be updated and modified as appropriate and as required by the construction
general permit and this chapter. Any update or modification to the SWPPP shall be prepared,
signed, and sealed by a licensed professional engineer.
(5) The SWPPP shall be prepared and submitted to the director at least 15 calendar days prior to
the commencement of construction activities. If the construction activity is already underway upon
the effective date of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the SWPPP shall be
submitted within 30 calendar days after the effective date of the Ordinance from which this chapter is
derived.
(6) A copy of any SWPPP that is required by subsection (2) of this section shall be submitted to
the city in conjunction with any application for a building permit, grading permit, site development
plan approval, and any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction at the
site.
(7) If, upon the director's review of the SWPPP (or any modification to the SWPPP) and any site
inspection that the director may conduct, the director determines that the SWPPP does not comply
with the requirements of the construction general permit, any individual NPDES permit issued for
stormwater discharge from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed by or under
this chapter, the director may issue an order prohibiting the commencement, or the continuation, of
any construction activity at the site. Also, if at any time the director determines that the SWPPP is
not being fully implemented, the director may similarly issue an order prohibiting the continuation of
any construction activity at the site. Any order issued by the director under the authority of this
subsection may be in the form of a compliance order under section 48-94, an emergency cease and
desist order under section 48-96, or a stop work order under section 48-97
(8) Upon review of the SWPPP and any site inspection that is conducted, the city may deny
approval of any building permit, grading permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence
or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that the SWPPP does not comply
with the requirements of the construction general permit, any individual or group NPDES permit
issued for stormwater discharge from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed
by or under this chapter. Also, if at any time the city determines that the SWPPP is not being fully
implemented, the city may similarly deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, or any
other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, at
the site.
(9) All contractors and subcontractors identified in an SWPPP shall sign a copy of the following
certification statement before conducting any professional service identified in the SWPPP:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/554
“I certify under penalty of law that I understand the terms and conditions of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit that authorizes the stormwater discharges
associated with industrial activity from the construction site identified as part of this certification.”
The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the signature; the name,
address, and telephone number of the contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description)
of the site; and the date the certification is made.
(10) The SWPPP, with the licensed professional engineer's signature, seal, and date affixed, and
the certifications of contractors and subcontractors required by subsection (9) of this section, and
with any modifications attached, shall be retained at the construction site from the date of
commencement of construction through the date of final stabilization.
(11) The operator shall make a copy of the SWPPP and any modification thereto available to the
director and any other authorized city inspector at the construction site upon request (as well as to
EPA and state inspectors).
(12) The director may notify the operator at any time that the SWPPP does not meet the
requirements of the construction general permit, any applicable individual NPDES permit issued for
stormwater discharges from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed by or under
this chapter. Such notification shall identify those provisions of the permit or Ordinance which are not
being met by the SWPPP, and identify which provisions of the SWPPP require modifications in order
to meet such requirements. Within seven calendar days of such notification from the director (or as
otherwise provided by the director), the operator shall make the required changes to the SWPPP
and shall submit to the director a written certification that the requested modifications have been
made.
(13) The operator shall modify the SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction,
operation, or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the potential for the discharge of
pollutants to the MS4 or to the waters of the United States, and which has not otherwise been
addressed in the SWPPP, or if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective in eliminating or significantly
minimizing pollutants, or in otherwise achieving the general objective of controlling pollutants in
stormwater discharges associated with construction activity. In addition, the SWPPP shall be
modified to identify any new contractor and/or subcontractor that will implement a measure in the
SWPPP. All modifications to the SWPPP shall be submitted to the director within seven calendar
days of a change, determination of ineffectiveness (self or city inspection), or effective date of
changes in contractor and/or subcontractor.
(14) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed
areas of the construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of
materials that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where
vehicles enter or exit the site, at least once every seven calendar days and within 24 hours of the
end of the storm that is 0.5-inch or greater. Disturbed areas and areas used for storage of materials
that are exposed to precipitation shall be inspected for evidence of, or the potential for, pollutants
entering the drainage system. Erosion and sediment control measures identified in the SWPPP shall
be observed to ensure that they are operating correctly. Where discharge locations or points are
accessible, they shall be inspected to ascertain whether erosion control measures are effective in
preventing significant impacts to receiving waters or the MS4. Locations where vehicles enter or exit
the site shall be inspected for evidence of off-site sediment tracking.
(15) Based on the results of the inspections required by subsection (14) of this section, the site
description and/or the pollution prevention measures identified in the SWPPP shall be modified as
appropriate, but in no case later than seven calendar days following the inspection. Such
modifications shall provide for timely implementation of any changes to the SWPPP within seven
calendar days following the inspection. All modifications to the SWPPP shall be submitted to the
director within seven calendar days of the date of inspection.
(16) A report summarizing the scope of any inspection required by subsection (14) of this section,
and the names and qualifications of personnel making the inspection, the dates of the inspection,
major observations relating to the implementation of the SWPPP, and actions taken in accordance
with subsection (15) of this section, shall be made and retained as part of the SWPPP for at least
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/554
three years from the date that the site is finally stabilized. Such report shall identify any incidence of
noncompliance. Where a report does not identify any incidence of noncompliance, the report shall
contain a certification that the facility is in compliance with the SWPPP, the facility's NPDES permit,
and this chapter. The report shall be certified and signed by the person responsible for making it.
(17) The operator shall retain copies of any SWPPP and all reports required by this chapter or by
the NPDES permit for the site, and records of all data used to complete the NOI, for a period of at
least three years from the date that the site is finally stabilized.
(18) Where a site has been finally stabilized and all stormwater discharges from construction
activities that are authorized by this chapter and by the NPDES permit for those construction
activities are eliminated, or where the operator of all stormwater discharges at a facility changes, the
operator of the construction site shall submit to the city engineer, and to any other responsible city
departmental director, a notice of termination (NOT) that includes the information required for notices
of termination the construction general permit.
(19) Upon final stabilization of the construction site, the owner (or the duly authorized
representative thereof) shall submit to the responsible director written certification by a licensed
professional engineer that the site has been finally stabilized. (See definition of “final stabilization” in
section 48-4. ) The city may withhold occupancy or use permit for any premises constructed on the
site until such certification of final stabilization has been filed and the responsible director has
determined, following any appropriate inspection, that final stabilization has, in fact, occurred and
that any required permanent structural controls have been completed.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-9; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-9), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-35. Post-construction stormwater management.
(a) Post-construction stormwater BMPs are required on development or redevelopment construction projects
that are expected to disturb at least one acre of land and fall in one or more of the following criteria:
(1) Construction of any type of commercial car wash facility.
(2) Construction of an automotive fueling facility including convenience stores.
(3) Construction of an automotive maintenance or repair facility.
(4) Restaurants (fast food or sit down) with grease collection and disposal.
(5) Other land uses deemed to have a high potential of pollutant discharge into the MS4 as
determined by the city engineer.
(b) General requirements.
(1) Post-construction stormwater BMPs are contained in section 48-32 of the city's Code of
Ordinances. Alternative BMPs may be used if approved by the city engineer.
(2) Post-construction BMPs shall be clearly indicated and shown on a site plan for development
that is required by this code.
(3) The maintenance schedule for post-construction stormwater BMPs shall be clearly indicated
and shown on any site plan for development.
(c) Public comment or information.
(1) The public may submit comments or information regarding post-construction stormwater
management by contacting the city engineer.
(Ordinance 2018-06-27, sec. 3, adopted 6/26/18)
Secs. 48-36–48-56. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES REQUIREMENTS
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/554
Sec. 48-57. Stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity.
(a) Industrial operator, hazardous waste treatment and landfill requirements. All operators of municipal
landfills, hazardous waste treatment, disposal, and recovery facilities, industrial facilities that are subject to
section 313 of Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA) USC 11023; and
industrial facilities that the director determines are contributing a substantial pollutant loading to the MS4, which
are sources of stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for stormwater discharge associated with
industrial activity under the NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges associated with
industrial activity (the baseline industrial general permit) or the NPDES stormwater multi-sector
general permit for industrial activities (the multi-sector general permit) shall submit a signed copy of
its notice of intent (NOI) to the director at least two calendar days prior to the commencement of the
industrial activity at the facility. If industrial activity requiring an NPDES stormwater permit is already
underway upon the effective date of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived, a copy of the
permit assignment notice or the NOI shall be submitted within 30 calendar days. Where the operator
of a facility with a stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity which is covered by an
NPDES general permit changes, the new operator of the facility shall submit an NOI at least two
calendar days prior to the change. (Note: Reference within this section to an NPDES general permit
or to the appropriate NPDES general permit shall be deemed to refer to either the baseline industrial
general permit or the multisector general permit. )
(2) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared and implemented in
accordance with the requirements of the appropriate NPDES general permit or any individual
NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, and with any additional
requirement imposed by or under this chapter, and any other city Ordinance.
(3) The SWPPP shall be completed prior to the submittal of the NOI to the director and, for a new
industrial operation, prior to the commencement of the industrial activity at the facility. The SWPPP
shall be updated and modified as appropriate and as required by the appropriate NPDES general
permit and this chapter.
(4) A copy of any NOI that is required by subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be submitted to the
city in conjunction with any application for a permit or any other city approval necessary to
commence or continue operation of the industrial facility.
(5) The director may require any operator who is required by subsection (a)(2) of this section to
prepare and submit the SWPPP, and any modifications thereto, to the director for review. Such
submittal and review of the SWPPP may be required by the director prior to commencement of or
during industrial activity at the facility.
(6) Upon the director's review of the SWPPP and any site inspection that he may conduct, the city
may deny approval of any application for a permit or any other city approval necessary to commence
or continue operation of the facility, on the grounds that the SWPPP does not comply with the
requirements of the appropriate NPDES general permit or any individual NPDES permit issued for
stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, or any additional requirement imposed by or under
this chapter or other city Ordinances. Also, if at any time the director determines that the SWPPP is
not being fully implemented, the city may similarly deny approval of any application for a permit or
other city approval necessary to commence or continue operation of the industrial facility.
(7) The SWPPP, with any modifications attached, shall be retained at the industrial facility from
the date of commencement of operations until all stormwater discharges associated with industrial
activity at the facility are eliminated and the required notice of termination (NOT) has been submitted
in accordance with the appropriate NPDES general permit.
(8) The operator shall make the SWPPP and any modification thereto available to the director
upon request (as well as to EPA and state inspectors).
(9) The director may notify the operator at any time that the SWPPP does not meet the
requirements of the appropriate NPDES general permit, any applicable individual NPDES permit
issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, or any additional requirement imposed
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/554
by or under this chapter or other city Ordinances. Such notification shall identify those provisions of
the permit or Ordinance which are not being met by the SWPPP, and identify which provisions of the
SWPPP require modifications in order to meet such requirements. Within 30 calendar days of such
notification from the director (or as otherwise provided by the director), the operator shall make the
required changes to the SWPPP and shall submit to the director a written certification that the
requested changes have been made.
(10) The operator shall amend the SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction,
operation, or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the potential for the discharge of
pollutants to the MS4 or to the waters of the United States, or if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective
in eliminating or significantly minimizing pollutants, or in otherwise achieving the general objective of
controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity.
(11) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator) shall inspect equipment and areas of the
facility specified in the SWPPP at appropriate intervals. A set of tracking or follow up procedures
shall be used to ensure that appropriate actions are taken in response to the inspections. Records of
inspection shall be maintained and made available to the director upon request.
(12) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator) shall conduct comprehensive site compliance
evaluations as required by the appropriate NPDES general permit at intervals of no less than once
per year. Based on the results of the compliance evaluation, the description of potential pollutant
sources and the pollution prevention measures and controls that are identified in the SWPPP shall
be revised as appropriate within two weeks of such evaluation and shall provide for implementation
of any changes to the SWPPP in a timely manner, but in no case more than 12 weeks after the
compliance evaluation.
(13) A report summarizing the scope of the comprehensive site compliance evaluation required by
the appropriate NPDES general permit, personnel making the compliance inspection, the dates of
the inspection, major observations relating to the implementation of the SWPPP, and actions taken
in accordance with necessary and appropriate plan revisions shall be made and retained as part of
the SWPPP for at least one year after all stormwater discharges from the facility are eliminated and
the required NOT has been submitted. The report shall identify any incidence of noncompliance; or,
if the report does not identify any incidence of noncompliance, the report shall contain a certification
that the facility is in compliance with the SWPPP, the applicable NPDES permit, and this chapter.
The report shall be signed by the individual responsible for the comprehensive site compliance
evaluation, and it shall be submitted to the director within ten calendar days of its completion.
(14) If the industrial facility is required by the appropriate NPDES general permit to conduct
monitoring, records of the monitoring results shall be retained at the facility and made available to
the director upon request.
(15) By written notice, the director may require any industrial facility identified in accordance with
this section to implement a monitoring program at its expense that includes the submission of
quantitative data on the following constituents:
a. Any pollutants limited in effluent guidelines subcategories;
b. Any pollutant listed in an existing NPDES permit for the facility;
c. Oil and grease, COD, pH, 30D5, TSS, total phosphorus, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, nitrate
plus nitrite nitrogen; and
d. Information on discharges required under 40 CFR 122.21(g)(7)(iii) and (iv).
The director may require written reports of any such monitoring to be submitted to him.
(16) By written notice, the director may require any industrial facility identified in this section to
conduct semi annual or annual monitoring of stormwater discharges, or the director may specify an
alternative monitoring frequency and/or specify additional parameters to be analyzed. The director
may require written reports of any such additional monitoring to be submitted to him.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/554
(17) The operator shall retain the SWPPP until at least one year after stormwater discharges
associated with industrial activity at the facility are eliminated, or that operator is no longer operating
the facility, and a notice of termination (NOT) in compliance with the appropriate NPDES general
permit has been submitted. The operator shall retain all records of all monitoring information, copies
of all required reports, and records of all data used to complete the NOI, until at least one year after
all stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity at the facility are eliminated, or the
operator ceases to operate that facility, and the required notice of termination (NOT) has been
submitted.
(18) For discharges subject to monitoring requirements of the appropriate NPDES general permit,
in addition to the records-retention requirements of the subsection (a)(17) of this section, operators
shall retain records of all monitoring information collected for the period of time required by the
appropriate NPDES general permit. Operators must submit such monitoring results, and/or a
summary thereof, to the director upon his request.
(19) Upon the effective date of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived, no discharge
shall contain any of the following hazardous metals in a concentration exceeding the maximum
concentrations (in mg/l) of each of the hazardous metals listed as follows:
Metal Average Daily Composite Grab Sample
Arsenic 0.1 0.2 0.3
Barium 1.0 2.0 4.0
Cadmium 0.05 0.1 0.2
Chromium 0.5 1.0 5.0
Copper 0.5 1.0 2.0
Lead 0.5 1.0 1.5
Manganese 1.0 2.0 3.0
Mercury 0.005 0.005 0.01
Nickel 1.0 2.0 3.0
Selenium 0.05 0.1 0.2
Silver 0.05 0.1 0.2
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/554
Zinc 1.0 2.0 6.0
(20) Where all stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity that are authorized by this
chapter, and by the NPDES permit for those discharges from industrial activities, are eliminated, or
where the operator of stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity at a facility changes,
the operator of the facility shall submit to the director a notice of termination (NOT) that includes the
information required for notices of termination by the appropriate NPDES general permit.
(b) Responsibility for compliance with section provisions. Any owner of a facility with a stormwater discharge
associated with industrial activity to which subsection (a) of this section applies, whether or not he is an
operator of the facility, is jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the best management practices
(BMP) measures required in the SWPPP for the facility.
(c) Difficulty in compliance; enforcement. Upon request by the director, all owners and operators of any
facility that experience a problem complying with the requirements of this chapter, the industrial general permit,
or any applicable individual or group NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility,
shall consult with the director, any other representative of the city, and any third party designated by the city in
an attempt to achieve compliance as soon as practicable. If compliance is not achieved to the city's satisfaction,
the city may, in its discretion, report the noncompliance to EPA and/or the state, and/or the city may itself
undertake any enforcement action authorized by article IV of this chapter. Exercise of the city's option for
consultation under this subsection shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other enforcement
action against any owner or operator of the facility.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-10; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-10), adopted 7/20/10)
Secs. 48-58–48-87. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 48-88. Right of entry: inspection and sampling.
(a) The director, or authorized representative, shall have the right to enter the premises of any person
discharging stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or to waters of the United States
to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this chapter, and with any state or federal
discharge permit, limitation, or requirement. Dischargers shall allow the director ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the performance
of any additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the director, upon request, any SWPPPs,
modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of intent and
any other records, reports and other documents related to compliance with this chapter and with any state or
federal discharge permit.
(b) Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director or authorized representative will be permitted to
enter without delay for the purposes of performing his responsibilities.
(c) The director shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property, or require installation of, such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's operations.
(d) The director may require any discharger to the MS4 or waters of the United States to conduct specified
sampling, testing, analysis and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges, and may specify the frequency
and parameters of any such required monitoring.
(e) The director may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's
expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(f) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or
sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the director and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the discharger.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/554
(g) Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the discharger's premises shall be a violation of
this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-11; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-11), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-89. Search warrants.
If the director, or authorized representative, has been refused access to any part of the premises from which
stormwater is discharged, and they are able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this chapter or any state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to
verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the director may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction. For purposes of this section, the director of community development, the city engineer,
the director of public works, the director of parks and the duly authorized representatives of these city
departmental directors are declared to be “health officers,” as that term is used in Texas C.C.P. art. 18.05. (1998
Code, sec. 113-12; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-12), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-90. Reports of violations.
(a) Citizen reports. All citizens are encouraged to report any spills, releases, illicit connections, other
instances of anyone discharging pollutants into the MS4 or waters of the United States, and any other violation
of this chapter of which they become aware, to the director, his delegate, or any person designated by the city
manager to receive such citizen reports.
(b) Methods of citizen reports. Such citizen reports may be made by telephone, in writing, or in person. A
written record of each citizen report to the city will be prepared and kept on file for a period of three years, and a
copy of the city's record of the report will be furnished to the reporting citizen upon request. Also upon request,
the building official or other responsible city official will inform the reporting citizen of any action undertaken by
the city in response to the citizen's report.
(c) Reports by owners and operators. The operator and the owner of any commercial or industrial activity
shall report any spills, releases, illicit connections, or other instances where pollutants are discharged into the
MS4 or waters of the United States and any other violation of this chapter for which they are responsible to the
director or delegate, or any person designated by the city manager to receive such reports.
(d) Reporting requirements. The operator and the owner of any commercial or industrial activity shall report
all incidents enumerated in subsection (c) of this section, in accordance with the following:
(1) A hazardous and/or toxic material spill or release shall be immediately reported to the city fire
department.
(2) Other instances where pollutants are discharged into the MS4 or waters of the United States
by spill, release, illicit connections or other means shall be reported to the building official.
(e) Notification responsibilities of operators and owners. Both the operator and the owner of any commercial
or industrial activity which has resulted in a spill or release of hazardous/toxic materials or a substance of a
polluting nature is responsible for proper notification of the incident to the appropriate county, state, and federal
agency. The reporting of a spill/release to the city does not release the owner or operator from reporting to
appropriate county, state and federal officials. Thus, dependent on the type of release and the nature of the
emergency caused thereby (i.e., life threatening or not), the following agencies, in addition to the building
official, are specified to be notified:
(1) City fire department;
(2) City police department;
(3) City street division;
(4) Texas Commission on Environmental Quality; and
(5) U. S. Environmental Protection Agency.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/554
(1998 Code; sec. 113-13; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-13), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-91. Warning notice.
When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate; any provision of this chapter or
any order issued hereunder; the director may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the
particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the
matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of
the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
director to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
warning notice. (1998 Code, sec. 113-14; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-14), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-92. Notification of violation.
When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or
any order issued hereunder, the director may serve upon that person a written notice of violation. Within ten
calendar days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the
alleged violator to the director. If the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no
corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to
the director within ten calendar days of receipt of the notice. Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no
way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency
action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. The director may enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with any person responsible for noncompliance with any provision in this chapter or any order issued
hereunder. Such documents may include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to this article and shall be judicially enforceable. (1998 Code, sec. 113-
15; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-15), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-93. Show cause hearing.
The director may order any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or
any order issued hereunder, to appear before the director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the alleged violator specifying the time and place for the hearing,
the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the alleged violator show
cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten calendar days prior to the
hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the alleged violator. The hearing shall
be conducted pursuant to the rights and procedures specified in section 48-98(g). A show cause hearing shall
not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the alleged violator. (1998 Code, sec.
113-16; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-16), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-94. Compliance orders.
When the director finds that any person has violated, continues to violate, or threatens to violate, any provision
of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, the director may issue an order to the violator directing that the
violator come into compliance within a specified time limit, prior to commencement or continuance of operation,
or immediately. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance,
including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged, to the MS4 and waters of the United States. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established by a state or federal standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the
person of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. (1998 Code, sec. 113-17;
Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-17), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-95. Remediation, abatement and restoration orders.
When the director finds that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any
order issued hereunder, and that such violation has adversely affected the MS4 or the waters of the United
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/554
States, the director may issue an order to the violator directing them to undertake and implement any
appropriate action to remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of the violation upon the MS4 or the waters of
the United States, and/or to restore any part of the MS4 or the waters of the United States. Such remedial,
abatement, and restoration action may include, but not be limited to, monitoring, assessment and evaluation of
the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement, and/or restoration action;
confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment and disposal of any discharged or released pollution or
contamination; prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any damage to the public health, welfare, or the
environment that may result from the violation; restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources
damaged by the violation. The order may direct that the remediation, abatement, and/or restoration be
accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and/or be completed within a specified period of time. An
order issued under this section does not relieve the violator of liability for any violation, including any continuing
violation. Issuance of an order under this section shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against any responsible party. (1998 Code, sec. 113-18; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-18),
adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-96. Emergency cease and desist orders.
(a) When the director finds that any person has violated, continues to violate, or threatens to violate, any
provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur,
and that the person's violation, or threatened violation, have caused or contributed to an actual or threatened
discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the director may issue an
order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements of this chapter; and
(2) Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
(b) Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this section shall immediately comply and
stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the emergency order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, including immediate termination of a facility's water
supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The director may allow the person to commence or
recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under
this chapter. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director within ten calendar days of receipt of the
emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the violator.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-19; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-19), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-97. Stop work orders.
Whenever the director finds that any operator of a construction site has violated, threatens to violate, or
continues to violate, any provision of article II of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, the director may
issue a stop work order to the operator, and require that a copy of the stop work order be posted at the
construction site and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose decisions affect any activity at the
site. Unless express written exception is made by the director, the stop work order shall prohibit any further
construction activity, or any commencement of construction activity, at the site and shall bar any further
inspection or approval by the city associated with a building permit, grading permit, or any other city approval
necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site. Issuance of a stop work
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. (1998 Code,
sec. 113-20; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-20), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-98. Reconsideration and hearing.
(a) Petition for reconsideration. Any person subject to a compliance order under section 48-94, a
remediation, abatement or restoration order under section 48-95, an emergency cease and desist order under
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/554
section 48-96, or a stop work order under section 48-97 may petition the director to reconsider the basis for his
order within 15 calendar days of the affected person's notice of issuance of such an order.
(b) Failure to submit petition deemed waiver. Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the order.
(c) Enumeration of objectives. In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions of the order
objected to, the reasons for the objection, any facts that are contested, the evidence that supports the
petitioner's view of the facts, any alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, and whether the
petitioning party requests a hearing on its petition.
(d) Effect of director's orders. The effect of any compliance order under section 48-94, remediation,
abatement, or restoration order under section 48-95, and any stop work order under section 48-97 shall be
stayed pending the director's reconsideration of the petition, and any hearing thereon, unless the director
expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The effectiveness of any emergency cease and desist
order under section 48-96 shall not be stayed pending the director's reconsideration, or any hearing thereon,
unless the director expressly and in writing stays his emergency order.
(e) Action by director; time limit. Within 30 calendar days of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration, the
director shall grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly, deny the petition without a hearing
if no material issue of fact is raised, or, if a hearing has been requested and a material issue of fact has been
raised, set a hearing on the petition.
(f) Notice of hearing; service. Written notice of any hearing set by the director pursuant to subsection (e) of
this section shall be served on the petitioning party personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the petitioning party.
(g) Conduct of hearing. The director may conduct the hearing and take evidence, or may designate any
employee of the city or any specially designated attorney or engineer to:
(1) Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing;
(2) Take evidence;
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence,
together with recommendations to the director for action thereon.
At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded. Any party is
entitled to present his case or defense by oral or documentary evidence and to conduct such cross examination
as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. A transcript will be made available to any party to
the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
(h) Action upon review of evidence. After the director has reviewed the evidence, he shall:
(1) Grant the petition;
(2) Deny the petition; or
(3) Grant the petition in part and deny it in part.
The director may modify his order as is appropriate based upon the evidence and arguments presented at the
hearing and his action on the petition. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be
issued.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-21; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-21), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-99. Appeal.
Any person who remains adversely affected by the director's order after petitioning for reconsideration pursuant
to section 48-98, or who is subject to an order of the director issued following a show cause hearing under
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/554
section 48-93, may challenge the final action of the director in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-22; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-22), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-100. Civil remedies.
(a) Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter that
relates to:
(1) The preservation of public safety relating to the materials or methods used in construction of
any structure or improvement of real property;
(2) The preservation of public health or to the fire safety of a building or other structure or
improvement;
(3) The establishment of criteria for land subdivision or construction of buildings, including street
design;
(4) Dangerously damaged or deteriorated structures or improvements;
(5) Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that creates
breeding and living places for insects and rodents; or
(6) Point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant, other than from a nonpoint
source, into the MS4.
The city may invoke Texas Local Government Code secs. 54.012–54.017and petition the state district court or
the county court at law of the county, through the city attorney, for either the injunctive relief specified in
subsection (b) of this section or the civil penalties specified in subsection (c) of this section, or both the
specified injunctive relief and civil penalties.
(b) Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code sec. 54.016, the city may obtain against the owner or the
operator of a facility a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
(1) Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter
specified in subsection (a) of this section; or
(2) Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with any
provision of this chapter that relates to any matter specified in subsection (a) of this section.
(c) Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code sec. 54.017, the city may recover a civil penalty of not more
than $1,000.00 per day for each violation of any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter specified in
subsections (a)(1) through (5) of this section, and a civil penalty of not more than $5,000.00 per day for each
violation of any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter specified in subsection (a)(6) of this section, if
the city proves that:
(1) The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the chapter; and
(2) After the defendant received notice of the chapter provisions, the defendant committed acts in
violation of the chapter or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-23; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-23), adopted 7/20/10)
State law reference–Civil actions for municipal health and safety Ordinances, Texas Local Government Code sec. 54.012
et seq.
Sec. 48-101. Criminal penalties.
(a) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this chapter, any code adopter
herein, or any order issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 for each offense and each and every day such violation
shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/554
(b) Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day
such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(c) In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all relevant
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective actions by the violator,
the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge, intent, negligence, or other state of mind of the violator,
and any other factor as justice requires.
(d) Culpable mental state. The requirement for establishing a culpable mental state for criminal prosecutions
under this chapter shall be met by a showing of criminal negligence.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-24; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-24), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-102. Civil suit under the Texas Water Code.
Whenever it appears that a violation or threat of violation of any provision of Texas Water Code sec. 26.121, or
any rule, permit, or order of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, has occurred or is occurring
within the jurisdiction of the city, exclusive of its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city, in the same manner as the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, may have a suit instituted in a state district court through its city
attorney for the injunctive relief or civil penalties, or both, authorized in Texas Water Code secs. 7.031 and
7.032, against the person who committed or is committing or threatening to commit the violation. This power is
exercised pursuant to Texas Water Code sec. 7.351. In any suit brought by the city under this section, the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality is a necessary and indispensable party. (1998 Code, sec. 113-25;
Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-25), adopted 7/20/10)
State law reference–Unauthorized discharges any water in the state prohibited, Texas Water Code sec. 26.121.
Sec. 48-103. Remedies nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under
state or federal law or other city Ordinances. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any violator. These
actions may be taken concurrently. (1998 Code, sec. 113-26; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-26), adopted
7/20/10)
Sec. 48-104. Performance and maintenance bonds.
The director may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of stormwater discharge
associated with construction or industrial activity to file a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to
exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance with this chapter,
any order issued hereunder, any required best management practice, and/or any SWPPP provision, and/or to
achieve final stabilization of the site. The city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit,
subdivision plat, site development plan, or any other city permit or approval necessary to commence or
continue construction or any industrial activity at the site, or to assume occupancy, until such a performance or
maintenance bond has been filed. (1998 Code, sec. 113-27; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-27), adopted
7/20/10)
Sec. 48-105. Liability insurance.
The director may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of stormwater discharge
associated with construction or industrial activity to submit proof that it has obtained liability insurance, or other
financial assurance, in an amount greater than or equal to a value determined by the director, that is sufficient
to remediate, restore, and abate any damage to the MS4, the waters of the United States or any other aspect of
the environment that is caused by the discharge. (1998 Code, sec. 113-28; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-
28), adopted 7/20/10)
Sec. 48-106. Nuisance.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/554
A violation of any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance
and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be
subject to chapter 34, nuisances. (1998 Code, sec. 113-29; Ordinance 2010-05-003, sec. 2(113-29), adopted
7/20/10)
Secs. 48-107–48-125. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. STORMWATER PROTECTION
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 48-126. Definitions.
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the meanings hereinafter designated:
Agricultural stormwater runoff means any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range
lands, and other nonpoint source agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding
operations as defined in 40 CFR 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as
defined in 40 CFR 122.24.
Aquatic monitoring organism means the Fathead minnow Pimephales promelas, the bacterium Vibrio ficheri, or
the daphnid Ceriodaphnia dubia.
Best management practices (BMPs) means the schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of the MS4 and waters of the
United States. The term “BMPs” also includes treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to
control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
Cellar dirt means construction site waste materials, such as natural rock and soil overburden.
CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations.
City means the city of Forest Hill, Texas.
Contaminated means containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
Contamination means the presence of or entry into a public water supply system, the MS4, waters of the state
or waters of the United States of any substance which may be deleterious to the public health and/or the quality
of the water.
Cosmetic cleaning.
(1) The term “cosmetic cleaning” means cleaning done for cosmetic purposes.
(2) The term “cosmetic cleaning” does not include industrial cleaning, cleaning associated with
manufacturing activities, hazardous or toxic waste cleaning. or any cleaning otherwise regulated
under federal. state or local laws.
Director means the building official or the director's authorized representatives.
Discharge means any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever
into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters of the United States.
Discharger means any person who causes. allows. permits, or is otherwise responsible for. a discharge.
including. without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or any duly
authorized official of said agency.
Facility, as used in division 3 of this article, means any facility, including construction sites, required by the
Federal Clean Water Act to have a permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/554
Fire code means chanter 22. fire prevention and protection.
Fire department means the fire department of the city or any duly authorized representative thereof.
Fire protection water means any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person
other than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire.
Harmful quantity means the amount of any substance that will cause pollution of waters in the state or waters of
the United States, or that will cause lethal or sublethal adverse effects on representative, sensitive aquatic
monitoring organisms belonging to the city, upon their exposure to samples of any discharge into waters in the
state, waters of the United States or the MS4.
Mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning means power washing, steam cleaning, and any other mobile cosmetic
cleaning operation, of vehicles and/or exterior surfaces, engaged in for commercial purposes.
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means the system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm
drains) owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which
is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
National pollutant discharge elimination system means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking
and reissuing, terminating. monitoring and enforcing permits. and imposing and enforcing pretreatment
requirements, under sections 307, 402, 318, and 405 of the federal Clean Water Act.
NOI means notice of intent.
Nonpoint source means any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a point source.
Notice of intent means the notice of intent that is required by the NPDES stormwater multisector general permit,
the EPA Region 6 NPDES stormwater construction general permit, or any similar general permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity that is issued by the EPA or the TCEQ.
NPDES means the national pollutant discharge elimination system.
NPDES permit means a permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC
1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States. whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group or general areawide basis.
Operate means to drive, conduct, work, run, manage or control.
Operator, as used in division 3 of this article, means the parties that either individually or taken together meet
the following two criteria:
(1) They have operational control over the site specifications (including the ability to make
modifications in specifications); and
(2) They have the day-to-day operational control of those activities at the site necessary to ensure
compliance with SWPPP requirements and any permit conditions.
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The term “person” includes all federal, state and local governmental entities.
pH means the logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the concentration in grams per liter of hydrogen ions;
a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
Point source.
(1) The term “point source” means any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including,
but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling
stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other
floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/554
(2) The term “point source” does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural
stormwater runoff.
Pollutant means dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; sewage; garbage; sewage sludge; filter
backwash; munitions; chemical wastes; biological materials; toxic materials; radioactive materials; heat;
wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; and industrial, municipal, recreational, and agricultural
waste discharged into water or into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Pollution means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination
of, any waters of the state or waters of the United States, that renders the water harmful, detrimental or
injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation or property, or to the public health, safety or welfare, or impairs the
usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water Act, (33 USC 1292), as amended, owned by the
City of Fort Worth, including any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any sewers, pipes and other conveyances
which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping,
leaching, dumping or disposing into groundwater, subsurface soils, surface soils, the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4), the waters of the state and the waters of the United States.
State means the State of Texas.
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation, including snow melt.
Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity.
(1) The term “stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity” means the discharge from
any conveyance which is used for collecting and conveying stormwater and which is directly related
to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial plant.
(2) The term “stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity” does not include
discharges from facilities or activities excluded from the NPDES program under 40 CFR 122.
(3) For the categories of industries identified in subsections (S)a through j of this definition, the
term includes, but is not limited to, stormwater discharges from industrial plant yards; immediate
access roads and rail lines used or traveled by carriers of raw materials, manufactured products,
waste material or byproducts used or created by the facility; material handling sites; refuse sites;
sites used for the application or disposal of process waste waters (as defined at 40 CFR 401); sites
used for the storage and maintenance of material handling equipment; sites used for residual
treatment, storage, or disposal; shipping and receiving areas; manufacturing buildings; storage
areas (including tank farms) for raw materials, and intermediate and finished products; and areas
where industrial activity has taken place in the past and significant materials remain and are
exposed to stormwater.
(4) For the categories of industries identified in subsection (5)k of this definition, the term includes
only stormwater discharges from all the areas (except access roads and rail lines) that are listed in
the previous sentence where material handling equipment or activities, raw materials, intermediate
products, final products, waste materials, byproducts or industrial machinery are exposed to
stormwater.
(5) For the purposes of this subsection, material handling activities include the storage, loading
and unloading, transportation, or conveyance of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, byproduct or waste product. The term “stormwater discharge associated with industrial
activity” excludes areas located on plant lands separate from the plant's industrial activities, such as
office buildings and accompanying parking lots as long as the drainage from the excluded areas is
not mixed with stormwater drained from the above described areas. Industrial facilities (including
industrial facilities that are federally, state, or municipally owned or operated that meet the
description of the facilities listed in this subsections (S)a through k of this definition) include those
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/554
facilities designated under the provisions of 40 CFR 122.26(a)(1)(v). The following categories of
facilities are considered to be engaging in “industrial activity”:
a. Facilities subject to stormwater effluent limitations guidelines, new source performance
standards, or toxic pollutant effluent standards under 40 CFR subchapter N (except facilities
with toxic pollutant effluent standards which are exempted under subsection (5)k of this
definition);
b. Facilities classified as standard industrial classifications 24 (except 2434), 26 (except 265
and 267), 28 (except 283), 29, 311, 32 (except 323), 33, 3441, 373;
c. Facilities classified as standard industrial classifications 10 through 14 (mineral industry)
including active or inactive mining operations (except for areas of coal mining operations no
longer meeting the definition of a reclamation area under 40 CFR 434.11(1) because the
performance bond issued to the facility by the appropriate federal Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act (SMCRA) authority has been released, or except for areas of noncoal mining
operations which have been released from applicable state or federal reclamation
requirements after December 17, 1990) and oil and gas exploration, production, processing, or
treatment operations, or transmission facilities that discharge stormwater contaminated by
contact with or that has come into contact with, any overburden, raw material, intermediate
products, finished products, byproducts or waste products located on the site of such
operations; (inactive mining operations are mining sites that are not being actively mined, but
which have an identifiable owner/operator; inactive mining sites do not include sites where
mining claims are being maintained prior to disturbances associated with the extraction,
beneficiation, or processing of mined materials, nor sites where minimal activities are
undertaken for the sole purpose of maintaining a mining claim);
d. Hazardous waste treatment, storage or disposal facilities, including those that are
operating under interim status or a permit under subtitle C of the federal Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA);
e. Landfills, land application sites, and open dumps that receive or have received any
industrial wastes (waste that is received from any of the facilities described under this
subsection) including those that are subject to regulation under subtitle D of RCRA;
f. Facilities involved in the recycling of materials, including metal scrapyards, battery
reclaimers, salvage yards, and automobile junkyards, including but limited to those classified
as standard industrial classifications 5015 and 5093;
g. Steam electric power generating facilities, including coal handling sites;
h. Transportation facilities classified as standard industrial classifications 40, 41, 42 (except
4221-25), 43, 44, 45, and 5171 which have vehicle maintenance shops, equipment cleaning
operations, or airport deicing operations. Only those portions of the facility that are either
involved in vehicle maintenance (including vehicle rehabilitation, mechanical repairs, painting,
fueling, and lubrication), equipment cleaning operations, airport deicing operations, or which
are otherwise identified under subsections (5)a through for (5)j and k of this definition are
associated with industrial activity;
i. Treatment works treating domestic sewage or any other sewage sludge or wastewater
treatment device or system, used in the storage treatment, recycling, and reclamation of
municipal or domestic sewage, including land dedicated to the disposal of sewage sludge that
are located within the confines of the facility, with a design flow of 1.0 mgd or more, or required
to have an approved pretreatment program under 40 CFR 403. Not included are farm lands,
domestic gardens or lands used for sludge management where sludge is beneficially reused
and which are not physically located in the confines of the facility, or areas that are in
compliance with section 405 of the federal Clean Water Act;
j. Construction activity including clearing, grading and excavation activities except:
operations that result in the disturbance of less than five acres of total land area which are not
part of a larger common plan of development or sale;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/554
k. Facilities under standard industrial classifications 20, 21, 22, 23, 2434, 25, 265, 267, 27,
283, 285, 30, 31 (except 311), 323, 34 (except 3441), 35, 36, 37 (except 373), 38, 39, 4221-25,
(and which are not otherwise included within subsections (5)b–j of this definition).
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a plan required by a permit to discharge stormwater
associated with industrial activity, including construction, and which describes and ensures the implementation
of practices that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with industrial
activity at the facility.
TAC means the Texas Administrative Code.
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) means the program delegated to the state by the EPA
pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b).
Total suspended solids (TSS) means solids that either float on the surface, or are in suspension in, water,
wastewater or other liquids, and which are generally removable by a laboratory filtration device. TSS is
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
Uncontaminated means not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
USC means United States Code.
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.
Waters in the state means groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs,
springs, rivers, streams, creeks, wetlands, marshes, inlets, canals inside the territorial limits of the state, and all
other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or nonnavigable, and including the bed and banks
of all watercourses and bodies of surface water that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside
the jurisdiction of the state.
Waters of the United States.
(1) The term “waters of the United States” means:
a. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in
interstate or foreign commerce;
b. All interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation,
or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce;
c. All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this
definition;
d. All tributaries of waters identified in this definition;
e. All wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and
f. Any waters within the federal definition of “waters of the United States” at 40 CFR 122.2.
(2) The term “waters of the United States” does not include any waste treatment systems,
treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act.
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The term “wetland” generally includes swamps, marshes,
bogs and similar areas.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-30; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-30), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-127. Administration.
The director and the director's authorized representatives are authorized to administer, implement, and enforce
the provisions of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 113-31; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-31), adopted
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/554
6/21/11)
Sec. 48-128. Discharge to MS4 prohibited.
(a) A person commits an offense if the person introduces or causes to be introduced into the MS4 any
discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for a violation of subsection (a) of this section that
the discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the following categories of discharges:
(1) A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, an NPDES permit (other than the
NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4);
(2) A discharge or flow resulting from firefighting by the fire department;
(3) A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances
or materials that chapter 22, fire protection and prevention, requires to be contained and treated
prior to discharge, in which case treatment adequate to remove harmful quantities of pollutants must
have occurred prior to discharge;
(4) Agricultural stormwater runoff;
(5) A discharge or flow from water line flushing or disinfection that contains no harmful quantity of
total residual chlorine (TRC) or any other chemical used in line disinfection;
(6) A discharge or flow from lawn watering, or landscape irrigation;
(7) A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring;
(8) A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater;
(9) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)) to the MS4;
(10) Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl space pump or footing
drain;
(11) A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any harmful substance or
material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container;
(12) A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation that is unmixed with water from a
cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter or any other source of pollutant;
(13) A discharge or flow from individual residential car washing;
(14) A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland;
(15) A discharge or flow from cold water (or hot water with prior permission of the director) used in
street washing or cosmetic cleaning that is not contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser,
solvent, emulsifier, dispersant or any other harmful cleaning substance;
(16) Drainage from a private residential swimming pool containing no harmful quantities of
chlorine or other chemicals. Drainage from swimming pool filter backwash is prohibited;
(17) A discharge or flow of uncontaminated stormwater pumped from an excavation.
(c) No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b) of this section if:
(1) The discharge or flow in question has been determined by the director to be a source of a
pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the United States or to the MS4;
(2) Written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/554
(3) The discharge has continued after the expiration of the time given in the notice to cease the
discharge.
(d) A person commits an offense if the person introduces or causes to be introduced into the MS4 any
harmful quantity of any substance.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-32; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-32), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-129. Connection of sanitary sewer prohibited.
A person commits an offense if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue. (1998 Code, sec. 113-33; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-33), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-130. Nuisances.
(a) An actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 that violates or would violate this article is hereby declared
to be a nuisance.
(b) A line conveying sewage or designed to convey sewage that is connected to the MS4 is hereby declared
to be a nuisance.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-34; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-34), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-131. Emergency suspension of utility service and MS4 access.
(a) The city may, without prior notice, suspend water service, sanitary sewer service and/or MS4 discharge
access to a person discharging to the MS4 or waters of the United States when such suspension is necessary
to stop an actual or threatened discharge which:
(1) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health
or welfare of persons; or
(2) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the MS4 or waters of the United
States.
(b) When the director determines that city-provided water and/or sanitary sewer service needs to be
suspended pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the director shall request the director of the department of
water to do so.
(c) As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service or MS4 discharge access, the director shall
notify the violator of the suspension in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall order the
violator to cease the discharge immediately. When time permits, the director should also attempt to notify the
violator prior to suspending service or access.
(d) If the violator fails to comply with an order issued under subsection (c) of this section, the director may
take steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or
to minimize danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of persons.
(e) The city shall not reinstate suspended services or MS4 access to the violator until the violator:
(1) Presents proof, satisfactory to the director, that the noncomplying discharge has been
eliminated and its cause determined and corrected;
(2) Pays the city for all costs the city incurred in responding to abating and remediating the
discharge or threatened discharge; and
(3) Pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service or access.
(f) A violator whose service or access has been suspended or disconnected may appeal such enforcement
action to the director, in writing, within ten days of notice of the suspension in accordance with section 48-99
(g) The city may obtain a lien against the property to recover its response costs pursuant to the procedure
set out in subsection (e)(2) and (3) of this section.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/554
(h) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this chapter.
Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar against. or a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-35; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-35), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-132. Nonemergency suspension of utility service and MS4 access.
(a) The city may terminate the city-provided water supply, sanitary sewer connection, and/or MS4 access to
any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article, if such termination would abate or reduce the illicit
discharge.
(b) The director will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its water supply, sanitary sewer
connection, and/or MS4 access. The violator may petition the director for a reconsideration and hearing
pursuant to section
(c) The city shall not reinstate suspended services or MS4 access to the discharger until:
(1) The violator presents proof, satisfactory to the director, that the noncomplying discharge has
been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected; and
(2) The violator pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service or MS4 access.
(d) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this chapter.
Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service, sanitary sewer service, and or MS4
access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the director.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-36; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-36), adopted 6/21/11)
Secs. 48-133–48-162. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. COSMETIC CLEANING
Sec. 48-163. Permit and registration required.
(a) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly engages in mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning
without a valid permit issued by the director.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly operates or causes to be operated a mobile
commercial cosmetic cleaning vehicle which is not registered with the director.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-50; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-50), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-164. Permit application procedures.
(a) A person required by section 48-163 to have a permit shall complete and file a permit application on a
form prescribed by the director.
(b) The director may require any information on an application that the director believes is necessary to
ensure that best management practices are implemented by the permittee.
(c) The application shall include a description and the vehicle license registration number of each vehicle to
be registered under the permit. All motor vehicles and trailers used to transport cosmetic cleaning rigs shall be
registered. However, a motor vehicle which is used to tow a trailer registered with the director and which is not
used to transport a cosmetic cleaning rig itself shall not be required to be registered
(d) Any applicant who utilizes wash water recycling units shall list all sanitary sewer discharge locations and
other disposal sites the applicant intends to use.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-51; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-51), adopted 6/21/11)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/554
Sec. 48-165. Issuance of permit and registration certificates.
(a) The director may issue a permit and registration certificates after the applicant pays all applicable fees,
unless the director has cause to deny such permit, as specified in section 48-168. The director shall provide for
procedures to add registered vehicles to a permit during its term.
(b) A permit shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance, unless suspended or revoked.
Registration certificates shall be valid for the term of the permit.
(c) Neither a permit nor a registration certificate shall be transferable.
(d) The annual fee for a permit and each registration certificate issued under this division shall be $100.00.
(e) The director will issue a registration number to each vehicle registered under a permit, and listed on the
permit. A registration number is not transferable.
(f) The director will issue a registration certificate for each vehicle registered under a permit. The certificate
shall be of a size and design determined by the director.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-52; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-52), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-166. Display of certificates.
(a) A permit holder shall have the registration certificate readily available in each of its vehicles registered
upon request of the director or any city employee.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a mobile commercial
cosmetic cleaning vehicle which does not have readily available certificate upon request by director or any city
employee.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-30; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-53), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-167. Permit conditions.
As a condition of receiving and maintaining a permit under this division a permit holder shall comply with the
following:
(1) A permit holder shall immediately notify the director of any management changes in the
business during the time the permit is in effect.
(2) A permit holder shall submit samples of wash water and/or waste water to the director or to an
authorized representative of the director of the department of water, immediately upon their demand.
(3) A permit holder who utilizes wash water recycling units shall:
a. Notify the director in writing of all changes in disposal sites it wants to use during the
permit period;
b. Discharge wash water into the sanitary sewer only at those sites listed in its permit
application and its notices under subsection (3)a of this section; and
c. Before the end of each permit period:
1. Test or cause to be tested a representative sample of its recycled wash water
discharge to determine compliance with the discharge limits and prohibitions of sections
48-218 through 48-220
2. Report the results of such tests in writing to the director; and
3. Sign and certify the report.
(4) A permit holder shall immediately notify the director in writing when it sells or otherwise
disposes of a vehicle registered under its permit.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/554
(5) A permit holder shall ensure that all of its employees engaged in mobile commercial cosmetic
cleaning are knowledgeable of the discharge prohibitions to the MS4 under this article, and shall
require all its employees to use best management practices when engaging in mobile commercial
cosmetic cleaning. For exterior cleaning, best management practices shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
a. Accumulations of oil and grease which have not dried shall be precleaned with absorbent
clay (kitty litter) or a similar material and properly disposed of prior to washing.
b. Storm sewer entrances which will receive the wash water shall be screened to catch
leaves and other debris. Wash water discharge shall comply with section 48-128(b)(15).
c. Wash water discharged to the MS4 shall first pass through an oil absorbent boom or pad
to absorb hydrocarbons so that no oil sheen is present on the discharge. Wash water
discharge shall comply with section 48-128 (b)(15).
d. Wash water which does not comply with section 48-128(b)(15) shall be discharged into
the sanitary sewer system. Discharge shall be at the job site when possible. Wash water from
recycle rigs which does not comply with section 48-128(b)(15) shall be disposed of in
compliance with subsection (5)c of this section. Grit and sludge shall not be disposed of
through the sanitary sewer.
(6) A permit holder shall ensure that all of its vehicles registered under the permit shall keep a
copy of the certificate readily available as required by section 48-166, and shall not allow
unregistered vehicles to engage in mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning.
(7) A permit holder shall not discharge to the MS4 in violation of this article.
(8) A permit holder shall not discharge wastewater to the sanitary sewer system in violation of
division 4 of this article.
(9) A permit holder shall not discharge wastewater into the sanitary sewer, either on a job site or
off a job site, without the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sewer inlet is
located. The permit holder shall provide proof of such permission to the director upon demand.
(10) A permit holder shall not create or maintain a nuisance in violation of section 48-169
(1998 Code, sec. 113-54; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-54), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-168. Permit denial and revocation.
(a) Denial of permit.
(1) The director may deny a permit if:
a. The application is incomplete;
b. The application contains a false statement of material fact.
(2) An applicant whose request for a permit is denied shall be notified in writing by the director of
the grounds for the denial. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt request, to the
address listed on the application.
(3) An applicant whose permit request is denied may request reconsideration no later than the
tenth day from the date on the notice of denial. The applicant who requests reconsideration of an
application shall be notified of the director's decision in writing no later than the tenth day following
the date of the request for reconsideration. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
request, to the address listed on the application.
(b) Suspension of permit.
(1) The director may suspend a permit if:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/554
a. After the permit is issued if it is determined the application contained a false statement of
material fact;
b. The permit holder is in violation of section 48-166
c. The permit holder is in violation of section 48-167; or
d. The permit holder is in violation of section 48-169
(2) The term of suspension shall be no less than 30 calendar days or more than 90 calendar days.
The term of suspension shall run from the date of notice from the director. If the suspension is
appealed the suspension shall remain in place until the decision is rendered by the city manager.
(3) An applicant whose permit is suspended shall be notified in writing by the director of the
grounds for the suspension. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt request, to the
address listed on the application.
(4) An applicant whose permit is suspended may appeal the suspension no later than the tenth
day from the date on the notice of suspension. The appeal shall be in writing and on a form
determined by the director. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal. Failure to
timely request an appeal shall waive any right to appeal under this article.
(5) The appeal shall be considered solely on the basis of the paperwork submitted by the permit
holder. There will be no hearing or testimony.
(6) The appeal shall be administered by the city manager and the city manager shall notify the
permit holder of his decision in writing not later than the tenth day following the date of the receipt of
the notice of appeal and supporting documents.
(c) Revocation of permit.
(1) The director may revoke a permit if:
a. A permit holder continues operation during a term in which the permit has been
suspended; or
b. A permit holder has been suspended in the preceding six months and is found to be in
violation of this article and could be suspended again.
(2) The term of revocation shall be no less than one year. The term of revocation shall run from
the date of notice from the director. If the revocation is appealed the revocation shall remain in place
until the decision is rendered by the city manager.
(3) An applicant whose permit is revoked shall be notified in writing by the director of the grounds
for the revocation. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address
listed on the application.
(4) An applicant whose permit is revoked may appeal the revocation no later than the tenth day
from the date on the notice of revocation. The appeal shall be in writing and on a form determined by
the director. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal. Failure to timely request an
appeal shall waive any right to appeal under this chapter.
(5) The appeal shall be considered solely on the basis of the paperwork submitted by the permit
holder. There will be no hearing or testimony.
(6) The appeal shall be administered by the city manager and the city manager shall notify the
permit holder of his decision in writing no later than the tenth day following the date of the receipt of
the notice of appeal and supporting documents.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-55; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-55), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-169. Nuisances.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/554
(a) A vehicle transporting cosmetic cleaning wash water or wastewater which is leaking or spilling from such
vehicle is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(b) Any premises upon which cosmetic cleaning wastewater has accumulated and which is emitting noxious
or offensive odors, or which is creating an unsanitary condition, or which is injurious to the public health or the
environment is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-56; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-56), adopted 6/21/11)
Secs. 48-170–48-191. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. STORMWATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY, INCLUDING
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
Sec. 48-192. Applicability.
This division applies to all facilities located within the city that have stormwater discharges associated with
industrial activity, including construction activity. (1998 Code, sec. 113-65; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-
65), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-193. Access to facilities.
(a) The director is authorized by section 48-88 to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this
article.
(b) Facility operators shall allow the director ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES
or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and
federal law.
(c) The director shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the
opinion of the director to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(d) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or
sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the director and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
(e) Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater
discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES or TPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the director
reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by
this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-66; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-66), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-194. Unpermitted discharges prohibited.
A person who is the operator of a facility commits an offense if the person discharges, or causes to be
discharged, stormwater associated with industrial activity without first having obtained a NPDES or TPDES
permit to do so. (1998 Code, sec. 113-67; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-67), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-195. Submission of NOI to city.
(a) The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have a NPDES or TPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the
director at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the EPA or the TCEQ as
applicable.
(b) The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the director either in person or by mailing it to:
(c) A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater associated
with industrial activity without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the director.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/554
(1998 Code, sec. 113-68; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-68), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-196. Compliance with permit.
(a) A facility shall be operated in strict compliance with the requirements of its NPDES or TPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility in violation of a requirement of the facility's
NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-69; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-69), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-197. Modification of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(a) The director may require any operator of a facility to modify the facility's stormwater pollution prevention
plan if in the best professional judgment of the director, the SWPPP does not comply with the requirements of
the facility's NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity.
(b) The deficiencies in a facility's SWPPP will be made in writing, and the director will give the facility
operator a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed 30 days, to make the necessary changes in the SWPPP.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-70; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-70), adopted 6/21/11)
Secs. 48-198–48-217. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITS
Sec. 48-218. Discharges to the Village Creek Wastewater Treatment Facility.
(a) General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or
wastewater which causes pass through or interface. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
regardless of whether they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements.
(b) Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following
pollutants, substances or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to,
waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees
Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.0, or otherwise causing corrosive or
structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW
resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than one-half-inch in any dimension;
(4) Oil and grease:
a. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or non polar products of mineral oil origin in
concentrations greater than 200 mg/l;
b. Visible free floatable polar oils, fats, or grease in wastewater discharged from industrial or
commercial facilities into the POTW;
c. In no case shall discharges in amounts that cause interference or operational problems
with the POTW be allowed;
(5) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc). released in a discharge at a
flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will
cause interference with the POTW;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/554
(6) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius),
or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104
degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius);
(7) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that
will cause interference or pass through;
(8) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
(9) Trucked or hauled industrial waste, except as approved in writing by the director;
(10) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
(11) Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide in excess of ten parts per million in water;
(12) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such
as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions;
(13) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
(14) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the director;
(15) Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
(16) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater discharge
permit;
(17) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent
to fail a toxicity test;
(18) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming
in the POTW; or
(19) Swimming pool drainage from private residential pools. Swimming pool drainage from public
and semi-public swimming pools may be discharged to the POTW with the prior consent of the
director. Swimming pool filter backwash may be discharged to the POTW;
(20) BTEX concentration greater than 1.0 mg/l.
(c) Categorical pretreatment. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter
N, parts 405–471 are hereby incorporated into this article. A user shall not discharge in violation of categorical
pretreatment standards.
(1) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or
the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or
mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(2) When regulated, process wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed
with nonregulated wastewaters prior to treatment, the director or the industrial user with the written
concurrence of the director, shall derive fixed alternative discharge limits in accordance with
procedures and the combined wastestream formula found in 40 CFR 406.3(e) or by a flow weighted
average.
(3) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can
demonstrate, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/554
relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
(d) Local limits. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and
interference. The limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. The director may
impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations. All concentrations for
metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. No person shall discharge wastewater
containing pollutants in the form of compounds or elements with total concentrations exceeding the following:
Pollutant Max. Allowable
Discharge Limit (mg/l)
Arsenic 0.25
Cadmium 0.15
Chromium 5.0
Copper 4.0
Lead 2.9
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 2.0
Silver 1.0
Zinc 5.0
Cyanide or cyanogens
compounds
(expressed as total
CN-)
1.0
(e) A person commits an offense if with criminal negligence the person processes or stores pollutants,
substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section in such a manner that they could be discharged to the
POTW.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-80; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-80), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-219. Discharges to the Trinity River Authority Central Regional Wastewater Treatment Facility.
(a) General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or
wastewater which causes pass through or interface. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/554
regardless of whether they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or
local pretreatment standards or requirements.
(b) Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following
pollutants, substances or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to,
waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees
Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 11.0, or otherwise causing corrosive or
structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW
resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than one-half-inch in any dimension or fats, oil
and grease measured as total oil and grease in excess of 200 mg/l;
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc), released in a discharge at a
flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will
cause interference with the POTW;
(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius),
or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104
degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius);
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that
will cause interference or pass through;
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
(8) Trucked or hauled waste except as discharge points designated by the director;
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous
oxide in excess of ten parts per million;
(10) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such
as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions;
(11) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except n compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
(12) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater,
unless specifically authorized by the director;
(13) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
(14) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater discharge
permit;
(15) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent
to fail a toxicity test; total toxic organics in excess of 2.13 mg/l collected as a grab sample;
(16) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming
in the POTW; or
(17) Swimming pool drainage from private residential pools. Swimming pool drainage from public
and semipublic swimming pools may be discharged to the POTW with the prior consent of the
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/554
director. Swimming pool filter backwash may be discharged to the POTW.
(c) Categorical pretreatment. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter
N, parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated into this article. A user shall not discharge in violation of categorical
pretreatment standards.
(1) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or
the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or
mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(2) When regulated, process wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed
with nonregulated wastewaters prior to treatment, the director or the industrial user with the written
concurrence of the director, shall derive fixed alternative discharge limits in accordance with
procedures and the combined wastestream formula found in 40 CFR 406.3(e) or by a flow weighted
average.
(3) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can
demonstrate, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors
relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
(4) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
(d) Local limits. The following local pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and
interference. The limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. The director may
impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations. All concentrations for
metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. No person shall discharge wastewater
containing pollutants in the form of compounds or elements with total concentrations exceeding the following:
Pollutant Max. Allowable
Discharge Limit (mg/l)
Arsenic 0.1
Barium 2.0
Cadmium 0.1
Chromium 3.5
Copper 2.5
Lead 2.0
Manganese 3.5
Mercury 0.008
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/554
Molybdenum TBA
Nickel 1.5
Selenium 0.05
Silver 0.25
Zinc 2.5
Cyanide or cyanogens
compounds (expressed as
total CN-)
1.0
(e) Offense. A person commits an offense if with criminal negligence the person processes or stores
pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section in such a manner that they could be discharged
to the POTW.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-81; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-81), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-220. Discharges to the Trinity River Authority Denton Creek Wastewater Treatment Facility.
(a) General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or
wastewater which causes pass through or interface. These general prohibitions apply to all uses of the POTW
regardless of whether they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements.
(b) Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following
pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to,
waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees
Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 10.0, or otherwise causing corrosive or
structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW
resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension or fats, oil
and grease measured as total oil and grease in excess of 100 mg/l;
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc), released in a discharge at a
flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will
cause interference with the POTW; biochemical oxygen demand (five-day) in excess of 250) mg/l
(surcharge limit only), total suspended solids in excess of 250 mg/l (surcharge limit only);
(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius),
or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104
degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius);
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that
will cause interference or pass through;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/554
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
(8) Trucked or hauled industrial waste, except as approved in writing by the director;
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
(10) Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide in excess of ten parts per million in water;
(11) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as,
but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions;
(12) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
(13) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the director;
(14) Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
(15) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater discharge
permit;
(16) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent
to fail a toxicity test; total toxic organics in excess of 1.0 mg/l collected as a grab sample;
(17) Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which may cause excessive foaming
in the POTW; or
(18) Swimming pool drainage from private residential pools. Swimming pool drainage from public
and semipublic swimming pools may be discharged to the POTW with the prior consent of the
director. Swimming pool filter backwash may be discharged to the POTW.
(c) Categorical pretreatment. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR ch. I, subch. N, parts
405–471 are hereby incorporated into this article. A user shall not discharge in violation of categorical
pretreatment standards.
(1) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or
the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or
mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(2) When regulated, process wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed
with nonregulated wastewaters prior to treatment, the director or the industrial user with the written
concurrence of the director, shall derive fixed alternative discharge limits in accordance with
procedures and the combined wastestream formula found in 40 CFR 406.3(e) or by a flow weighted
average.
(3) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can
demonstrate, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors
relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
(4) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40
CFR 403.15.
(d) Local limits. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and
interference. The limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. The director may
impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations. All concentrations for
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/554
metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. No person shall discharge wastewater
containing pollutants in the form of compounds or elements with total concentrations exceeding the following:
Pollutant Max. Allowable
Discharge Limit (mg/l)
Arsenic 0.1
Barium 1.0
Cadmium 0.1
Chromium 1.0
Copper 1.5
Lead 1.0
Mercury 0.005
Nickel 1.0
Selenium 0.05
Silver 0.1
Zinc 2.0
Cyanide or cyanogens
compounds (expressed as total
CN-)
1.0
(e) Offense. A person commits an offense if with criminal negligence the person processes or stores
pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section in such a manner that they could be discharged
to the POTW.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-82; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-82), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-221. City's right of revision.
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent
standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW than those set forth in section 48-220. (1998 Code, sec.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/554
113-83; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-83), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-222. Dilution.
(a) No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
(b) The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-84; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-84), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-223. Upset.
When upset occurs, a user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain
compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment equipment
until the equipment is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in
the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment equipment is reduced,
lost or fails. (1998 Code, sec. 113-85; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-85), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-224. Bypass.
(a) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to
be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section.
(b) Advance notice of need for bypass.
(1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director,
at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds
applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration
of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case
basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
(c) Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass unless:
(1) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
(2) There were not feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment
facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed
in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
(3) The user submitted notices as required under subsection (b) of this section.
(d) The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (c) of this section.
(1998 Code, sec. 113-86; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-86), adopted 6/21/11)
Sec. 48-225. Enforcement.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/554
Any person found violating any portion of this article, in part or in whole, shall be subject to enforcement actions
as stated in article IV of this chapter. (1998 Code, sec. 113-87; Ordinance 2011-05-004, sec. 2(113-87),
adopted 6/21/11)
CHAPTER 50
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 50-1. Adoption of state law relative to street improvements.
The provisions of Texas Transportation Code ch. 313 (Texas Transportation Code sec. 313.001 et seq.), as
amended, are hereby adopted by the city as controlling the establishment, construction and repair of street
improvements within the city. (1976 Code, sec. 27-1; 1998 Code, sec. 114-1)
Sec. 50-2. Obstruction of sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner obstruct the use by pedestrians of any sidewalk, public
easement or street in the city by placing, depositing or suffering to remain thereon or permitting any of his
servants, employees or persons under his control, to deposit, place or suffer to remain thereon any goods,
wares, merchandise, material, vehicle or other objects whatever. (1976 Code, sec. 27-2; 1998 Code, sec. 114-
2)
Sec. 50-3. Obstruction of drainage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, close up or fill any street gutter or public drainageway of any kind
for any purpose. (1976 Code, sec. 27-3; 1998 Code, sec. 114-3)
Sec. 50-4. Obstruction of public ways.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, without obtaining a permit, to erect, construct,
reconstruct, alter or repair or to permit the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or repair of any
fence, wall, hedge, structure or any other character of obstruction:
(1) Over, on or across any public property, way, alley, street, sidewalk or park; or
(2) Between the property line of any lot and a public street or alley line.
(b) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or fail to comply therewith shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. The owner of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this
section shall be placed or exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or person assisting in the
commission of any such violation, shall also be guilty of a separate misdemeanor.
(1976 Code, sec. 27-4; 1998 Code, sec. 114-4)
Sec. 50-5. Interference with or obstruction of public improvements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct any public improvements authorized by the city
council, the mayor or other city officials by means of threats, coercion, duress or any other method whatsoever,
either directly or indirectly. (1976 Code, sec. 27-5; 1998 Code, sec. 114-5)
Sec. 50-6. Specifications for construction of streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and drive approaches.
All streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drive approaches, extensions and appurtenances thereto shall be
constructed in accordance with those publications styled “Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction,” first edition, 1983, by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, and “Standard Plans for
Water, Sanitary Sewer, Paving and Storm Drains, Forest Hill, Texas,” dated September 28, 1984, copies of
each of which are on file in the office of the city secretary. (1976 Code, sec. 27-6; 1998 Code, sec. 114-6)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/554
Secs. 50-7–50-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. EXCAVATIONS*
Sec. 50-31. Permit for street work.
No person shall occupy, obstruct or do any work in, on, over, about or under any street, public right-of-way or
other public property without first obtaining from the city a permit to do so. Public agencies and public utilities
franchised to use public property are exempt from permit requirements; however, they shall be subject to
notice, approval and warning device requirements as set forth in this article. (1976 Code, sec. 27-18; 1998
Code, sec. 114-31)
Sec. 50-32. Adoption of barricade manual; compliance with manual and permit.
Permits and approval shall be granted as set forth in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
hereby adopted and on file in the office of the city secretary, and no person shall conduct any operations within
any public street or right-of-way except in compliance with the provisions thereof and the conditions set forth in
any permit. (1976 Code, sec. 27-19; 1998 Code, sec. 114-32)
Sec. 50-33. Permit fee; authority of city manager.
The fee for permits hereunder shall be as established by the city council, from time to time. The city manager
and designees as hereby delegated the authority to make such determinations as are authorized in said Texas
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as well as the authority to deny permission to any person, firm or
corporation to use any public way for any purpose other than transportation of persons and goods. (1976 Code,
sec. 27-20; 1998 Code, sec. 114-33)
Sec. 50-34. Bond required.
The city manager or his designee shall estimate the probable cost of restoring the street or highway to be
excavated and shall require the applicant to file a written bond in an amount sufficient to cover such cost, with
two or more sufficient sureties, conditioned that the street shall be restored in as good condition as it was
before the excavation or opening therein was made. Such bond shall be received and approved by the city
secretary. If the applicant elects to do so, he may make a cash deposit with the city secretary in such sum as
may have been fixed by the city manager or his designee in lieu of the written bond. (1976 Code, sec. 27-21;
1998 Code, sec. 114-34)
Sec. 50-35. Boring.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the city manager or his designee may require work to be
accomplished under this article to be performed by boring under the streets, alleys, public highways or
sidewalks in this city. (1976 Code, sec. 27-22; 1998 Code, sec. 114-35)
CHAPTER 52
TAXATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 52-1. Due date for payment of ad valorem taxes; interest and delinquent penalties.
The ad valorem taxes levied by the city council each year shall become due on receipt of the tax bill and are
delinquent if not paid before February 1 of the year following the year in which imposed.
(1) A delinquent tax incurs a penalty of six percent of the amount of tax for the first calendar
month it is delinquent plus one percent for each additional month or portion of a month the tax
remains unpaid prior to July 1 of the year in which it becomes delinquent. A tax delinquent on July 1
incurs a total penalty of 12 percent of the amount of delinquent tax without regard to the number of
months the tax has been delinquent.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/554
(2) A delinquent tax accrues interest at the rate of one percent for each month or portion of a
month that the tax remains unpaid.
(3) The provisions of Texas Tax Code sec. 33.07, be and are hereby adopted and all taxes that
remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent shall incur an additional
penalty of 15 percent to defray costs of collection, which penalty shall be in lieu of recovery of
attorney's fees in suit to collect delinquent taxes.
(1976 Code, sec. 29-1; 1998 Code, sec. 118-1)
State law reference–Additional penalty for collection costs, Texas Tax Code sec. 33.07.
Sec. 52-2. Tax lien created.
A lien is hereby created on all property in favor of the city for all taxes, ad valorem, occupation or otherwise.
Such lien shall exist from January 1 in each year, until all the taxes are paid. Such lien shall be prior to all other
claims and liens then existing or thereafter arising and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind or
judicial writ of any kind shall ever defeat such lien. The lien for taxes created in this section shall attach to all
property of the taxpayer owned on January 1 or subsequently acquired, whether assessed or not. (1976 Code,
sec. 29-2; 1998 Code, sec. 118-2)
Sec. 52-3. Tax research fee.
A fee shall be charged for each parcel of property about which tax information is requested. The amount of the
tax research fee shall be as established by the city council, from time to time. (1976 Code, sec. 29-3; 1998
Code, sec. 118-3)
Sec. 52-4. Penalty for failure to display tax receipt.
Whoever shall pursue or follow any occupation, calling or profession to do any act taxed by law, or exhibit any
machine or instrument for which a tax is required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter or state law,
without exhibiting and displaying the tax receipt issued to him in the manner provided by state law, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, fined in any sum not exceeding $50.00. (1976 Code, sec. 29-4;
1998 Code, sec. 118-4)
State law reference–Similar provisions, Texas Tax Code sec. 191.102.
Sec. 52-5. Ad valorem tax homestead exemption for owner 65 years of age or older.
The owner of a residence homestead who, at any time before taxes become delinquent, makes application for
a homestead exemption, and who furnishes a copy of a birth certificate or other proof satisfactory to the tax
assessor that such owner is 65 years of age or older on or before January 1 of the tax year for which the
application is made, shall be entitled to a $40,000.00 exemption from assessed valuation for city ad valorem tax
purposes. (1976 Code, sec. 29-6; 1998 Code, sec. 118-5)
State law reference–Residence homestead, Texas Tax Code sec. 11.13.
Sec. 52-6. Assessed valuation for ad valorem tax purposes to be 100 percent of market value.
Beginning with the next year following enactment of this section, assessed valuation for city ad valorem tax
purposes shall be 100 percent of fair market value. (1976 Code, sec. 29-7; 1998 Code, sec. 118-6)
Sec. 52-7. Taxation of constitutionally exempt property.
Goods, wares, merchandise, other tangible personal property and ores other than oil, natural gas and other
petroleum products shall not be exempt from taxation even if it is acquired in or imported into the state to be
forwarded outside the state, and is detained in this state for assembly, storing, manufacturing, processing and
fabricating and is transported outside the state not later than 175 days after the date it is acquired. The purpose
of this section is to tax property otherwise exempt under the provisions of article 8, section 1-J of the state
constitution. (1976 Code, sec. 29-8; 1998 Code, sec. 118-7)
Sec. 52-8. Taxation of goods-in-transit.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/554
Goods-in-transit, as defined by Texas Tax Code sec. 11.253(a)(2), as amended by House Bill 621, enacted by
the 80th Texas Legislature in regular session, shall remain subject to taxation by the city. (1998 Code, sec. 118-
8; Ordinance 2007101 adopted 11/6/07)
Secs. 52-9–52-34. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. SALES AND USE TAXES*
Sec. 52-35. Tax imposed.
The majority of the qualified voters of the city having voted for the adoption of a local sales and use tax, the tax
is hereby imposed in the city and shall become effective as provided by state law. The city secretary is hereby
instructed to forward to the state comptroller of public accounts, by registered or certified mail, a certified copy
of this section and a map of this city clearly showing the boundaries thereof. (1976 Code, sec. 29-5; 1998
Code, sec. 118-31)
Sec. 52-36. Levy of tax at rate of 0.50 percent.
There shall be and there is hereby levied a 0.50 percent sales and use tax imposed on the receipts from the
sale at retail of taxable items within the city limits and additional impositions at the same rate of excise tax on
the use, storage or other consumption within the city limits of tangible personal property purchased, leased, or
rented from a retailer, for the purposes provided by Texas Tax Code sec. 321.001 et seq. (1998 Code, sec. 118-
32; Ordinance 901-950063-2900, sec. 1, adopted 2/7/95)
Sec. 52-37. Leased vehicles not exempt.
The city chooses not to exempt leased vehicles and will assess and levy ad valorem taxes on said vehicles as
authorized by Texas Tax Code sec. 11.252. (1998 Code, sec. 118-33; Ordinance 2001110, sec. 1, adopted
12/18/01)
Secs. 52-38–52-62. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. HOTEL TAX*
Sec. 52-63. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Consideration means the cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space, but shall not include the
cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying
such room or space for occupancy, and shall not include any tax assessed for the occupancy thereof by any
other governmental agency.
Finance director means the finance director of the city.
Hotel.
(1) The term “hotel” means any building or buildings, trailer, railroad Pullman car not being utilized
for the transportation of travelers, or other facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain
sleeping accommodations. The term “hotel” includes hotels, motels, tourist houses, trailer houses,
trailer motels, railroad Pullman cars parked on a siding or otherwise used for sleeping
accommodations not involving the transportation of travelers, dormitory space where bed space is
rented to individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by “permanent residents” as that term is
hereinafter defined, and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished
for a consideration.
(2) The term “hotel” does not include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room, space or sleeping
facility in a hotel for any purpose.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/554
Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any
room or rooms, or sleeping spaces or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access,
license, contract or agreement
Permanent resident means any occupant of any room, sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least 30
consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year.
Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling
any hotel.
Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the year:
(1) The first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March;
(2) The second quarter being the months of April, May and June;
(3) The third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and
(4) The fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December.
(1976 Code, sec. 29-11; 1998 Code, sec. 118-61)
Sec. 52-64. Hotel tax levied.
(a) There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost
of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent of the consideration
paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other
governmental agencies.
(b) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident.
(c) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively
for religious, charitable or education purposes, no part of net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any
private shareholder or individual.
(d) In the event the city council should in the future determine that revenue bonds should be issued for any of
the purposes allowed by Texas Tax Code ch. 351, all or any portion of the tax levied under subsection (a) of this
section may be pledged as security for such bonds to the extent allowed by law.
(e) One percent of the cost of such occupancy shall be reserved from such tax by the city for the purpose of
advertising and conducting solicitation programs to acquaint potential users with public meeting and convention
facilities, and for promotion of tourism and advertising of the city and its vicinity either by the city or through
contract with persons or organizations selected by the city.
(1976 Code, sec. 29-12; 1998 Code, sec. 118-62; Ordinance 2012-07-004, sec. 2, adopted 7/17/12)
Sec. 52-65. Collection.
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by section 52-
64 for the city. (1976 Code, sec. 29-13; 1998 Code, sec. 118-63)
Sec. 52-66. Reports; payment of tax.
On the twentieth day of the month following the end of each calendar month every person required in section
52-65 to collect the tax imposed herein shall file a report with the finance director showing the consideration
paid for all room occupancies in the immediately preceding month, the amount of tax collected on such
occupancies, and any other information the finance director may reasonably require. Such persons shall pay
the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. There shall also be furnished to the finance
director of the city on a quarterly basis a copy of the quarterly report filed with the state comptroller in
connection with the state hotel occupancy tax. (1976 Code, sec. 29-14; 1998 Code, sec. 118-64; Ordinance
2016-09-005, sec. 2, adopted 9/20/16)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/554
Sec. 52-67. Rules and regulations.
The finance director shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary
to effectively collect the tax levied hereby, and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records
necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the
amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. (1976 Code, sec. 29-15; 1998 Code, sec. 118-65)
Sec. 52-68. Civil penalty.
Any person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit five percent of
the amount due as a penalty, and after the first 30 days he shall forfeit an additional five percent of such tax;
provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the
rate of six percent per annum beginning 60 days from the due date. (1976 Code, sec. 29-16; 1998 Code, sec.
118-66)
Sec. 52-69. Criminal penalty.
If any person required by the provisions of this article to collect the tax imposed herein or make reports as
required herein, and pay to the finance director the tax imposed herein, shall fail to collect such tax, file such
report or pay such tax, or if any such person shall file a false report, such person shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by fine not to exceed $200.00 and shall pay to the finance
director the tax due, together with a penalty of five percent of the tax due for each 30 days that the same is not
timely filed. (1976 Code, sec. 29-17; 1998 Code, sec. 118-67)
Secs. 52-70–52-96. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES TAX
Sec. 52-97. Taxation of telecommunication services.
(a) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunication services sold within the Forest Hill Crime Control and
Prevention District For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunication services is consummated at the
location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication
originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call
or other communication is billed.
(b) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the Forest Hill Crime
Control and Prevention District, for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the
state.
(c) The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the state by United States registered mail a copy of
this article along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's vote and discussion on this article.
(1976 Code, sec. 29-20; 1998 Code, sec. 118-91)
CHAPTER 54
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS*
Sec. 54-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
(1) Establish regulations for the siting of towers and antennas;
(2) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of
towers throughout the community;
(3) Encourage the joint use of new and existing towers sites;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/554
(4) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas
where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
(5) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the
adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and
(6) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide services to the
community quickly, effectively, and efficiently.
(1998 Code, sec. 122-1; Ordinance 980094, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/98)
Sec. 54-2. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this section,
unless the context indicates a different meaning:
Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar
alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television communications through the
sending or receiving or electromagnetic waves.
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
Height, when referring to a tower or other structure, means the distance measured from ground level to the
highest point on the tower or other structure, even if the highest point is an antenna.
Preexisting towers and antennas has the meaning provided in section 54-3(b)(3).
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or
more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term “tower”
includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures and similar structures.
(1998 Code, sec. 122-2; Ordinance 980094, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/98)
Sec. 54-3. Applicability.
(a) Generally. The requirements of this chapter govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that
are installed at a height in excess of, the height limitations specified for the zoning district in which the tower or
antenna is to be located.
(b) Exemptions. Except for the requirements of section 1-15(g) and (h), this chapter does not apply to:
(1) Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city;
provided, a license or lease authorizing the antenna or tower has been approved by the city council;
(2) A tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and
operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive
only antennas; or
(3) A tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of
this chapter, which is referred to in this chapter as a “preexisting tower” or “preexisting antenna.”
(1998 Code, sec. 122-3; Ordinance 980094, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/98)
Sec. 54-4. Principal or accessory use.
Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an
existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on the lot. For
purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district regulations,
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/554
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements and other similar requirements, the
dimensions of the entire lot control, even though the antenna or tower may be located on a leased parcel within
the lot. Towers that are constructed and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. (1998 Code, sec.
122-4; Ordinance 980094, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/98)
Sec. 54-5. Antennas permitted with building permit only.
The following antennas are permitted with a building permit:
(1) Installation of an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign,
light pole, water tower, or other freestanding nonresidential structure) that is 50 feet in height or
greater, so long as the additional antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of the existing
structure; and
(2) Installation of an antenna on an existing tower of any height if:
a. The addition of the antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of the existing tower;
b. The existing tower is not a preexisting tower; and
c. No buildings or supporting equipment will be added in connection with the antenna.
(1998 Code, sec. 122-5; Ordinance 980094, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/98)
Sec. 54-6. Towers and antennas requiring a conditional use permit.
(a) A conditional use permit is required for:
(1) A tower; and
(2) An antenna if the antenna is not permitted under section 54-5
(b) In granting a conditional use permit, the city council may impose conditions to the extent the city council
concludes that conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower or antenna on
adjoining properties.
(1998 Code, sec. 122-6; Ordinance 980094, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/98)
Sec. 54-7. Process for obtaining a conditional use permit.
The process for obtaining a conditional use permit is the same as the process for obtaining a change in zoning
classification under this Code of Ordinances. (1998 Code, sec. 122-7; Ordinance 980094, sec. 1, adopted
7/21/98)
Sec. 54-8. Information required in an application.
(a) Each applicant requesting a conditional use permit under this chapter shall submit:
(1) A scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations,
and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the
location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio
frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping and
adjacent users;
(2) An inventory of the applicant's existing towers that are either within the city or within onequarter
mile of the boundary of the city, including specific information about the location, height and
design of each tower. (The city may share this information with other applicants for administrative
approvals or conditional use permits under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate
antennas within the city; provided, however, that the city is not, by sharing such information, in any
way representing or warranting that the sites are available or suitable); and
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/554
(3) Other information determined by the city council to be necessary to assess compliance with
this chapter.
(b) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical or electrical
shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer.
(1998 Code, sec. 122-8; Ordinance 980094, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/98)
Sec. 54-9. Factors considered in granting conditional use permits.
(a) The city council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use
permit:
(1) Height of the proposed tower;
(2) Capability of the tower to structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by
the applicant as certified by a licensed professional engineer;
(3) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries. In this regard
telecommunication providers should strive to locate antennas and towers on properties with LR, GB,
LI, AND HI zoning classifications;
(4) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(5) Surrounding topography;
(6) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(7) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of
reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
(8) Proposed ingress and egress. In this regard, fire and emergency access shall be provided to
connect the antenna and/or tower location to the nearest public street. Said access must be
approved by the fire marshal prior to construction;
(9) Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed in section 54-8(a);
(10) Insurance coverage. In this regard, a minimum of $1,000,000.00 in liability coverage is
required; and
(11) Compliance with this chapter and other applicable ordinances of the city.
(b) The city council may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the
city council concludes that the purposes of this chapter are better served thereby.
(1998 Code, sec. 122-9; Ordinance 980094, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/98)
Sec. 54-10. Requirements for the installation of towers and antennas.
(a) Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new tower shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city council that no existing tower or structure can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or
structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
(1) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
(2) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
(3) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's
proposed antenna and related equipment.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/554
(4) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna
on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause
electromagnetic interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(5) The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing
tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
(6) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and
structures unsuitable.
(b) Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers:
(1) Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site
residential structure.
(2) Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback
requirements.
(3) Towers over 90 feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter of a mile from any existing
tower that is over 90 feet in height. Distances shall be measured in a straight line between the
nearest points on the bases of the towers.
The city council may reduce the setback and separation requirements if the purposes of this chapter would be
better served thereby.
(c) Height restrictions. A tower must meet the following height and usage criteria:
(1) For a single user, a tower may be no higher than 90 feet in height;
(2) For two users, a tower may be no higher than 120 feet in height; and
(3) For three or more users, a tower may be no higher than 150 feet in height.
(d) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall
also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device.
(e) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers.
(1) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the
view of the tower compound from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of a
landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
(2) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping
requirement may be reduced or waived.
(3) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer.
(f) Visual characteristics.
(1) Towers shall be maintained with either a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable
standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible,
be maintained with materials, color, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower
facilities to the natural setting and built environment.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting
electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/554
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
(4) Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority.
If lighting is required, the city may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design
that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
(g) Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the
FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If
applicable federal standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas
governed by this chapter shall bring the towers and antennas into compliance with the revised standards and
regulations within six months of the effective date of the standards and regulations, unless a more stringent
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owners expense.
(h) Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall
construct and maintain the tower in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and
the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Telecommunications Industry Association, as
amended from time to time. If upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with these codes
and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of
the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring the tower into compliance with the standards. If the owner fails
to bring the tower into compliance within 30 days, the city may remove the tower at the owner's expense.
(1998 Code, sec. 122-10; Ordinance 980094, sec. 1, adopted 7/21/98)
Sec. 54-11. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned,
and the owner of the antenna or tower shall remove it within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying
the owner of the abandonment. If the antenna or tower is not removed within the 90 days, the city may remove
the antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this chapter
shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. (1998 Code, sec. 122-11; Ordinance 980094,
sec. 1, adopted 7/21/98)
CHAPTER 56
TRAFFIC*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 56-1. State law adopted.
(a) The provisions of Texas Transportation Code ch. 541 et seq., as amended, are hereby adopted by this
city by reference as if fully set forth herein.
(b) All definitions contained in the state act, as referred to in subsection (a) of this section, shall apply in the
interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.
(1976 Code, secs. 31-1, 31-2(b); 1998 Code, secs. 126-1, 126-2(b))
Sec. 56-2. Use of roller skates, toys and similar devices on roadway.
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle, whether
motorized or not, or other similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a
crosswalk. When so crossing, such person shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians. This provision shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street. (1976
Code, sec. 31-3; 1998 Code, sec. 126-3)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/554
State law reference–A person using roller skates is prohibited from attaching themselves to a streetcar or vehicle on a
roadway, Texas Transportation Code sec. 551.102.
Sec. 56-3. Removing or damaging traffic barriers.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a city employee, to remove or damage any barriers, either closing
a street or for the purpose of warning traffic of an obstruction in the street, erected under the direction of the
chief of police or street superintendent. (1976 Code, sec. 31-4; 1998 Code, sec. 126-4)
Sec. 56-4. Temporary traffic control officers.
Under unusual conditions the chief of police may appoint temporary traffic control officers until such unusual
conditions cease to exist. These temporary officers shall have the same authority as regular officers of the
police department unless they are specifically limited by the chief of police. (1976 Code, sec. 31-5; 1998 Code,
sec. 126-5)
Sec. 56-5. Garages to report damaged vehicles.
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence
of having been involved in an accident of which report must be made as provided by state law, or struck by any
bullet, shall report to the police department within 24 hours after such motor vehicle is received, giving the
engine number, the registration number and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-6; 1998 Code, sec. 126-6)
State law reference–Similar provisions authorized, Texas Transportation Code sec. 550.067(b).
Secs. 56-6–56-28. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE
Sec. 56-29. Liability of owner or other person in charge of vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle
to require or knowingly to permit the operation of such vehicle upon a highway in any manner contrary to law.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-18; 1998 Code, sec. 126-31)
Sec. 56-30. Payment of fine at traffic violations bureau.
(a) Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge under this chapter may,
within the time specified in the notice, appear at the traffic violations bureau and answer the charge set forth in
such notice by paying a prescribed fine, and in writing pleading guilty to the charge, waiving a bearing in court
and giving power of attorney to the person in charge of the bureau to make such a plea and pay such fine in
court.
(b) Any person who has been guilty of two or more moving traffic violations, except as otherwise provided,
within the preceding I 2 months, shall not be permitted to pay a fine at the traffic violations bureau, and he must
make statutory bail for appearance in court.
(c) The provisions of this section shall not apply for juveniles.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-19; 1998 Code, sec. 126-32)
Sec. 56-31. Disposition of fines and forfeitures.
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited in the general
fund. (1976 Code, sec. 31-20; 1998 Code, sec. 126-33)
Secs. 56-32–56-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY
Sec. 56-51. Starting parked vehicle.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/554
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be
made with safety. (1976 Code, sec. 31-32; 1998 Code, sec. 126-61)
Sec. 56-52. Driving on fresh pavement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any portion of any street in the city that has been
freshly paved, unless all barriers or signal lights have been lawfully removed therefrom indicating that the street
is ready for travel. (1976 Code, sec. 31-33; 1998 Code, sec. 126-62)
Sec. 56-53. “Digging out” prohibited.
Any driver of any motor vehicle who shall willfully cause such vehicle to “dig out” or shall cause any such
vehicle to make unnecessary noise by reason of operating such vehicle in such manner as to cause the wheels
thereof to spin or slide on the roadway of any street when starting such vehicle or while making any turning
movement shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1976 Code, sec. 31-34; 1998 Code, sec. 126-63)
Sec. 56-54. Obstructing traffic generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, drive or propel a vehicle in such a manner as to block or obstruct the
traffic on any street or alley of the city. (1976 Code, sec. 31-35; 1998 Code, sec. 126-64)
Sec. 56-55. Maximum speed limits on specific streets.
The maximum prima facie reasonable and prudent speed on the city streets shall be as follows:
Streets MPH
Forest Hill Circle
(1) From Wichita Street to Forest Hill Dr. 40
Forest Hill Drive
(1) Between the south city limits (station 0 + 00) and a point (station 39 +
92) 0.756 mile north thereof
40
(2) Between a point (station 39 + 92) 0.756 mile north of the south city
limits and a point (station 45 + 52) 0.106 mile north thereof
35
(3) Between a point (station 45 +22) 0.862 mile north of the south city
limits and the north city limits (Mansfield Highway)
30
Interstate Highway 20 (frontage roads) 55
(1) North frontage road between the west city limits (station 127 + 15) and
at a point 2.153 miles to the east thereof (station 240 + 82)
35
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/554
(2) Northwest frontage road between a point (station 2 + 46) 0.209 mile
southwest of the northeast city limits and the northeast city limits
30
(3) South frontage road between Anglin Drive (station 217 + 29) and a
point 0.453 mile east thereof (station 241 + 23)
35
(4) Southeast frontage road between a point (station 2 + 15) 0.256 mile
southwest of the northeast city limits and the northeast city limits
(station 15 + 69)
30
U.S. Highway 287 (Wichita Street) 40
(1) Between the north city limits and Loop 820 40
(2) Between Loop 820 and the south city limits 30
(3) Between Loop 820 and Joel East Road 30
(4) Between Loop 820 and U.S. Highway 287 40
Editor's note–Refer to Ordinance 2015-08-001 (not published herein) for additional provisions regarding IH 20 frontage
roads.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-37; 1998 Code, sec. 126-66; Ordinance 2015-12-001 adopted 12/1/15)
Sec. 56-56. Maximum speed unless otherwise provided by ordinance.
The maximum prima facie reasonable and prudent speed on all streets within the city shall be 30 miles per hour
unless otherwise provided by ordinance. (1976 Code, sec. 31-38; 1998 Code, sec. 126-67)
Sec. 56-57. Minimum speed limits on specific streets.
The minimum prima facie reasonable and prudent speed on city streets shall be as follows:
Street MPH
Interstate Highway 20 40
(1976 Code, sec. 31-39; 1998 Code, sec. 126-68)
Sec. 56-58. School zone speed.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/554
The maximum prima facie reasonable and prudent speed limits on the parts of streets within the city, is hereby
declared to be 20 mites per hour between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., between the hours of 11:00
a.m. and 1:00 p.m., and between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and4:00 p.m. on school days.
(1) Cardinal Ridge between Truitt Street and Burleson Street
(2) Forest Hill Drive between a point 54 feet north of Horton Road and extending to Devalcourt
Avenue.
(3) Horton Road between Burleson Street and Truitt Street.
(4) Crawford Lane between Oakhaven Drive and Alhambra Drive.
(5) Dorsey Street between Crawford Lane and Hartman Road.
(6) Nell Street between Richard Street and Dorsey Street.
(7) Old Hickory Trail between Wichita Street and Windward Way.
(8) Mahoney Place between Horton Road and Cardinal Ridge Street.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-40; 1998 Code, sec. 126-69)
Sec. 56-59. Use of handheld mobile telephone prohibited.
(a) Use of a handheld mobile telephone is prohibited while operating a moving motor vehicle in a school zone
on official school days and during hours when the school zone is in effect.
(b) For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Engaging in a call means talking into, dialing or listening on a handheld mobile telephone, but does not include
holding a mobile telephone to activate or deactivate such telephone.
Handheld mobile telephone means a mobile telephone with which a user engages in a call using at least one
hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person).
Handsfree mobile telephone means mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function, or that is
equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, which a
user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically
disabled person), whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic devices) is necessary to activate,
deactivate, or initiate a function of such telephone.
Mobile telephone means the device used by subscriber and other users of wireless telephone service to access
such service and includes personal digital assistants.
Personal digital assistant means a device operated using a wireless telecommunications service that provides
for data communication other than by voice.
Wireless telephone service means two-way real time voice telecommunications service that is interconnected to
a public switched telephone network commonly referred to as cellular service or personal communication
service.
(c) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e) of this section, it shall be unlawful for a person to drive or
operate a motor vehicle in a school zone, on official school days, during the hours when school zones are in
effect, and when school zone signs and signs prohibiting handheld mobile telephone use are posted in place,
while using a handheld mobile telephone to engage in a call or to create, send and/or read a text message.
(d) An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to, or in the immediate proximity of his ear
while such vehicle is in motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this section. The term
“immediate proximity” means the distance, as permits, the operator of a mobile telephone to hear
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/554
telecommunications transmitted over such mobile telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such
operator's ear.
(e) Subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to:
(1) The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purposes of communicating with any of the
following regarding an emergency situation:
a. An emergency response operator;
b. A hospital;
c. A physician's office or health clinic;
d. The city's public safety facility;
(2) Any law enforcement, public safety or police officers, emergency services officials, first aid,
emergency medical technicians and personnel, or any fire safety officials in the performance of
duties arising out of and in the course of their employment as such; or
(3) The use of a handsfree mobile telephone when being used in a handsfree manner.
(f) The violation of this section is a strict liability offense.
(Ordinance 2009019, sec. 2, adopted 9/8/09)
Secs. 56-60–56-76. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. TURNS*
Sec. 56-77. Limitations on turning.
No person shall turn a vehicle at any place or in any direction where there appears an authorized sign or device
prohibiting such turn. (1976 Code, sec. 31-49; 1998 Code, sec. 126-91)
Sec. 56-78. U-turns restricted.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street
in a business district or at any intersection controlled by traffic lights and shall not upon any other street or
intersection so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other
traffic. (1976 Code, sec. 31-50; 1998 Code, sec. 126-92)
Secs. 56-79–56-99. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 56-100. Powers and duties of traffic engineer; police chief in emergencies and special
conditions.
(a) The city traffic engineer, subject to the approval of the city council, shall place and maintain traffic-control
signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter to make effective the provisions of this
chapter, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to
regulate traffic under this chapter or state law, or to guide or warn traffic. It shall be the duty of the city traffic
engineer to supervise the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices.
(b) The chief of police may authorize the temporary placement of official traffic control devices when required
by an emergency or special condition. The chief of police shall notify the city traffic engineer of any such action
as soon thereafter as is practicable. No such temporary regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety
(90) days.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/554
(c) An emergency shall be defined as a traffic situation, which due to reasonably unforeseeable factors,
necessitates the placement of temporary traffic-control devices, which may include the rerouting of traffic, in
order to maintain a safe traffic flow.
(d) A special condition shall mean an event or gathering, which due to considerations in place at the time the
decision is made, necessitates the rerouting of traffic or the placement of temporary traffic-control devices, in
order to maintain a safe traffic flow.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-62; 1998 Code, sec. 126-121; Ordinance 2017-12-12 adopted 12/19/17)
Sec. 56-101. Uniformity of devices.
All signs and signals required under the provisions of this article for a particular purpose shall, so far as
practical, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. (1976 Code, sec. 31-63; 1998 Code, sec. 126-
122)
Sec. 56-102. Ratification of existing devices.
All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this Code and
in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be
official traffic control devices, provided such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter or state law. (1976 Code, sec. 31-64; 1998 Code, sec. 126-123)
Sec. 56-103. Designation of crosswalks; establishment of special zones; marking of traffic lanes.
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized:
(1) To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the
roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway; and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
(2) To establish safety zones, quiet zones, play zones and others of such kind and character and
at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of the public.
(3) To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable,
consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-65; 1998 Code, sec. 126-124)
Sec. 56-104. Conformance with state manual and state law.
All traffic control devices, including signs, signals and markings, installed or used for the purpose of directing
and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways, volumes I and II (hereinafter called the manual), and Texas Transportation Code ch. 541
et seq. All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the city shall be uniform and be located so far as
practicable according to the directions shown in the manual throughout the city. All existing traffic control
devices and those erected in the future by the city being consistent with the manual, state law and this article
shall be official traffic control devices. (1976 Code, sec. 31-66; 1998 Code, sec. 126-125)
State law reference–Traffic signs, signals, and markings, Texas Transportation Code sec. 544.001 et seq.
Sec. 56-105. Obedience to traffic control devices.
The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle or animal shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device,
sign, signal or marking applicable there to placed in accordance with this article in any minute order directive by
the city council directing that such traffic control device, sign or signal shall be installed or erected, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle permitted by this article. (1976 Code, sec. 31-67; 1998 Code, sec. 126-126)
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Transportation Code sec. 544.004.
Sec. 56-106. Emergency vehicles.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/554
(a) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, as the term “authorized emergency vehicle” is defined by
state law, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this
section, but subject to the conditions herein stated
(b) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this article or any ordinance.
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be
necessary for safe operation.
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property.
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
(c) The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of
any said vehicle in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, as may be reasonably
necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except that an
authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light
visible from in front of the vehicle.
(d) The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty
to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-68; 1998 Code, sec. 126-127)
State law reference–Additional equipment requirements for authorized emergency vehicles, Texas Transportation Code
sec. 547.702; emergency vehicles authorized to be equipped with and operate alternately flashing lighting equipment,
Texas Transportation Code sec. 547.305.
Sec. 56-107. Unauthorized traffic control devices.
(a) No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway, street or alley any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which
hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal.
(b) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways,
streets or alleys of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official
signs.
(c) Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of
police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-69; 1998 Code, sec. 126-128)
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Transportation Code sec. 544.006.
Sec. 56-108. Altering, injuring or removing traffic control devices.
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any
official traffic control device, sign or signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia
thereon, or any part thereof. (1976 Code, sec. 31-70; 1998 Code, sec. 126-129)
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Transportation Code sec. 544.005.
Sec. 56-109. Proof of installation or authority for traffic control devices and signals.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/554
In any prosecution for any violation of this chapter, it shall not be necessary for the state to prove the installation
or authority therefor of any traffic control device or signal. (1976 Code, sec. 31-71; 1998 Code, sec. 126-130)
Sec. 56-110. Defendant's right of rebuttal.
Any person charged with violation of this chapter shall have the right to prove the sign, signal or device was not
so installed or authorized as a defense. (1976 Code, sec. 31-71.1; 1998 Code, sec. 126-131)
Secs. 56-111–56-133. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. STOP, YIELD INTERSECTIONS
Sec. 56-134. Stop required at through streets.
The driver of any vehicle on any street or other way intersecting with a through street shall bring such vehicle to
a full and complete stop before entering such through street and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
approaching on such through street. (1976 Code, sec. 31-72; 1998 Code, sec. 126-151)
Sec. 56-135. Stop or yield signs at through streets.
Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through street it shall be the duty of the city
traffic engineer to place and maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at
any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such
intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two
such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop
signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of such streets as may be determined by the city traffic
engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. (1976 Code, sec. 31-73; 1998 Code, sec. 126-152)
Sec. 56-136. Designation of other intersections where stop or yield required.
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazards
exist upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to
any such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop
is required, or whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection
as prescribed in section 56-138(a), in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place
where obedience thereto is required. (1976 Code, sec. 31-74; 1998 Code, sec. 126-153)
Sec. 56-137. Point where driver is to stop when approaching stop or yield sign.
(a) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(b) Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle
approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on
the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-75; 1998 Code, sec. 126-154)
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Transportation Code sec. 544.010.
Sec. 56-138. Vehicle entering stop intersection.
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle
approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by section 56-138(b), and after
having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another
highway or which is approaching so closely on such highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection. (1976 Code, sec. 31-76; 1998 Code, sec.
126-155)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/554
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Transportation Code sec. 545.153.
Sec. 56-139. Vehicle entering yield intersection.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed
reasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is
moving across or within the intersection; provided, however, that if such driver is involved in a collision with a
vehicle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima
facie evidence of his failure to yield the right-of-way. (1976 Code, sec. 31-77; 1998 Code, sec. 126-156)
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Transportation Code sec. 545.153.
Sec. 56-140. Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway, shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and
upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. (1976 Code,
sec. 31-78; 1998 Code, sec. 126-157)
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Transportation Code sec. 545.155.
Sec. 56-141. Stop when traffic obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (1976 Code, sec.
31-79; 1998 Code, sec. 126-158)
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Transportation Code sec. 545.302.
Secs. 56-142–56-165. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. ONE-WAY STREETS, ALLEYS*
Sec. 56-166. Designation.
Whenever any ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the traffic engineer shall place and
maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place.
Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement
of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (1976 Code, sec. 31-86; 1998 Code, sec. 126-18)
Sec. 56-167. Operation of vehicles.
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys which are designated as one-way streets or alleys,
vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction where signs indicating the direction of traffic are
erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. (1976
Code, sec. 31-87; 1998 Code, sec. 126-182)
Sec. 56-168. One-way streets specified.
The following streets are designated as one way on all days in which school is in session:
(a) Between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., and between 2:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.:
(1) Cardinal Ridge between Forest Hill Drive and Truett Street shall be one way east to west.
(2) Mahaney Place between Horton Road and Cardinal Ridge shall be one way north to
south.
(Ordinance 2017-12-13, sec. 2, adopted 12/19/17)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/554
Secs. 56-169–56-187. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. TRUCK ROUTES*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 56-188. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them by this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Authorized emergency vehicle means any vehicle of the fire department or police department, public and
private ambulances for which permits have been issued by the state board of health, emergency vehicles of
municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the governing body of
an incorporated city, private vehicles operated by volunteer firefighters or certified emergency medical services
employees or volunteers while answering a fire alarm or responding to a medical emergency, and vehicles
operated by blood banks or tissue banks, accredited or approved under the laws of this state or the United
States, while making emergency deliveries of blood, drugs, medicines or organs.
Business destination means any location within the city limits to which a commercial motor vehicle may travel
for purposes of conducting the routine business activities normally associated with said vehicle. The term
“business destinations” includes truck terminals, motor fuel stations, garages, places of repair, places of
performing a service and places of loading or unloading.
Commercial motor vehicle means any motor vehicle designed or used for the transportation of property, not
including a passenger bus, passenger automobile, motorcycle, panel delivery truck or pickup truck.
Driver or operator means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric
power obtained from overhead trolley wires but not operated upon rails.
Place of business origin means any place within the city limits from which a commercial motor vehicle embarks
for the purpose of conducting the routine business activities normally associated with said vehicle. The term
“points of business origin” includes truck terminals, motor fuel stations, garages, places of repair, places of
performing a service and places of loading or unloading.
Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a street or highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
“roadway” refers to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
Semitrailer means every vehicle of the trailer type so designed or used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that
some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another motor vehicle.
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when
any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
Trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed or used to carry property or passengers wholly on
its own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle.
Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so
constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
Vehicle means every mechanical device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported
or drawn upon a public highway, including motor vehicles, commercial motor vehicles, truck tractors, trailers,
and semitrailers, severally, as herein defined, but excepting devices moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-99; 1998 Code, sec. 126-211)
Sec. 56-189. Truck routes designated.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/554
(a) No person shall operate or cause to be operated any truck or other commercial motor vehicle on a public
street in the city without a business destination or point of business origin within the corporate limits of the city
except upon streets designated as truck routes; provided, however, this section shall not apply to emergency
vehicles operating in response to emergency calls or to vehicles operated by a public utility in the performance
of inspection or maintenance functions. Such truck with a business destination or point of business origin within
the corporate limits of the city shall be operated only on truck routes or on the shortest street route between
such business destination or point of business origin and the nearest truck route. The driver of any such truck
or commercial motor vehicle shall, at any time such truck or commercial motor vehicle is operated off a truck
route, carry with him a bill of lading or other written evidence showing all points of business origin and business
destination within the city.
(b) The following streets and parts of streets are designated as truck routes:
(1) Interstate Highway 20.
(2) Mansfield Highway (Spur 496-State Highway).
(3) Wichita Street, north of Interstate Highway 20.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-100; 1998 Code, sec. 126-212)
Sec. 56-190. Commercial delivery routes designated.
All streets in this city, other than those designated as truck route streets, are hereby designated as commercial
delivery routes. (1976 Code, sec. 31-101; 1998 Code, sec. 126-213)
Sec. 56-191. Identification.
The street and drainage superintendent shall erect appropriate signs and markings to designate the truck
routes described in this article. (1976 Code, sec. 31-102; 1998 Code, sec. 126-214)
Sec. 56-192. Alternate routes.
Whenever any street designated as a truck route is being repaired or is otherwise temporarily out of use, the
street and drainage superintendent is authorized to designate alternate truck routes for such period as might be
necessary. (1976 Code, sec. 31-103; 1998 Code, sec. 126-215)
Sec. 56-193. Use generally.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any commercial motor vehicle, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer
or any combination thereof through the city in intercity travel, without a local destination or point of origin,
except upon such streets as are designated as truck routes by this article. (1976 Code, sec. 31-104; 1998
Code, sec. 126-216)
Sec. 56-194. Use of commercial delivery routes-Generally.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall operate or cause to be operated upon any public street
within the city any commercial motor vehicle, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer or any combination thereof except
on such street or streets as are designated as either truck routes or commercial delivery routes by this article.
Such vehicles shall be operated on a truck route wherever reasonably practicable; provided, they may be
operated on a commercial delivery route only when it is not reasonably practicable to use a truck route to fulfill
the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. (1976 Code, sec. 31-105; 1998 Code, sec. 126-217)
Sec. 56-195. Same-Exceptions.
The provisions of section 56-194 shall not apply to:
(1) A vehicle traveling to or from a truck terminal, garage, place of repair, place of performing a
service, or place of loading or unloading, over the shortest practicable route to a point on a truck
route or commercial delivery route; any such vehicle shall be permitted to proceed from one such
point not on a truck route or commercial delivery route to another such point without returning to a
truck route or a commercial delivery route if to so return would unreasonably increase the distance
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/554
to be traveled between such points; the operators of any such vehicle shall carry evidence of the
location of its last stop and of its immediate destination in order for this exception to apply.
(2) Emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call.
(3) Vehicles operated by a public utility while cruising in an assigned area for the purpose of
inspecting the facilities of such public utility or providing maintenance service to the facilities.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-106; 1998 Code, sec. 126-218)
Secs. 56-196–56-213. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL*
Sec. 56-214. Definitions.
The following definitions, when used in this division, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Hazardous materials means any quantity, group, form or class of material designated as a hazardous material
in any official publication of the Secretary of Transportation to the United States under the authority of 49 USC
1803 (1976), as amended, including any publication issued after the effective date of this division.
Requiring placards means that the material to be transported is hazardous and is in sufficient quantity to require
placarding in accordance with the U.S. Department of Transportation hazardous materials regulations (49 USC
1801 et seq.).
Transport means to move any motor vehicle requiring placards upon any public thoroughfare or highway.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-107; 1998 Code, sec. 126-241)
Sec. 56-215. Hazardous materials routes.
No person shall knowingly transport hazardous materials or knowingly cause hazardous materials to be
transported upon any public street within the corporate limits of the city, except on the following routes that
portion of:
(1) Interstate Loop 820 lying within the corporate limits of the city.
(2) Any federal or state highway or public thoroughfare used to reach a destination or point of
departure by the most direct route within the corporate limits of the city.
(3) Any federal or state highway or public thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the city used
to reach a destination or point of departure by the most direct route within the Dallas-Fort Worth
metropolitan area.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-108; 1998 Code, sec. 126-242)
Sec. 56-216. Marking of vehicles transporting hazardous material.
The operator of a vehicle used to transport hazardous materials in sufficient quantity to require placarding in
accordance with the U.S. Department of Transportation hazardous materials regulations (49 USC 1801 et seq.)
shall apply and display appropriate placards meeting U.S. Department of Transportation specifications on each
side of the vehicle. (1976 Code; sec. 31-109; 1998 Code, sec. 126-243)
Sec. 56-217. Vehicles to be inspected.
The operator of a vehicle used to transport hazardous materials requiring placards shall before operation
inspect the vehicle and determine that:
(1) The brakes are in good working condition;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/554
(2) The steering mechanism is in good working condition;
(3) The electrical wiring is well insulated and firmly secured;
(4) The required lights are working;
(5) The vehicle is in a safe condition to transport hazardous materials; and
(6) All emergency features on bulk transport carriers are installed and operative as outlined in the
U.S. Department of Transportation specifications and requirements.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-110; 1998 Code, sec. 126-244)
Sec. 56-218. Presumption that marked vehicles contain hazardous materials.
For purposes of prosecution of violations under this article, a vehicle will be presumed to contain hazardous
materials if it bears a hazardous materials placard. (1976 Code, sec. 31-111; 1998 Code, sec. 126-245)
Sec. 56-219. Enforcement.
The fire and police departments of the city are expressly authorized to enforce the provisions of this article.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-112; 1998 Code, sec. 126-246)
Secs. 56-220–56-246. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. VEHICLE PERMITS
Sec. 56-247. Applicability.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or move, or to
cause or permit to be driven, operated or moved, on any public street within the city, any commercial motor
vehicle with or without load, contrary to any of the regulations contained in this division. (1976 Code, sec. 31-
113; 1998 Code, sec. 126-271)
Sec. 56-248. Exception.
The provisions of this division shall not apply to:
(1) Any person operating or causing to be operated a motor vehicle under a valid and subsisting
permit for the operation of overweight or oversize equipment for the transportation of such
commodities as cannot be reasonably dismantled issued by the state department of highway under
the provisions of Texas Transportation Code sec. 623.071 et seq., as such article now exists or
might from time to time be amended.
(2) Emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-114; 1998 Code, sec. 126-272)
Sec. 56-249. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle regulated by the provisions of this division over the
public streets of the city without first obtaining a permit to do so. Nothing in this division shall be interpreted to
override or abrogate the requirements of division I of this article related to truck routes. (1976 Code, sec. 31-
115; 1998 Code, sec. 126-273)
Sec. 56-250. Application.
Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this division shall make application therefor to the
chief of police stating:
(1) The kind of equipment to be operated, with a complete description of the same and a
statement of its weight.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/554
(2) The kind of commodity to be transported and a certificate as to its weight.
(3) The street or streets over which the equipment is to be operated, and the date or dates and
the approximate time of the operation, and the number of trips to be made, except when the nature,
route, time or frequency of operation cannot be determined at the time the permit is issued.
(4) The date of such application.
(5) The signature of the applicant.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-116; 1998 Code, sec. 126-274)
Sec. 56-251. Bond.
Before a permit is issue d under this division, the applicant for same shall file with the public works department
a bond in an amount to be set and approved by the public works department. The amount of such bond shall
not exceed the product of the number of vehicles for which a permit is sought multiplied by $10,000.00, which
bond shall be payable to the city and conditioned that the applicant will pay to the city the sum of money
necessary to repair any damage which might be occasioned to any public street or publicly owned fixture
appurtenant to such street by virtue of operation of any commercial vehicle under such permit. Venue of any
suit for recovery upon the bond shall be in the county and any bond issued hereunder shall contain an
unambiguous contractual provision to that effect. (1976 Code, sec. 31-117; 1998 Code, sec. 126-275)
Sec. 56-252. Fee.
(a) A fee shall be charged for each permit as required by this division as follows:
Single trip permits: $5.00
Periods not exceeding 30 days: 10.00
Periods not exceeding 60 days: 15.00
Periods not exceeding 90 days: 20.00
Periods not exceeding one year: 50.00
(b) The proper fee shall accompany each application for a permit and shall be paid in cash or by cashier's or
certified check or postal money order. The fee shall be returned if the application is denied.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-118; 1998 Code, sec. 126-276)
Sec. 56-253. Contents.
Any permit issued under this division shall include at least the following:
(1) The name of the applicant, the date, a description of the equipment to be operated and a
description of the commodity to be transported.
(2) The signature of an authorized member of the police department and the public works
department.
(3) The time for which the permit is issued.
(4) The specified street or streets over which the equipment is to be operated, insofar as it can be
determined at the time the permit is issued.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-119; 1998 Code, sec. 126-277)
Sec. 56-254. Weight limitations.
No commercial motor vehicle, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer or combination of such vehicles shall be operated
or caused or permitted to be operated upon any public street within the city having a weight in excess of any
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/554
one or more of the following limitations:
(1) In no event shall the total gross weight, with load, of any vehicle or combination of vehicles
exceed 72,000 pounds.
(2) No axle shall carry a load in excess of 18,000 pounds. An axle load shall be defined as the
total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose centers may be included between two parallel
transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.
(3) The total gross weight concentrated on the highway surface from any tandem axle group shall
not exceed 32,000 pounds for each such tandem axle group. Tandem-axle group is defined to be
two or more axles spaced 40 inches or more apart from center to center having at least one
common point of weight suspension.
(4) Vehicles used exclusively to transport ready-mix concrete may be operated upon the public
streets of the city with a tandem axle load not to exceed 36,000 pounds and a gross load not to
exceed 48,000 pounds.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-120; 1998 Code, sec. 126-278)
Sec. 56-255. Vehicle dimensions.
(a) No commercial motor vehicle shall exceed a total outside width. including any load thereon, of 96 inches,
except that the width of a farm tractor shall not exceed nine feet and that the limitations as to size of a vehicle
stated in this section shall not apply to implements of husbandry, machinery used solely for the purpose of
drilling water wells, or highway or street building or maintenance machinery owned or operated by or on behalf
of the state or any of its political subdivisions or the city.
(b) No commercial motor vehicle unladen or with load shall exceed a height of 13 feet six inches, including
the load.
(c) No commercial motor vehicle, truck tractor, trailer or semitrailer, except pole trailers, shall exceed a length
of 35 feet except when such vehicle is operated in combination and coupled to another such vehicle, and when
operated in combination no such combination of vehicles coupled together shall exceed a total length of 60
feet; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any disabled vehicle being
towed by another vehicle to an intake place for repairs; and provided further that the limitations of this section
shall not apply to any mobile home or to any combination of a mobile home and a motor vehicle, but no mobile
home and motor vehicle combination shall exceed a total length of 55 feet.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-121; 1998 Code, sec. 126-279)
Sec. 56-256. Projecting loads.
No vehicle or combination of vehicles, except pole trailers, shall carry any load extending more than three feet
beyond the front thereof, or more than four feet beyond the rear thereof. (1976 Code, sec. 31-122; 1998 Code,
sec. 126-280)
Sec. 56-257. Securing of load.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any commercial motor vehicle on a public
street in such manner as to permit any portion of its cargo, either liquid or solid, to fall out of, spill from, or blow
out of such vehicle. (1976 Code, sec. 31-123; 1998 Code, sec. 126-281)
Secs. 56-258–56-277. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 56-278. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited near hazardous or congested places.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/554
(a) The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not
exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially
hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
(b) When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein. no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(1976 Code. sec. 31-135; 1998 Code. sec. 126-311)
Sec. 56-279. Owner of vehicle presumed responsible for illegal parking.
In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance or regulation governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle. proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such
ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such
parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for
the time during which, such violation occurred. (1976 Code, sec. 31-136; 1998 Code, sec. 126-312)
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Transportation Code sec. 545.308.
Sec. 56-280. Parking not to obstruct traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave
available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (1976 Code, sec.
31-137; 1998 Code, sec. 126-313)
Sec. 56-281. Storage of vehicle in street.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vehicle to allow said vehicle to remain on any street within the
corporate limits for a period of time longer than 72 hours.
(b) Each and every day such vehicle remains after the initial 72 hours shall constitute a separate offense and
be punishable hereunder.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-138; 1998 Code, sec. 126-314)
Sec. 56-282. Parking restrictions in residential areas.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or any owner to leave, park or stand any vehicle which is more
than 24 feet in length or which has a rated capacity of one ton or more, upon any public street, alley, parkway,
boulevard, or public place within or adjacent to any area zoned as a single-family dwelling district, two-family
district, or multiple-family dwelling district as established by the city's zoning ordinance.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a person or owner to leave. park or stand a truck tractor. road tractor, semitrailer,
bus, truck or trailed with a rated capacity of one ton according to the manufacturer's classification, on property
within any area zoned as residential or multifamily according to the city's zoning ordinance.
(c) This section shall not prevent the parking or standing of the vehicles described in this section in such
zoned areas for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise, not for
otherwise. This shall not apply to recreational vehicles.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-139; 1998 Code, sec. 126-315; Ordinance 97-970155, sec. 1, adopted 12/2/97; Ordinance
990060, sec. 1, adopted 4/20/99)
State law reference–Similar provision, Texas Transportation Code sec. 545.301.
Sec. 56-283. Marking of handicapped parking spaces.
Upon the request of the owner or operator of any off-street parking facility, the public works department of the
city is authorized to designate stalls or spaces in an off-street parking facility for the exclusive use of vehicles
which display a distinguishing license plate, specially designed symbols, tags or other devices, issued pursuant
to Texas Transportation Code secs. 502.253 and 502.254, to disabled veterans and disabled persons. Such
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/554
markings shall be required for spaces required for the handicapped by the city's zoning ordinance. Such stalls
or spaces shall be designated by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space a sign
consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with an occupant in white on a blue background. (1976 Code, sec.
31-140; 1998 Code, sec. 126-316)
Sec. 56-284. Parking in handicapped spaces restricted; towing of unauthorized vehicles from
handicapped spaces.
(a) It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle not displaying a distinguishing license plate issued to disabled
persons pursuant to Texas Transportation Code sec. 502.253, or to disabled veterans pursuant to Texas
Transportation Code sec. 502.254, to stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle in any parking space
properly designated for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons pursuant to section 56-283. Such
shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor.
(b) Any vehicles not displaying the proper license plates, tags or devices may be towed from a handicapped
parking space designated by section 56-283 at the expense of the owner of such vehicle, and may be
impounded until all towing and storage charges are paid.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-141; 1998 Code, sec. 126-317)
Sec. 56-285. Parking in front yards.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or stand any motor vehicle, camper, trailer or boat in any
required yard of a residentially zoned property or between the front of a residence and the street it fronts on;
provided, however, this regulation shall not be deemed to prohibit parking in that portion of a yard which is an
improved driveway. The term “improved driveway” means any driveway improved to the standards required by
the city at the time such drive was constructed. (1976 Code, sec. 31-142; 1998 Code, sec. 126-318)
Sec. 56-286. Certain truck parking prohibited.
(a) No truck with a rated capacity in excess of one ton shall be parked unattended on any public street.
(b) No truck tractor or tractor trailer shall be parked unattended on any public street.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-143; 1998 Code, sec. 126-319)
Sec. 56-287. Towing and impoundment of vehicles illegally parked on public streets.
Any vehicle illegally parked on public streets may be towed away at the expense of the owner of such vehicle,
and may be impounded until all towing and storage charges are paid. (1976 Code, sec. 31-144; 1998 Code,
sec. 126-320)
Sec. 56-288. Parking of inoperative motor vehicles and trailers.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, park or allow to stand an automobile, truck or any other motor
vehicle or any trailer on any property, private or public, for a period in excess of 48 hours when such vehicle or
trailer is without one or more wheels or is apparently inoperative for any reason. For the purpose of this section,
any vehicle without a license or inspection for the current registration or inspection year shall be inoperative.
Provided, however, this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the storage of currently licensed and currently
inspected recreational vehicles on blocks on private property.
(b) Vehicles or trailers which are inoperative or which lack current registration or inspection are hereby
declared to be nuisances and shall be impounded if found unattended on any public street. Such vehicles or
trailers shall not be reclaimed except upon proof of ownership and payment of the towing fee and cost of
storage.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-144.1; 1998 Code, sec. 126-321)
State law reference–Removal of unlawfully stopped vehicle, Texas Transportation Code sec. 545.305.
Secs. 56-289–56-309. Reserved.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/554
DIVISION 2. PROHIBITED, RESTRICTED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Sec. 56-310. Applicability.
The provisions of this division prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those
times herein specified or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-145; 1998 Code, sec. 126-341)
Sec. 56-311. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this division imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to
observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles
in specified places or at specified times. (1976 Code, sec. 31-146; 1998 Code, sec. 126-342)
Sec. 56-312. Parking prohibited on certain streets.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets
described by ordinance. (1976 Code, sec. 31-147; 1998 Code, sec. 126-343)
Sec. 56-313. Parking restricted on certain streets.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours
specified by ordinance on any day, except Sundays and public holidays, within the district or upon any of the
streets described by ordinance. (1976 Code, sec. 31-148; 1998 Code, sec. 126-344)
Sec. 56-314. Parking signs required.
Whenever any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets by this division or any
ordinance of the city, it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice
thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any
alleged offense. (1976 Code, sec. 31-149; 1998 Code, sec. 126-345)
Sec. 56-315. Prohibited parking zones specified.
(a) Parking is hereby prohibited at all times on the following streets:
(1) California Parkway East (excluding the street right-of-way between Anglin Drive and Hartman
Road).
(2) South frontage road of I-20 (SE Loop 820), between Wichita Street and Forest Hill Drive.
(3) Wichita Street.
(4) Forest Hill Drive between SE Loop 820 and Lon Stevenson Road.
(5) Bisbee Street (between Horton Road and Mansfield Highway).
(b) On all days in which school is in session, stopping, standing and parking, other than for the expeditious
loading and unloading of school busses, are hereby prohibited between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.,
and between 2:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the following streets:
(1) Forest Hill Drive between Horton Road and George Avenue.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-150; 1998 Code, sec. 126-346; Ordinance 990081, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/6/99; Ordinance
2017-12-13, sec. 1, adopted 12/19/17)
Sec. 56-316. Permit for parking on portion of Shamrock Lane-Permit required; issuance.
(a) Parking is prohibited on Shamrock Lane, between Wichita Street and the city's Shamrock well site, from
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless a permit, as approved by the city, is clearly displayed in
the vehicle's front window area.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/554
(b) Residents in the restricted section of Shamrock Lane described in subsection (a) of this section shall be
issued five permits without charge. Additional permits may be purchased at the city department of public works
for a permit fee in an amount as established by the city council; from time to time. Proof of residency in the
restricted area will be required after the first set of free permits is distributed in order to receive additional sets
of free permits.
(1976 Code; sec. 31-151; 1998 Code, sec. 126-347)
Sec. 56-317. Same-Towing of vehicles not displaying permit.
Any vehicles not displaying the city-approved permit may be towed from any parking-restricted street identified
in section 66-316 at the expense of the owner of such vehicle, and may be impounded until all towing and
storage charges are paid. (1976 Code, sec. 31-152; 1998 Code, sec. 126-348)
Secs. 56-318–56-337. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. LOADING AND UNLOADING
Sec. 56-338. City traffic engineer to designate curb loading zones.
The city traffic engineer, subject to the approval of the city council, is hereby authorized to determine the
location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating
the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. (1976 Code, sec. 31-
156; 1998 Code, sec. 126-371)
Sec. 56-339. Standing in passenger curb loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when
the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed
three minutes. (1976 Code, sec. 31-157; 1998 Code, sec. 126-372)
Sec. 56-340. Standing in freight curb loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or the pick up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading
zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. (1976 Code, sec. 31-158; 1998
Code, sec. 126-373)
Secs. 56-341–56-368. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. PARADES AND PROCESSIONS*
Sec. 56-369. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any number of persons, delegation or association of persons or for any company, circus
or group to parade or assemble on the streets or public grounds within the city without first having obtained a
written permit from the chief of police. (1976 Code, sec. 31-170; 1998 Code, sec. 126-401)
Sec. 56-370. Prohibited hours for starting parade or assembly.
The city council shall not issue a permit under the provisions of this article for any person to start any parade or
assembly between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 am., between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., and
between the hours of 3:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays, and on days that the city council shall declare
legal holidays. (1976 Code, sec. 31-171; 1998 Code, sec. 126-402)
Sec. 56-371. Designation of route and time.
Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this article, it shall designate the streets, avenues,
alleys and thoroughfares over which the parade is privileged to travel and the time that the parade shall be held
and completed, and if for an assembly, the place of assembly and time it shall be held and completed (1976
Code, sec. 31-172; 1998 Code, sec. 126-403)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/554
Sec. 56-372. Exceptions to article.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to movements of the military forces of the United States of America,
of the state or to the funeral procession being held as a part of the burial services of a human body. (1976
Code, sec. 31-173; 1998 Code, sec. 126-404)
Sec. 56-373. Change of route.
The chief of police is authorized to make such change in the route of any proposed parade as he may deem
proper and necessary in averting a breach of the peace, public disorder or traffic congestion within the city.
(1976 Code, sec. 31-174; 1998 Code, sec. 126-405)
Sec. 56-374. Driving through procession prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive between vehicles comprising a funeral or other
authorized parade or procession while they are in motion, provided that said vehicles are conspicuously so
designated. This provision shall not apply to intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or
police officers. (1976 Code, sec. 31-175; 1998 Code, sec. 126-406)
CHAPTER 58
TREES AND LANDSCAPING
Sec. 58-1. Purpose and intent.
(a) The purpose of this chapter is to ensure environmentally sensitive site planning which furthers the
preservation of mature trees and natural areas; to protect trees during construction; to facilitate site design and
construction which contribute to the long term viability of existing trees; and to control the removal of trees when
necessary. It is the further purpose of this chapter to achieve the following broader objectives and public
purposes:
(1) To encourage preservation of existing public and private trees that are shade, ornamental,
specimen and/or of historic value through incentives and penalties.
(2) To encourage ecological stabilization through urban forest management that contributes to the
processes of air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff
retardation; and promote energy efficiency and water conservation through tree preservation and
cultivation, thereby abating noise, heat and glare.
(3) To acknowledge that trees and landscaping add value to property and protect public and
private investments to the general benefit of the city and its residents.
(4) To define reasonable protective measures required to preserve the protected tree population.
(5) To protect healthy, quality trees and promote the natural ecological, environmental and existing
aesthetic qualities of the city.
(6) To preserve and promote the appearance and heritage of the city.
(7) To protect and preserve native and specimen vegetative specimen, their ecosystems, and
natural habitats and prevent damage to an unnecessary removal of vegetation during the land
development and construction processes.
(8) To prohibit indiscriminate clearcutting.
(9) To preserve trees on both public and private property and, in the event that tree removal is
necessary, to ensure that appropriate replacement trees are planted.
(10) To protect and increase the value of residential and commercial properties within the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/554
(11) To maintain and enhance a positive image for the attraction of new businesses and promote
the quality of life of the residents in the city.
(b) This chapter is also intended to minimize erosion and stormwater runoff. provide buffers between
neighboring properties, preserve historic streetscapes, minimize the visual and environmental impacts of paved
surfaces and buildings, and ensure landscaping in conjunction with new development and redevelopment in a
manner that preserves native vegetation. This chapter is intended to balance the property rights of individual
property owners with those of the overall health, safety and welfare interests of the community. A permit system
is utilized, intended to prevent the damage, destruction or removal of a protected tree unless this chapter and
its requirements are met.
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 1, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 58-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words and terms used in this
chapter, but not defined in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in other ordinances of the city.
Words and terms defined in two ordinances shall be read in harmony unless there exists an irreconcilable
conflict, in which case the definition contained in this chapter shall control.
Administrative official means the department director appointed by the city manager to administer this chapter,
or the department director's designee.
Agricultural use means any use on property that is related to active farming, livestock, or ranching, including
using land as pasture or in the production of crops, or horticultural products, the keeping of livestock, including
but not limited to poultry and hoofed animals such as cattle, horses, goats and sheep, for commercial or
noncommercial purposes, and the construction and maintenance of agricultural accessory buildings.
Alter or alteration means any act which causes or may reasonably be expected to cause a tree to die, including
but not limited to, any of the following:
(1) Uprooting any portion of the tree's root system;
(2) Severing the main trunk of the tree;
(3) Inflicting damage upon the tree's root system by machinery, storage of materials, or the
compaction of soil above the root system of a tree;
(4) Changing the natural grade of the critical root zone of a tree or uphill from the critical root zone
of the tree so as to divert the flow of water to or away from the critical root zone;
(5) Applying herbicidal or other lethal chemicals to the tree or any portion of the critical root zone
of the tree;
(6) Placement of impermeable material over any portion of the critical root system of a tree; and
(7) Trenching within the critical root zone.
A protected tree shall be considered to be altered if one or more of the following occurs: more than 25 percent
of the critical root zone is adversely affected; more than 25 percent of its canopy is removed; or the tree is
disfigured to the extent a certified arborist would conclude the tree will not survive.
Buildable area means that portion of a building site exclusive of the required yard areas on which a structure or
building improvements may be erected, including the actual structure, driveway, parking lot, pool and other
construction shown on a site plan. The buildable area shall extend six feet from such area to allow for the
normal operation of construction equipment.
Building pad means the actual foundation area of a building and a reasonable area around the foundation
necessary for construction and grade transitions.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/554
Building permit means the official authorization by the city to allow any construction on any property in the city
that increases the impervious cover on the lot, tract or portion of land.
Caliper means American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk measurement of nursery stock. Caliper
of the trunk shall be taken six inches above the ground for up to four-inch caliper size and 12 inches above the
ground for larger caliper sizes.
Certificate of occupancy (CO) means an official city acknowledgement that indicates conformance with all
applicable city regulations and authorizes the legal use and occupancy of the premises for which it is issued.
Certified arborist means a specialist in the care of individual trees, knowledgeable about the needs of trees, and
trained and equipped to provide proper care of trees, and certified by the International Society of Arboriculture
as a certified arborist.
Clearcutting means the removal of all trees or a significant majority of the trees within an area of land.
Critical root zone means the area of undisturbed natural soil around a tree defined by a concentric circle drawn
at grade with a radius equal to the distance from the trunk to the outermost portion of the drip line. As a
practical matter, this is the acute portion of the tree's root system.
Cut/fill means areas where the natural ground level has been modified either through excavation (cut) or fill.
Development means any construction activity for which a building permit or grading permit is required under the
ordinances of the city.
Disruptive activity.
(1) The term “disruptive activity” means any permanent change to existing surface conditions
including clearing, grading, trenching, boring, and similar activities.
(2) The term “disruptive activity” does not include normal mowing or removal of trees less than
four caliper inches.
Dripline means whichever of the following encompasses the greatest area:
(1) The irregular shape formed around a tree by a series of vertical lines that run through the
outermost portion of the canopy of the tree and extend to the ground;
(2) A circular area with a radius of one-half the height of the tree extending outward from the
center point of the tree; or
(3) If the tree is damaged or deformed, a circular area with a radius equal to two feet per inch of
caliper.
Easement means the authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of
any designated part of such property. Easements may be temporary or permanent.
Easement, conservation, means a permanent deed restriction that limits development of property, or a transfer
of an interest in property to a public or nonprofit entity approved by the city, duly recorded in the deed records of
the county and binding on all subsequent owners, and for the purpose of protecting and preserving
environmentally sensitive natural resources, in which the landowner retains fee title to the property.
Easement, permanent, means the permanent transfer by plat or written instrument of an interest in property or
authorization by a property owner for the use by another, for a specified limited purpose.
Easement, temporary access, means an easement granting a right of access to property that is adjacent to a
property being developed to provide temporary access for construction activities on the property being
developed. The easement is granted only for the period of the construction activity.
Easement, temporary construction, means an easement granting a right of use of property that is adjacent to a
property being developed to provide temporary access required for the installation of required and approved
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/554
utility lines and other infrastructure to serve the property being developed. The easement is granted only for the
period of the construction activity.
Easement, utility or drainage, means an area designated on any plat or other instrument approved by the city
for the location of utility lines or facilities for the flow of stormwater.
Environmental preserve means a natural open space reserved for land that is under permanent conservation,
such as areas in the floodplain, woodlands to be preserved, creeks, water bodies, steep grades, and other
environmentally sensitive lands and including land protected through conservation easements.
Existing tree cover means the sum total of the area that is located beneath the canopies of all protected trees
on the lot or tract on the date of development application, as measured by accepted forestry practices.
Footprint means an area not to exceed six feet in all directions around impervious surfaces as designated on an
approved site plan or tree conservation plan.
Grading means the movement of dirt, topsoil, grass, native material, bushes, trees, landscaping or other forms
of surface material which will result in a long-term difference of six inches or greater from the initial elevation.
Grading permit means an official authorization by the city to allow any person to regrade, excavate, disturb or
store spoils on any property in the city as required by the city's adopted building code.
Grading plan means a topographical map of the subdivision with sufficient perimeter area to provide a clear
definition of the initial elevations, watercourses and drainage patterns. In addition, the plan includes one-foot
contours, spot elevations. and flow arrows. The plan is sufficient in detail and scale to determine limits and
depths of excavation or fill. The plan must be signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed
by the state.
Heavily wooded area means an area of continuous wooded vegetation where trees are at a density of at least
one protected tree per 325 square feet of land, where the branches and leaves form a continuous canopy, and
which consists of at least five trees.
Landscape architect means a person licensed to use the title of landscape architect in the state in accordance
with state law.
Limits of construction means a delineation on the graphic exhibit which shows the boundary of the area within
which all construction activity will occur.
Municipal public domain property means property owned by a governmental entity such as the city, county,
state, federal government, school district or other such entity, such as city hall, public parks, Corps of Engineers
property, public rights-of-way (ROW), libraries, fire stations, and water tower, water treatment and other public
works facilities.
Owner means any person holding a legal or equitable interest in land, or a lessee, agent, employee or other
person acting on behalf of such person.
Parks master plan means the component element of the Forest Hill 2020 Strategy that serves as the
community's blue print for future parks and open space facilities.
Parks/clean cities committee means a volunteer citizen body appointed by the city council which is authorized
to make recommendations on the city's parks and public open space facilities. The parks/clean cities committee
shall also serve as the tree board.
Planning and zoning commission means a volunteer citizen body appointed by the city council which is
authorized to make recommendations on the physical development of the city, including land use, zoning and
transportation issues.
Protected tree means any self-supporting, woody perennial plant which has a caliper of four inches or more
when measured at a point 4½ feet above ground level and which normally attains an overall height of at least
15 feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. It may appear to have several
stems or trunks as in several varieties of oaks.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/554
Protective measures means protective fencing with a four-foot approximate height surrounding the critical root
zone and bark protection to ensure that all prohibited activities (see section 58-7(b)) in the critical root zone are
prevented, in order to prevent damage to the tree and its root system, including protection for trees on adjacent
properties.
Right-of-way (ROW) means a strip of land, other than a drainage or utility easement occupied or intended to be
occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main,
sanitary or storm sewer, or for another special use.
Selective thinning means selective clearing of undesirable trees to allow unrestricted growth of young, vigorous
trees, especially hardwoods, as recommended by a licensed professional. Shade of 50 to 60 percent is more
desirable and conducive to all activities. Dense shade is the least desirable. On densely wooded properties,
selective thinning may be used to accomplish a required tree survey by a licensed professional on the property.
Significant or large tree means any tree 30 caliper inches (94.25 inches in circumference) or 20 caliper inches
(62.83 inches in circumference) for post oaks and blackjack oaks or such trees deemed to be of historical
value.
Specimen tree means a tree grown for exhibition or open to display its full development.
Tree means any self-supporting woody perennial plant which will normally attain a trunk diameter of two inches
or more when measured at a point 4½ feet above ground level and an overall height of at least 15 feet at
maturity.
Tree board means a board appointed to carry out specific duties and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter.
The parks/clean cities commission shall constitute the tree board.
Tree conservation analysis means a preliminary analysis that shows the general site design direction of the
development including general placement of building pads, parking areas and infrastructure based on the
environmental features of the property.
Tree conservation plan means a plan that illustrates, in detail, the impact of all proposed development including
the location of all proposed buildings, parking areas, location of all easements, streets and all other
infrastructure and the impact on all environmental features of the site such as protected trees, natural creeks,
ponds, steep grades and other critical resources. A grading plan shall be included if applicable; also the trees
desired to be removed, the trees that shall remain on the site, and an accompanying document indicating the
reason for the proposed removal of any tree, and if applicable, a description of how the existing healthy trees
proposed to be retained will be protected from damage from construction.
Tree, diseased, infected or damaged means a tree that is:
(1) Infected with a disease or a parasite making it reasonably likely that the tree will either die
within three years or pose a significant threat of infecting other trees of the same or similar species;
(2) Damaged, in whole or part, to such an extent that either the tree is reasonably likely to die
within three years; or
(3) Hazardous, in whole or part, to such an extent that it presents a significant danger to the
general public.
Tree, park, means trees in public parks and all areas owned by the city to which the public has access as a
park.
Tree permit means the official authorization by the city required to alter any protected tree not exempted by this
chapter.
Tree preservation area means an area identified on any plan approved by the city council denoting a significant
tree stand which is to be preserved by a conservation easement during and after development of that property.
Tree protection sign means a sign furnished by the city's administrative official which sign describes prohibited
conduct detrimental to trees.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/554
Tree removal means the cutting, destroying, removing, moving, poisoning, banding, marking, or effectively
destroying through damaging, any tree four caliper inches or greater, regardless of species, situated on
property regulated by the city's zoning ordinance, without first obtaining a permit authorizing tree removal from
the administrative official.
Tree removal authorization means permission granted by a administrative official or city council to remove
protected trees in accordance with this chapter.
Tree, street, means a protected tree located within or directly adjacent to a public right-of-way.
Tree survey means a plan drawing that provides legend details about the location and details of trees and
contains the information set forth in appendix A attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived,
including but not limited to drawings by a licensed landscape architect, certified nurseryman, certified arborist,
licensed engineer or licensed professional land surveyor.
Tree technical manual means the manual that contains the text of this chapter and any graphic depictions,
tables, or other illustrative material created and approved by the city council to illustrate the requirements of this
chapter.
Tree topping means the severe cutting back of branches to stubs larger than three caliper inches within the
tree's canopy to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
Utility means the service or product provided by a utility provider, including but not limited to, the provision of
gas, electric, water, wastewater, drainage, stormwater, telecommunications. cable or telephone service for
users within the city.
Utility, city, means the city's public works department or city employee or entity employed on the behalf of the
city providing a utility service.
Utility line means a conduit, channel, ditch, tube, duct, hose, wire, box, pipe or similar conveyance device
through which a utility is transported, provided or conveyed, excluding utility service lines. Channels, ditches,
creeks. detention/retention ponds and other drainage improvements shall constitute a utility line for purposes of
this chapter only to the extent that such improvement is required by the city or other public entity as an integral
and necessary part of an approved drainage plan, is located so as to avoid, to the greatest extent practical,
altering protected trees. and is approved by the administrative official. Ponds, channels, creeks or other bodies
of water intended or created primarily for decorative, scenic or recreational purposes shall not constitute a utility
line for purposes of this chapter, unless such improvement is required by the city engineer or by ordinance,
even if such areas may serve some drainage purposes.
Utility provider means a company or entity, or agent for a company or entity, including a municipality that
provides a utility service within the city.
Utility service line means a conduit, channel, ditch, tube, duct, hose, wire, box, pipe or similar conveyance
device through which a utility is transported, provided, or conveyed to a single lot or tract, to the extent that the
conveyance device is located on that lot or tract.
Yard area means the front, side and rear yard areas and the zoning district requirements applicable thereto.
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 2, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 58-3. Applicability of ordinance provisions.
(a) Generally. The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to real property as follows except as noted
in section 58-4, tree removal. All developments which have not submitted a preliminary plat/construction plan,
site plan or building permit, whichever is applicable, as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this
chapter is derived, shall be subject to the requirements for tree protection and replacement specified as follows:
(1) All vacant and undeveloped property.
(2) All property to be redeveloped, including additions and alterations.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/554
(3) All easements and rights-of-way, except those included in a preliminary plat approved by the
planning and zoning commission shall meet the terms and provisions of this chapter.
(4) The yard areas of all developed property, excluding developed single-family residential
property.
(b) Tree preservation/protected and significant or large trees.
(1) Protected trees shall be as designated by the administrative official.
(2) Significant or large trees 30 caliper inches (94.25 inches in circumference) or 20 caliper inches
(62.83 inches in circumference) for post oaks and blackjack oaks can only be removed by permit
approved by the parks/clean city committee. The reduced caliper inches for post oaks and blackjack
oaks is in recognition of the naturally occurring post oak savannahs within the Eastern Cross timbers
zone. Preservation of a significant or large tree will be credited 1½ times its caliper inches toward to
any required tree replacement on the same site.
(3) Criteria for granting the permit will be one of the following conditions:
a. Removal will be granted if an area 1½ times the area of the specific tree's caliper inches
is retained on the same site. The 1½ retention of existing trees shall be in excess of the tree
replacement requirements on the site/tract;
b. Removal will be granted if planting of new trees at five times greater in replacement
inches than the removed significant tree;
c. Payment into the tree reforestation fund based upon the total diameter of the specific tree
times $200.00 per caliper inch; or
d. Tree board approves a plan that mitigates the removal of the large tree.
(4) Replacement of any significant tree preserved and that dies within five years due to
construction or development activities will be the responsibility of the original applicant. Replacement
will be new trees with a minimum of three caliper inches each and equal to five times the lost
replacement inches. Tree replacement will be guaranteed for a period of two years.
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 3, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 58-4. Tree removal.
(a) Authorization required.
(1) Required on private and public property; exception. A tree removal authorization shall be
required when protected trees are requested to be removed except as allowed by subsection (b) of
this section, removal procedures. No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, move or
remove, or effectively destroy through damaging, any protected tree situated on private or public
property regulated by this chapter without first obtaining a tree removal authorization unless the
conditions of subsection (b) of this section apply.
(2) Clearcutting. The clearcutting of land as defined in this chapter is prohibited except as allowed
by subsection (b) of this section, removal procedures.
(3) Selective thinning. The removal of selected trees from within a densely forested area when
done in a professionally accepted manner shall be allowed as a single permit upon approval by the
administrative official. Approval will only be granted when the administrative official determines upon
recommendation of a registered landscape architect or certified arborist that the selective thinning is
being done in a manner that would enhance the environment and likelihood of survival for the
remaining trees. Approved selective thinning may take place either before, during or after
construction and shall be overseen by a registered landscape architect or certified arborist.
(b) Removal procedures.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/554
(1) Allowable tree removal prior to issuance of a building permit. No protected trees shall be
removed prior to issuance of a building permit unless one of the following conditions exists. The
burden of proof as a qualified exception is upon the person removing the tree.
a. Any protected tree located in a single-family residential subdivision with two lots or less,
zoned and used as residential with a residential structure upon it is exempted from these
regulations. All other uses, e.g., vacant, commercial, institutional, industrial must comply with
these regulations regardless of lot size.
b. Any protected tree located within street rights-of-way, utility or drainage easements as
shown on a preliminary plat approved by the planning and zoning commission. If certain trees
outside the above areas or trees based partially outside the easement or right-of-way are
requested to be removed to allow the operation of equipment, the applicant shall submit a
recorded plat, and a site plan which indicates the exact operation area needed. The
administrative official may approve selected removal under this condition.
c. The protected tree is dying, dead, diseased, injured, in danger of falling, interferes with
utility service, creates unsafe vision clearance or conflicts with other ordinances or regulations
and immediate removal is required.
d. Any protected tree that has disrupted a public utility service due to a tornado, storm, flood
or other act of nature. Removal shall be limited to the portion of the tree reasonably necessary
to reestablish and maintain reliable utility service.
e. Landscape nursery. All licensed plant or tree nurseries shall be exempt from the tree
protection and replacement requirements and from the tree removal provision only in relation
to those trees planted and growing on the premises of said licensee which are so planted and
growing for the sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of said
licensee's business. This may also apply to a nursery established and so designated by a
developer of a large project within the city, where trees are intended for landscaping future
phases of such larger project.
f. Any protected tree that is required to be removed in order to properly grade and drain the
property as required on a final grading plan that is approved by the administrative official. If this
option is utilized on any lot in a single family residential district, a total of three replacement
native trees per lot shall be required. These replacement trees will meet the minimum
requirements of section 58-6(a) and shall be planted prior to the final building inspection. At
least one of these trees shall be planted in the required front yard setback. Other types of
development shall meet the current approved landscape regulations.
g. The owner of property zoned agricultural and being actively used for agricultural purposes
shall be exempt from this chapter.
h. Utilities operating under a franchise agreement with the city are exempt from this chapter
and are not required to make application for removal of protected trees provided that any trees
removed under this exemption pose a direct hindrance to the utility's ability to exercise its
rights under the franchise to utilize city property rights-of way, and dedicated easements to
provide safe, reliable service to its customers and that said trees are located in the
aforementioned areas governed by the franchise agreement and removal of trees is directly
linked to extending service to new customers.
(2) Allowable tree removal after issuance of a building permit. Upon issuance of a building permit,
the developer shall be allowed to remove trees located in the approved buildable area of the
property except as noted in subsection (b)(1) of this section. Trees located in required yard areas,
buffers and open space area shall be maintained.
(c) Authorization review and approval process.
(1) Authority for review. The administrative official shall be responsible for the review and approval
of all requests for tree removal authorizations submitted in accordance with the requirements
specified herein. Upon receipt of a completed application, the official reviewing the request for tree
removal may take one of the following actions:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/554
a. Deferral of decision. The administrative official may defer the approval of a tree removal
authorization to the tree board for any reason. Any decision made by the tree board may be
appealed to the city council. All decisions made by the city council shall be final.
b. Approval. The administrative official shall issue a tree removal authorization if it is
determined that:
1. The tree constitutes a hazard to life or property which cannot be reasonably
mitigated without removing the tree;
2. The tree is dying, dead or diseased to the point that restoration is not practical; or
3. All reasonable efforts have been made to avoid removing the tree for the
development and removal cannot be avoided.
c. Refusal. The administrative official shall deny a tree removal authorization application if it
is determined that:
1. Removal of the tree is not reasonably required in order to conduct anticipated
activities; or
2. A reasonable accommodation can be made to preserve the tree.
d. Appeal of decision. Any decision made by the administrative official may be appealed to
the tree board. Any decision made by the tree board may be appealed to the city council. All
decisions made by the city council shall be final.
e. Authorization expiration. Tree removal authorization issued in connection with an
approved building permit or site plan shall be valid for the period of that building permit's or site
plan's validity. A tree removal authorization not issued in connection with an approved building
permit or a site plan shall become void 180 days after the date of the approval.
f. Fees. The applicant shall submit, with an application for a tree removal authorization,
payment of a fee to the city in the amount specified by city council in a fee schedule, with the
following exceptions:
1. When altering any protected tree, the city is exempt from the tree permit fee, but
must obtain a permit and comply with all tree replacement and tree protection
procedures. Protected trees proposed to be altered must be shown on construction plans
approved by the administrative official.
2. When altering any protected tree, a public utility is exempt from the tree permit fee,
but must obtain a permit and comply with all tree replacement and tree protection
procedures. Protected trees proposed to be altered must be shown on construction plans
approved by the administrative official.
(2) Tree removal authorization application.
a. Authorization. A request for tree removal authorization must be submitted and approved
prior to the removal of any protected tree in the city unless the tree is exempt under a provision
of this chapter.
b. Payment of fee required before review. The administrative official shall have no obligation
to review an application for a tree permit until all required information has been submitted and
the applicable fee, if any, has been paid. If any required information or fee has been omitted,
the administrative official shall notify the applicant of that fact, following permit filing procedures
described in Texas Local Government Code sec. 245.002.
c. Application unrelated to development. An application for a request for tree removal
authorization that is unrelated to development shall include the following information:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/554
1. The name, address and telephone number of those persons or entities who own the
property and those persons or entities seeking the permit;
2. The address, existing use, and zoning of the property;
3. A detailed written statement stating the reasons for the requested alteration,
including citation to any relevant provision of this chapter that may authorize the
alteration and including the following:
(i) The amount of land to be disturbed, if any;
(ii) The method and equipment to be used; and
(iii) The dates the proposed alteration would take place;
4. A legible diagram or map indicating the following for the area reasonably likely to be
affected if the permit is issued:
(i) Location of all existing structures, improvements, streets or rights-of-way,
property lines, setback and yard requirements;
(ii) Location of all existing utility lines, utility service lines and easements;
(iii) The common and botanical name, size and location of all trees specifically
designated by number; and
5. Such additional information as the administrative official may reasonably require
given the particular characteristics of the property.
d. Application related to development–Tree conservation plan. The application shall be
made by the property owner in conjunction with a registered landscape architect, certified
nurseryman, certified arborist, certified forester, registered engineer or registered professional
land surveyor who will provide stamped, sealed tree survey. A graphic exhibit shall be attached
showing at least the following items:
1. Appropriate title (i.e., tree removal authorization exhibit);
2. Title block including street address, lot and block, subdivision name, city and date of
preparation;
3. North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity;
4. Scale at a size no larger than one inch equals 200 feet (i.e., one inch equals 100
feet is also permitted);
5. Name, address and phone number of owners and persons preparing the exhibit;
6. Location of all right-of-way lines and public easements;
7. Location of all buildings, structures, pools, parking, and other improvements which
are existing or intended on the lot;
8. Areas of proposed cut/fill as required per city requirements with amount of each
shown (graphically different than subsection (c)(2)c.4 of this section) and the drainage
flow line, if applicable;
9. Areas of proposed cut/fill not required per city requirements with amount of each
shown (graphically different than subsection (c)(2)c.4 of this section) and the drainage
flow line, if applicable;
10. Existing and proposed spot elevation, grades and major contours, along with
existing landscaping, streams, ponds and major natural features;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/554
11. Limits of construction line shown, if applicable;
12. Location of all protected trees and thicket boundaries that are not exempted by
subsection (b)(1) of this section within 50 feet of any construction area that are to remain,
with a description of the size and types of trees, such trees shall be designated by a
circle;
13. The location of all protected trees that are not exempted by subsection (b)(1) of
this section which are to be removed, such trees shall be designated by a triangle;
14. Note on the graphic exhibit the caliper size (as measured 4½ feet from the
ground), the Latin and common name of tree to be removed; and
15. Location of any required replacement trees shown with caliper size and common
name of tree found from the list of approved trees as noted in section 58-12
e. Same–Alternative tree conservation plan. A detailed tree survey shall not be required for
areas on the plan designated as tree preservation areas. These are areas identified on any
plan approved by the city council denoting a significant tree stand which is to be preserved
during and after development of that property through the designation and filing of a
permanent conservation easement. For other treed areas located within the same site that will
be impacted by development activity, the applicant shall provide a tree survey, a graphic
exhibit, and meet all other application requirements of subsection (c)(2)c of this section, for a
tree conservation plan.
These requirements may be modified by the administrative official as needed to administer this chapter. Use of
aerial photography may be allowed if it includes all of the items set forth in this section on a transparency at the
same scale as the photo.
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 4, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 58-5. Gas well sites.
A 30 percent tree canopy requirement through preservation and/or planting will apply to any well sites not
adjacent to protected uses within the city limits. A 40 percent tree canopy requirement through preservation
and/or planting will apply to any well sites adjacent to protected uses within the city limits. The following
requirements apply to both types of gas well sites:
(1) A minimum retention of 25 percent of the existing trees will be required unless removal is
necessary for location of equipment as determined by the gas inspector.
(2) No more than 25 percent of the same species may be planted at one site, and trees shall be
selected from section preferred tree replacement list.
(3) A minimum of 25 percent of the planted trees must be evergreen species.
(4) A minimum of 75 percent of the planted trees must be located between the gas well site and
protected uses or public way. An administrative waiver of the 75 percent placement can be approved
by the administrative official with proof that the proposed planting will screen the negative views into
the well site from the protected uses, or evidence is provided that placement of trees would be
detrimental to necessary truck traffic and/or location of equipment.
(5) Replacement and/or planted trees shall be located on the subject site whenever possible.
However, if this is not feasible, the administrative official has the authority to allow the planting to
take place on another property.
(6) All planted trees that die within two years of the date for project completion will be replaced by
another replacement tree. The replacement tree carries the same two-year replacement
requirement. A replacement of any tree that dies within two years of planting will be replaced by the
gas well operator or agent and a new two year guarantee will begin at the time of replacement.
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 5, adopted 4/21/09)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/554
Sec. 58-6. Tree replacement.
(a) Generally. If a tree removal authorization is granted, the applicant shall replace the protected trees being
removed with large canopy trees listed in section 58-12, table A, list of preferred trees, which shall be a
minimum of three caliper inches measured six inches from the ground and a minimum of seven feet in height
when planted. A sufficient number of trees shall be planted so that the total caliper of the replacement trees is
equal to the caliper of the trees removed as measured 4½ feet high on the trunk. The replacement trees shall
be noted either on the required landscape plan for all non-single-family developments or on the plot plan
submitted with the building permit application for single-family developments. If the location of the removed
trees will be within 25 feet of utility lines, then replacement trees shall be selected from section 58-12, table B. If
areas of the site are determined to be unsuitable for large canopy trees, due to height or spacing requirements,
medium or small canopy trees may be selected from section 58-12, table A, list of preferred trees, upon
recommendation of a landscape architect or certified arborist or forester. All planted trees that die within two
years of the date for project completion will be replaced by another replacement tree. The replacement tree
carries the same two-year replacement requirement.
(b) Replacement procedures. Replacement trees shall be located on the subject site whenever possible.
However, if this is not feasible, the administrative official has the authority to allow the planting to take place on
another property. Such replacement shall occur at the time of landscaping of newly developed property or in the
event or removal or death of a tree after the property has been developed, except for developed single-family
residential development. Single-family residential lots that have been finalized are exempt from replacing
required replacement trees.
(c) Reforestation fund. If approved by the administrative official, the parks/clean city committee or the city
council, the applicant, in lieu of compliance with this chapter, may make a payment into the reforestation fund,
which shall be a special account administered by the parks/clean city committee. The funds shall be used only
for purchasing, planting and maintaining trees on public property, or for acquiring and preserving wooded
property. The amount of payment required shall be calculated based on an average of three current market
prices for the cost of acquiring, planting and maintaining a tree equal in caliper to the trees to be removed for a
period of one year. Two prices will be provided by the applicant and the city will provide one price.
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 6, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 58-7. Tree protection.
(a) Prior to construction. The following procedures shall be followed on all types of construction projects (i.e.,
residential subdivisions, commercial, multi-family, industrial developments, residential buildings and
municipal/public). It is the responsibility of the developer and his subcontractors to take the appropriate action
to preserve all protected trees and significant trees during all phases of construction or any development
activities. Development activities include vegetation removal, grading, installation of utilities and/or construction
of structures and site amenities.
(1) Tree flagging. All protected trees that are to remain on the subject property within 50 feet of
any area of development activity where vehicles, materials and/or equipment are moved, placed,
transported or stored, shall be flagged with bright fluorescent orange vinyl tape wrapped around the
main trunk at a height of four feet or more, such that the tape is very visible to workers operating
construction equipment.
(2) Protective measures. Protective measures must occur on all trees located within 50 feet of
development activities, the measurement to be taken from the critical root zone radius boundary.
(3) Open space flagging. All trees or groups of trees within areas intended to be saved as open
space shall be enclosed with fluorescent orange tape along all areas of possible access or intrusion
by construction equipment. Tape shall be supported at a minimum of 25-foot intervals by wrapping
trees or utilizing another approved method. Single incident access for the purposes of clearing
underbrush is allowed.
(4) Protective fencing. In those situations where a protected tree is so close to the construction
area that construction equipment will infringe on the critical root zone, a system of protective fencing
shall be required between the tree and the construction activity. All protective fencing shall be in
place prior to commencement of any site work and remain in place until all exterior work has been
completed.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/554
(5) Bark protection. In situations where a protected tree remains in the immediate area of intended
construction, the tree shall be protected by enclosing the entire circumference of the tree with twoinch
by four-inch lumber encircled with wire or other means that do not damage the tree. This will
protect the bark of the tree against incidental contact by large construction equipment.
(b) Prohibited activities adjacent to trees. The following activities shall be prohibited within the limits of the
drip line of any protected tree subject to the requirements of this chapter:
(1) Material storage. No materials intended for use in construction or waste materials accumulated
due to excavation or demolition shall be placed within the limits of the critical root zone of any
protected tree.
(2) Equipment cleaning/liquid disposal. No equipment shall be cleaned or other materials or
liquids deposited or allowed to flow over land within the limits of the critical root zone of a protected
tree. This includes, without limitation, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or similar
materials.
(3) Tree attachments. No signs, wires or other attachments other than those of a protective nature
shall be attached to any protected tree.
(4) Vehicular traffic. No vehicular and/or construction and heavy equipment traffic or parking,
including but not limited to trucks, tractors, trailers, bulldozers, bobcat tractors, trenchers,
compressors and hoists, shall take place within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected
tree other than on an existing paved street or parking lot.
(5) Grade changes. No grade changes in excess of two inches (cut or fill) shall be allowed within
the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree without submission of a certified
arborist/forester report dealing with protections and the report accepted by the administrative official.
(6) Boring. Boring of utilities under the critical root zone of a protected tree shall be required in
those circumstances where it is not possible to trench around the critical root zone of the protected
tree. When required, the bore shall be a minimum depth of 48 inches.
(7) Trenching. No trenching shall cross the critical root zone of any protected tree, unless
approved in writing by the administrative official or exempted from the application of this chapter.
(8) Impervious paving. No paving with asphalt, concrete or other impervious materials in a manner
which may reasonably be expected to kill a tree shall be placed within the limits of the critical root
zone of a protected tree except as otherwise allowed in this chapter.
(c) Preserved tree criteria. A protected tree shall be considered preserved only if a minimum of 75 percent of
the area of the critical root zone is maintained at undisturbed natural grade and no more than 25 percent of the
canopy is removed due to building encroachment.
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 7, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 58-8. Tree requirements for commercial properties.
(a) Trees. All commercial properties shall provide trees at a ratio often trees per acre (43,560 square feet) or
one tree per 4,356 square feet of the gross lot area.
(b) All new trees planted to satisfy the tree standards must be a minimum of three-caliper inches at six inches
above soil level.
(c) At the discretion of the city, and at the request of the property owner, the ten trees per acre may be
satisfied by planting trees elsewhere in the city at the direction of the administrative official.
(d) See section 58-12 for a suggested species list that may be used to meet the requirements of this section.
No trees with a maximum mature height of 25 feet or greater may be planted within 25 feet (measured
horizontally) from the nearest overhead utility line. Section 58-12, table B, lists trees that may be planted near
or under power lines.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/554
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 8, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 58-9. Tree pruning restrictions.
(a) Generally. Normal pruning required to promote tree health and vitality is permitted. No protected tree shall
be pruned in a manner, which would reasonably lead to the death of the tree.
(b) Required pruning. The owners of any tree adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be required to maintain a
minimum clearance of 14 feet above the traveled surface or curb of a public street or open space trail. The city
shall also have the right to prune trees overhanging the public right-of-way as necessary to preserve the public
safety.
(c) Allowed pruning. The administrative official may approve pruning of a protected tree in cases where
protected trees must be strategically pruned to allow construction or demolition of a structure. When allowed, all
pruning shall be in accordance with section 58-4(a)(1), approved arboricultural techniques, and the
recommendations of section 58-t 3. This section is not intended to require a tree removal authorization for
reasonable pruning performed or contracted to be performed by the owner of the tree when unrelated to
construction activity.
(d) Tree topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city department to top any
tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires
or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the
determination of the administrative official.
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 9, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 58-10. Tree planting restrictions.
(a) Overhead lines. Replacement trees shall not be planted in a location where the natural canopy of the tree
will interfere with overhead utility lines. Replacement trees for locations near utility lines shall be selected from
section 58-12, list B.
(b) Underground utilities. Any required replacement trees or street trees shall not be planted within an area
such that the mature root zone of the tree will interfere with underground public utility lines, including water
lines, sewer lines, transmission lines or other utilities. No trees shall be planted within ten feet of a fire hydrant
and surface utilities such as pad-mounted transformers and gas meters.
(c) Visibility triangle. No trees shall be planted in the visibility triangle as designated for traffic safety.
(d) Parkway trees. City approval shall be obtained prior to planting any tree in the city's right-of-way
(parkway). Such plantings shall comply with subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section.
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 10, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 58-11. Enforcement of chapter provisions.
(a) Developer's agreement. All developer's agreements shall state that all construction activities shall meet
the requirements of this chapter.
(b) Construction permits. Prior to issuance of a permit to do any site work including grading, a tree survey of
the development shall be submitted to the administrative official.
(c) Building permit. No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant signs a statement that binds the
applicant to ensuring that all construction activities shall meet the requirements of this chapter.
(d) Acceptance of improvements. No acceptance of public improvements shall be authorized until all fines for
violations of this chapter have been paid to the city or otherwise disposed of through the municipal court.
(e) Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all fines for violations of this
chapter have been paid to the city or otherwise disposed of through the municipal court.
(f) Enforcement, penalties and appeal.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/554
(1) Authority. The administrative official shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Administrative penalty. Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who interferes with the enforcement of any
provision of this chapter shall be assessed an administrative penalty as follows:
a. $200.00 per caliper inch of protected trees removed or damaged without a valid tree
removal permit;
b. $400.00 per caliper inch of significant trees removed or damaged with a valid tree
removal permit
Appeal of the administrative official's determination of the administrative penalty may be appealed to
the tree board, within ten days of the determination, but notice of written appeal submitted to the city
secretary, outlining the nature and scope of the dispute. Any party aggrieved of the decision of the
tree board may appeal the decision to the city council within ten days of the tree board's order on
administrative penalty by filing written notice of appeal to the city secretary. The decision of the city
council shall be final.
(3) Criminal offense. Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of
this chapter, shall also be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur, and be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon final conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not to exceed
$500.00 for removal or damage of each tree. The unlawful injury, destruction or removal of each
protected tree shall be considered a separate incident In addition, all violations shall be required to
meet the requirements of section 58-6, tree replacement Allegation and evidence of a culpable
mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter.
(4) Additional relief. Nothing herein shall preclude the city from pursuing any remedies and relief
permitted by applicable law.
(5) Violations. A person commits an offense if the person interferes with or obstructs the
enforcement of this chapter.
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 11, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 58-12. Approved tree replacement lists.
Trees not listed may be approved for use at the discretion of the administrative official or his designee, if
recommended by a registered landscape architect, certified arborist, licensed surveyor or engineer. The first list
in table A, is the approved tree replacement list, as follows:
TABLE A. APPROVED TREE REPLACEMENT LIST
Common Name Scientific Name
Large Canopy Trees
Pecan# (native) Carya illinoinensis
Deodar cedar (evergreen) Cedrus deodara
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/554
Green ash (native) Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Southern magnolia# (evergreen) Magnolia grandiflora
Bur oak* (native) Quercus macrocarpa
Chinquapin oak (native) Quercus muhlenbergii
Shumard oak# (native) Quercus shumardii
Texas red oak (native) Quercus buckleyii
Live oak* (evergreen, native) Quercus virginiana
American elm Ulmus americana
Cedar elm* (native) Ulmus crassifolia
Lacebark elm Ulmus parvifolia
Post oak (native) Quercus stellata
Blackjack oak (native) Quercus marilandica
Medium Canopy Trees
Caddo maple* Acer barbaturn var. caddo
Bigtooth maple* Acer grandidentaturn
Common persimmon Diospyros virginiana
Texas ash (native) Fraxinus texensis
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/554
Ginkgo Ginkgo biloba
Kentucky coffeetree Gymnocladus dioicus
Eastern red cedar* (native) Juniperus virginiana
Golden raintree Koelreuteria paniculata
Eldarica (Afghan) pine* (evergreen) Pinus eldarica
Italian stone pine (evergreen) Pinus pinea
Chinese pistache* Pistacia chinensis
Honey mesquite* Prosopis glandulosa
Blackjack oak* Quercus marilandica
Monterrey (Mexican white) oak* Quercus polymorpha
Western soapbeny* (native) Sapindus drummondii
Pond cypress Taxodium ascendens
Bald cypress* Taxodium distichum
Chittamwood* (native) Bumelia languinosa
Small Canopy Trees
Japanese maple# Acer palmaturn
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/554
Common buttonbush Cephalanthus occidentalis
Redbud* (native) Cercis canadensis
Desert willow* Chilopsis linearis
Rough-leaf dogwood# Cornus drummondii
Texas persimmon* Diospyros texana
Carolina buckthom# (native) Frangula caroliniana
Yaupon holly* (native) Ilex vomitoria
Deciduous holly Ilex decidua
Crepe myrtle* Lagerstroemia indica
White shin oak* Quercus inuate var. breviloba
Flameleaf sumac* Rhus lanceolata
Eve's necklace* (native) Sophora affinis
Mexican buckeye* (native) Ungnadia speciosa
Rusty blackhaw Viburnum rufidulum
Bigelow oak* (native) Quercus sinuata
Mesquite (native) Prosopis glandulosa
*Drought tolerant species
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/554
#Not recommended for parking lots or high heat areas
TABLE B. COMPATIBLE TREES NEAR POWER LINES
Common Name Scientific Name
Carolina cherry laurel Prunus caroliniana
Dwarf crepe myrtle Lagerstroemia indica var.
Flowering dogwood Cornus florida
Japanese maple Acer palmaturn var.
Mesquite Prosopis glandulosa
Mexican buckeye Ungnadia speciosa
Mexican plum Prunus mexicana
Possumhaw Ilex decidua
Sumac Rhus spp.
Texas mountain laurel Sophora secundiflora
Texas persimmon Diospyros texana
Texas redbud Cercis canadensis
Vitex Vitex angus-castus
Waxmyrtle Myrica cerifera
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/554
Yaupon holly Ilex vomitoria
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 12, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 58-13. Tree pruning recommendations.
The following recommendations apply to tree pruning:
(1) When removing a branch always cut outside the branch bark ridge and collar. Do not make a
flush cut.
(2) Branches that do not have a distinct collar should be cut at a right angle to the branch outside
the branch bark ridge.
(3) Trees may have codominant stems. If a codominant stem must be removed, cut at an angle
outside of the bark ridge. Avoid leaving any stub.
(4) When removing heavy limbs, first make an undercut several inches outside of the collar. Then
remove the limb by a second cut an inch or so outside of the first cut. Remove the stub with a third
cut just outside of the collar.
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 13, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 58-14. Effective date.
A person who has applied for approval of a preliminary plat, development plan, concept plan or site plan before
the effective date of this chapter shall not be required to comply with the requirements imposed by this chapter
unless one of the following occurs:
(1) An application for preliminary plat approval for the project being developed was filed before
(date), 2009 and expires without a final plat being approved on or before the second anniversary of
the date of approval of the preliminary plat; or if a final plat is approved on a portion of the property,
the remaining property included within the plat expires without a final plat being approved on or
before the first anniversary of the date of approval of a portion of the preliminary plat;
(2) The project being developed was initiated by a preliminary plat application filed on or after
(date), 2009, but no progress has been made on the project before the second anniversary of the
date of the application. For purposes of this section, the term “progress” has the meaning described
in Texas Local Government Code sec. 245.005; or
(3) The project is abandoned or significantly altered such that it is a new project. For purposes of
this chapter, a project shall be deemed to be abandoned or altered in the event the applicant files an
application for approval of another permit for the property for which a project is pending and the
permit sought is for different uses or for a different configuration of the property.
Should the conditions in any subsection set forth in this section be met, or should the applicant request, the
provisions of this chapter shall be controlling and shall apply to the applicant's project.
(Ordinance 2009005, sec. 16, adopted 4/21/09)
CHAPTER 60
UTILITIES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 60-1. Definition.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/554
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Utility means and includes water, sewer and/or any other utility service furnished by the city to consumers
thereof.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-1; 1998 Code, sec. 130-1)
Sec. 60-2. Scope of provisions.
All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city
shall furnish any utility service to any person, or whereby the city shall make any utility connections or perform
any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any utility service pursuant to the rules and regulations
of the city council. (1976 Code, sec. 32-2; 1998 Code, sec. 130-2)
Sec. 60-3. Service to comply with technical provisions.
Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with and in compliance
with all applicable technical provisions of this Code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations. (1976
Code, sec. 32-3; 1998 Code, sec. 130-3)
Sec. 60-4. Construction and maintenance standards for utility service systems.
The city council shall have the authority to establish by rule or regulations such standards and specifications as
may be deemed necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service system
owned and operated by the city within or without the city and under the management of the council. Such rules,
regulations, standards and specifications shall be filed in the office of the city secretary. Violation of such rules,
regulations, standards and specifications shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (1976 Code, sec. 32-4; 1998 Code,
sec. 130-4)
Sec. 60-5. Inspection of premises prior to making water or sewer taps outside city.
In order to protect the utility service supply, the city will not make any water or sewer taps outside the city limits
until the premises involved have been inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector. (1976 Code, sec. 32-
5; 1998 Code, sec. 130-5)
Sec. 60-6. Right of entry.
Any authorized inspector of the city shall have free access at any time to all premises supplied with any utility
service by the city for the purpose of examination in order to protect the utility service from abusive use. (1976
Code, sec. 32-6; 1998 Code, sec. 130-6)
Sec. 60-7. Termination of service authorized.
The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any utility service for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law.
(2) Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service.
(3) Nonpayment of a bill; however, a person over 60 years of age who is a residential customer
and who occupies the entire premises may receive upon request a delay of 25 days from the date of
the bill to pay such bill if there is not already an outstanding bill which has also been delayed.
(4) Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures or appliances
or otherwise.
(5) Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility
service.
(6) Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment therefor.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/554
(7) Vacancy of premises.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-7; 1998 Code, sec. 130-7)
Sec. 60-8. Liability of city for damage.
The city shall not be liable for any damage to any customer of any utility service furnished by the city due to
backflow of the sewerage system, failure of supply, interruption of service or any other cause outside the direct
control of the city. (1976 Code, sec. 32-8; 1998 Code, sec. 130-8)
Sec. 60-9. Utility service-Application required.
Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall make application for the same to the utility
service department. Such application shall contain the applicant's name and address and the uses for which
such utility service is desired. (1976 Code, sec. 32-9; 1998 Code, sec. 130-9)
Sec. 60-10. Same–Denial of service to persons in debt to city.
The city may decline or fail or cease to furnish utility service to any person who may be in debt to the city for
any reason, except ad valorem taxes and special assessments. (1976 Code, sec. 32-10; 1998 Code, sec. 130-
10)
Sec. 60-11. Same-Permission for use.
Approval of the application for any utility service by the utility service department shall be deemed permission
for such service. (1976 Code, sec. 32-11; 1998 Code, sec. 130-11)
Sec. 60-12. Same-Use assumed.
All premises connected to any utility service of the city shall be assumed to be using such utility service, and
the owner or occupant shall be charged therefor so long as such premises shall remain connected with the
utility service. (1976 Code, sec. 32-12; 1998 Code, sec. 130-12)
Sec. 60-13. Same-Use contrary to permit.
Any person having a permit from the city for the use of any utility service offered by the city who shall use such
utility service for any purpose other than mentioned in such permit or who shall make any unauthorized
changes in such service shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1976 Code, sec. 32-13; 1998 Code, sec.
130-13)
Sec. 60-14. Damaging, tampering with or trespassing on utility equipment or premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person, not having authority to do so, to open any water hydrant or tamper with any
utility service furnished by the city to consumers, or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass upon any
equipment or premises belonging to the city connected with any utility service. (1976 Code, sec. 32-14; 1998
Code, sec. 130-14)
Sec. 60-15. Temporary interruption of service.
The city reserves the right to cut off any utility service without notice in case of emergencies. When an
interruption in service is necessary for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected
customers will be notified as circumstances permit. (1976 Code, sec. 32-15; 1998 Code, sec. 130-15)
Sec. 60-16. Authority of city to restrict use.
The city hereby reserves the right to at any time restrict or prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the
city during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use. (1976
Code, sec. 32-16; 1998 Code, sec. 130-16)
Sec. 60-17. Sale of service by customer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to resell to others any utility service obtained from the city, except only by
special arrangement with the city council. (1976 Code, sec. 32-17; 1998 Code, sec. 130-17)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/554
Sec. 60-18. Supervision of connections.
Connections for any utility service furnished by the city shall be made only under the supervision of the utility
service department. (1976 Code, sec. 32-18; 1998 Code, sec. 130-18)
Sec. 60-19. Separate connection required for each building, structure or consumer.
Every building, structure or consumer in the city shall have a separate utility service connection. (1976 Code,
sec. 32-19; 1998 Code, sec. 130-19)
Sec. 60-20. Unlawful connections.
Any person who shall make any connection in any manner to any utility system, whether owned by the city or
not, without the prior knowledge and consent of the owner of such utility system shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1976 Code, sec. 32-20; 1998 Code, sec. 130-20)
Sec. 60-21. Connections, disconnections, repairs, and turning on or turning off service to be done
only by city employees.
No person, other than employees of the city, shall be authorized to connect, turn on, turn off or disconnect any
utility service offered by the city, or remove, replace or repair any equipment connected to any such utility
service. (1976 Code, sec. 32-21; 1998 Code, sec. 130-21)
Sec. 60-22. Maintenance of system by consumer.
The consumer of any utility service furnished by the city shall maintain and keep in good repair all connections,
appliances and other apparatus installed and used in connection with such utility service. (1976 Code, sec. 32-
22; 1998 Code, sec. 130-22)
Sec. 60-23. Water emergencies.
(a) Purpose and scope. The purpose of this section is to establish the city's policy in the event of shortages
or delivery limitations in the city's water supply and to establish water restrictions to be enforced in case of
drought or emergency conditions. This section applies to:
(1) All persons and premises within the city using water from the water system;
(2) All retail customers who live in unincorporated areas within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction
and are served by the water system; and
(3) All wholesale service customers outside the city to the extent provided in subsection (k) of this
section.
(b) Drought contingency/emergency water management plan. The drought contingency/emergency water
management plan shall be as promulgated by the entity that has water district control authority over the city's
water system and as subsequently approved by the city council, from time to time.
(c) Authority. The city manager is authorized to implement measures prescribed when required by this
section and by the drought contingency/emergency water management plan approved by the city council. The
director is authorized to enforce the measures implemented and to promulgate regulations not in conflict with
this section or state and federal laws in aid of enforcement.
(d) Initiation of plan stages. The director, upon determination that drought conditions or a water emergency
exists, shall advise the city manager. The city manager may order that the appropriate stage of the drought
contingency/emergency water management plan be initiated. To be effective, the order must be:
(1) Made by public announcement to the news media;
(2) Published on the city's website; and
(3) Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/554
(e) Duration of stage; change. A stage will remain in effect until the conditions that triggered initiation of the
stage have been eliminated. If the stage is initiated because of excessive demands, all initiated actions will
remain in effect through September 30 of the year in which they were triggered unless the city manager
determines that conditions exist that will allow termination of the stage before September 30. Upon
recommendation of the director, the city manager may terminate, upgrade or downgrade the stage. Any such
change must be made in the same manner prescribed in subsection (d) of this section.
(f) Violation of section. A person commits an offense if he knowingly makes, causes or permits a use of water
contrary to the measures implemented by the city manager as prescribed in the drought
contingency/emergency water management plan. For purposes of this subsection, it is presumed that a person
has knowingly made, caused or permitted a use of water contrary to the measures implemented if the
mandatory measures have been formally ordered consistent with the terms of subsection (d) of this section
and:
(1) The manner of use has been prohibited by the drought contingency/emergency water
management plan;
(2) The amount of water used exceeds that allowed by the drought contingency/emergency water
management plan; or
(3) The manner or amount used violates the terms and conditions of a compliance agreement
made pursuant to a variance granted by the director pursuant to subsection (h) of this section.
(g) Penalties for violation. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with a
measure implemented in accordance with this section and the drought contingency/emergency water
management plan shall be fined not more than $2,000.00 for each offense. In addition, the following penalties
shall apply:
(1) A person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with a measure
implemented in accordance with this section and stage 3 of the drought contingency/emergency
water management plan shall be fined not less than $250.00.
(2) A person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with a measure
implemented with this section and stage 4 of the drought contingency/emergency water
management plan shall be fined not less than $500.00.
(3) If a person is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with
a measure implemented in accordance with this section and the drought contingency/emergency
water management plan two times, the director may install a flow restrictor in the water line to the
premises where the violations occurred to limit the amount of water that may pass through the meter
in a 24-hour period.
(4) If a person is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with
a measure implemented in accordance with this section and the drought contingency/emergency
water management plan three times, the director may discontinue water service to the premises
where the violation occurred.
(h) Variances. During the time the emergency order is operative, the director may grant variances only under
the following circumstances and conditions:
(1) The applicant signs a compliance agreement on a form provided by the director and approved
by the city attorney, agreeing to use the water only in the amount and manner permitted by the
variance;
(2) Granting of the variance would not cause an immediate significant reduction in the city's water
supply;
(3) Failure to approve the variance would result in an extreme hardship or need relating to the
health, safety or welfare of the applicant; and
(4) Granting the variance would not adversely affect the premises at which the violation occurred.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/554
(i) Revocation of variances. The director may revoke a variance when he determines that:
(1) The conditions of subsection (h) of this section are not being met or are no longer applicable;
(2) The terms of the compliance agreement are being violated; or
(3) Revocation is advisable to protect the health, safety or welfare of other persons.
(j) Appeal. Denial or revocation of a variance by the director can be appealed to the city manager by filing a
written notice of appeal with the city manager within ten days after issuance of the director's decision. The city
manager's decision shall be final.
(k) Wholesale service to customers outside the city. The director shall advise customers receiving wholesale
water service from the city of actions taken under the drought contingency/emergency water management plan.
The director may restrict service to customers outside the city as permitted under the contract and state law.
(l) Authority under other laws. Noting in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the mayor, the
city council or the city manager to seek emergency relief under the provisions of any state or federal disaster
relief act.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-23; 1998 Code, sec. 130-23; Ordinance 200558, sec. 1, adopted 6/7/05)
Secs. 60-24–60-49. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. IDENTITY THEFT PROGRAM
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 60-50. General information.
(a) A ruling known as the “identity theft red flags regulation” was jointly issued by the Federal Trade
Commission, Office of Thrift Supervisor and several other governing agencies (agencies), implemented section
114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 (FACT ACT) and is effective November 1, 2008.
(b) The identity theft red flags regulation requires financial institutions to develop and implement a written
identity theft program to detect, prevent and diminish identity theft in connection with opening of certain
accounts or existing accounts.
(c) Under the regulation only those financial institutions that offer or maintain covered accounts must develop
and implement a written program. The term “covered account” means:
(1) An account primarily used for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is
designed to permit multiple payments or transactions;
(2) Any other account for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or the safety
and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft.
(d) The agencies believe that accounts such as credit cards, mortgage loans, cell phone, utility, checking,
automobile loans and savings accounts are examples of accounts designed to permit multiple payments or
transactions and also contain a reasonably foreseeable risk of identity theft.
(1998 Code, sec. 2-15; Ordinance 2008121, sec. 2(exh. A, sec. I), adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 60-51. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure the city has a program in place to detect, prevent and diminish identity
theft in connection with the opening of utility accounts and to establish written procedures for security and
storing of personal information. (1998 Code, sec. 2-15; Ordinance 2008121, sec. 2(exh. A., sec. II), adopted
10/21/08)
Sec. 60-52. Application.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/554
This policy applies to all city employees and service providers that have access to utility billing records
containing customers personal information that is submitted in person, by fax, email and over the internet.
(1998 Code, sec. 2-15; Ordinance 2008121, sec. 2(exh. A., sec. 111), adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 60-53. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Identity theft means a fraud committed using the identifying information of another person.
Identifying information means any name or number that may be used along or with any other information to
identify a specific person, including the following:
(1) Name;
(2) Date of birth;
(3) Address;
(4) Telephone number;
(5) Government-issued driver's license or ID number;
(6) Alien registration number;
(7) Government-issued passport number;
(8) Routing code;
(9) Tax identification number.
Red flags means a pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible risk of identity theft.
(1998 Code, sec. 2-15; Ordinance 2008121, sec. 2(exh. A, sec. IV), adopted 10/21/08)
Secs. 60-54–60-79. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. POLICY AND PREVENTION
Sec. 60-80. Red flag alerts.
(a) When opening new accounts, staff needs to carefully scrutinize documents submitted for identification or
proof of residency for red flags such as:
(1) Documents provided for identification appear to be altered or forged.
(2) The photograph or physical description on the identification is not consistent with the
appearance of the customer requesting service.
(3) Other information on the identification is not consistent with information provided by the person
requesting service.
(4) Other information is not consistent with information that is on file (i.e., previous application
submitted with driver's license).
(5) Lease submitted for proof of residency appears to be altered or forged.
(6) Personal information submitted is associated with known fraudulent activity.
(7) Toe state-issued driver's license number and date of birth are the same as another customer's.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/554
(8) A new account requested immediately after disconnection for nonpayment.
(b) Under any of the cases listed in subsection (a) of this section, city staff will request additional
identification, proof of residence by asking to view other bills and/or seek additional documentation as deemed
necessary to properly identify the patron.
(1998 Code, sec. 2-15; Ordinance 2008121, sec. 2(exh. A, sec. V.A), adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 60-81. New account activation.
To ensure proper identification verification, effective November 1, 2008, all requests for new service must be
completed in person.
(1) Applicants must show a government-issued photo ID to initiate service.
(2) New applications submitted by fax, email, mail or internet will no longer be processed until
proper identification verification is completed in person.
(3) Applications must be submitted by the responsible party; parents, siblings or any other
interested party cannot activate service on behalf of another person.
(1998 Code, sec. 2-15; Ordinance 2008121, sec. 2(exh. A, sec. V.B), adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 60-82. Data security and storage.
(a) City's security system. Electronic data is transmitted and exchanged through the city's secure socket
layer security system which enables encryption of sensitive information during online transactions.
(b) Disclosure of personal information. Information is used as a means of identification, for internal
verification or administrative purposes.
(c) Data storage. All hard copy information is stored in secured filing cabinets. Cash receipt information
containing credit card numbers is decoded.
(d) Internal database security. All employees undergo a background check conducted by the human
resources department prior to hiring. Employees are assigned security levels which limit access to sensitive
data. Access into the system requires a password assigned by the system administrator. Upon termination,
employee passwords are immediately disabled.
(1998 Code, sec. 2-15; Ordinance 2008121, sec. 2(exh. A, sec. V.C), adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 60-83. Data retention.
Records are disposed of in accordance with state and federal law, including the records retention schedule
issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. (1998 Code, sec. 2-15; Ordinance 2008121, sec.
2(exh. A, sec. V.D), adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 60-84. Identify theft notification.
A zero tolerance policy is in effect for all fraudulent transactions within utility billing customer service. Once
written notification and verification is received of fraudulent activity from a customer, banking institution or
collection agency utility billing customer service will proceed with:
(1) Notating and taking corrective actions on the account;
(2) Gathering all pertinent information that is available; and
(3) Immediately contacting the city police department to initiate a criminal investigation.
(1998 Code, sec. 2-15; Ordinance 2008121, sec. 2(exh. A, sec. V.E), adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 60-85. Periodic review and reporting.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/554
The utility billing supervisor will conduct an annual review of the current policy. (1998 Code, sec. 2-15;
Ordinance 2008121, sec. 2(exh. A., sec. V.F), adopted 10/21/08)
Secs. 60-86–60-113. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 60-114. Meters generally; testing of meters; authority of city manager.
(a) Meters for the measurement of utility services furnished by the city shall be furnished and installed by and
shall remain the property of the city.
(b) Should any consumer demand a meter be tested for accuracy, he shall deposit with the city water
department a sum of money as established by the city council. If the test shows that the meter is registering
within the warranty of the meter manufacturer or is registering less water than is actually used, the deposit shall
become the property of the city; otherwise, the deposit shall be refunded to the user.
(c) Should any meter fail to register correctly the amount of water used by a customer since the previous
reading, the water utilities department shall have the right to average the monthly charge for water on the basis
of any three months' average; provided, however, that the months used for the purpose of making the average
shall be comparable to the months in which the water is used.
(d) The city manager shall have the authority to decide any question which may arise and which is not fully
covered by any of the provisions of this article. and he shall have the right to fix and determine any water rate.
and his decision in such cases shall be final. subject to modification by ordinances enacted by the city council.
(1976 Code. sec. 32-34; 1998 Code. sec. 130-41)
Sec. 60-115. Deposit required.
Applicants for water and/or sewer service shall be required to pay to the city a security deposit to guarantee all
amounts that may become due to the city for water and/or sewer service, which charges shall be an amount
estimated by the city manager or his designee to be equal to the charges for an average two-month period for
similar types of occupancy but in no event to be less than the amount as established by the city council for each
dwelling unit or commercial occupancy. (1976 Code, sec. 32-35; 1998 Code, sec. 130-42)
Sec. 60-116. Refund of deposit.
Refunds of deposits made for utility service shall be made upon the termination of such utility service only after
payment of all indebtedness to the city for such utility service. Application of the deposit may be made in partial
or total settlement of accounts when the supply is cut off for nonpayment of the bill, or for any infraction or
violation of any ordinance. rule or regulation of the city relative to utility services offered by the city. (1976 Code,
sec. 32-36; 1998 Code. sec. 130-43)
Sec. 60-117. Rates established for water.
(a) Residential rate. A residential rate for water is to be charged single-family residential units and to each
separately metered residential unit of all other residential dwellings.
(b) Commercial rate. A commercial rate for water is to be charged to all commercial users.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-37; 1998 Code, sec. 130-44; Ordinance 2010-12-001, sec. 2, adopted 12/7/10)
Sec. 60-118. Payment due date.
All bills for utility service furnished by the city shall be due and payable prior to midnight of the due date on the
receipt of such bill; provided, however, that if such due date shall fall on a Sunday or a legal holiday observed
by the city, then such bill shall be due and payable by midnight of the following business day. (1976 Code. sec.
32-38; 1998 Code, sec. 130-45; Ordinance 2013-10-005, sec. 2, adopted 10/15/13)
Sec. 60-119. Delinquency penalty.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/554
(a) In the event any consumer of utility service furnished by the city shall fail to pay his bill prior to midnight of
the due date the following day a late charge of ten percent of the amount billed shall become immediately due
and payable. Failure to receive a bill does not constitute a waiver by the city to charge a delinquent penalty or
the customer's obligation to pay for services provided.
(b) The foregoing provision shall not be applicable to a person over 60 years of age who has received a
delay of payment pursuant to request until after the 25th day after the date of such bill.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-39; 1998 Code, sec. 130-46; Ordinance 2013-10-005, sec. 3, adopted 10/15/13)
Sec. 60-120. Disconnection for nonpayment.
(a) In the event bills for utility service shall not be paid when the same shall become due, the city shall have
the right to disconnect and discontinue all utility services furnished by the city to the consumer so in arrears.
(b) The foregoing shall not be applicable to a person over 60 years of age who has been granted a delay of
payment until after the 25th day after the date of the bill.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-40; 1998 Code, sec. 130-47)
Sec. 60-121. Bankruptcy of customer.
(a) Upon receipt by the city of notice of the filing of a petition in bankruptcy by any water and/or sewer
customer, the city shall suspend the old account and place in those city records relating to the suspended
account a notice that no attempt be made to collect on the account any charges for water, sewer or garbage
service unpaid as of the date of the bankruptcy filing. The city shall secure an actual water meter reading within
ten working days after receipt of the notice of bankruptcy to be used as a cutoff of the suspended account and
for the initial reading of the new account. If the city is unable to secure access to the premises for an actual
reading, the city may estimate the initial reading on the new account from consumption information contained in
the last bill sent prior to bankruptcy filing.
(b) In addition, the city shall, upon receipt of notice of the filing of the petition in bankruptcy by a water and/or
sewer customer, send a written notice to the representative of the bankrupt estate that a deposit is required to
be made with the water and sewer department as security for continued service. Said deposit shall be made
within 20 days after notification to the representative of the bankrupt estate for each residential dwelling unit or
commercial occupancy of two months' average monthly bills calculated from the previous one year of service to
such premises.
(c) Any bankrupt estate which does not make the required deposit within the 20 days shall be subject to
discontinuation of service.
(d) In no event shall any person seeking relief from the bankruptcy court have service discontinued with
respect to bills outstanding prior to filing of bankruptcy.
(e) Any bankrupt estate which makes a timely deposit, but which does not thereafter make timely payments,
shall be subject to receiving turnoff notices, and may have service discontinued as any other customer. The
deposit required herein shall be used toward payment of any bill for amounts accrued after the date of the
bankruptcy. The deposit required herein may be made only by cash, certified checks and money orders.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-40.1; 1998 Code, sec. 130-48)
Sec. 60-122. Reconnection after disconnection for nonpayment.
In the event that utility service is disconnected or a meter has been cut off for nonpayment of the bill, the
consumer thereof shall have the right to have the same reconnected or turned on only upon the payment of the
outstanding charges and in addition thereto a reconnection or service activation fee as established by the city
council. If the customer has turned on the meter after the city has shut it off or if reinstallation of a water meter
at such location is necessary, an additional fee as established by the city council shall be immediately payable
to the city. (1976 Code, sec. 32-41; 1998 Code, sec. 130-49)
Sec. 60-123. Voluntary discontinuance of service.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/554
Consumers wishing to discontinue the use of any utility service shall give written notice thereof at the city hall.
Failure to do so shall render them liable for the payment of all bills until such notice has been given. (1976
Code, sec. 32-42; 1998 Code, sec. 130-50)
Sec. 60-124. Rates charged by franchised public utilities to be approved by city council.
The city council shall fix and approve the rates charged by any private public utility company franchised by the
city and doing business within the city. It shall be unlawful for any such public utility company or any officer or
employee thereof to assess or charge for services rendered any rate other than the rate so fixed and approved.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-43; 1998 Code, sec. 130-51)
Sec. 60-125. Water taps.
(a) Tapping charges for all water meter installations shall be as established by the city council.
(b) All charges made for taps in excess of one inch in diameter shall be upon a cost plus ten percent basis,
such estimate to be based on tabor and material cost to the city as well as for any necessary resurfacing of
street.
(c) All water taps shall be placed no further than three feet from the face of the curb.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-43.1; 1998 Code, sec. 130-52)
Sec. 60-126. Normal sanitary sewer rate.
The following schedule of rates per month or a fraction thereof shall be the basis for determining charges to all
customers for rendering sanitary sewer services, where sewage produced by such customer is normal sewage
and where such customer is located entirely within the city:
(1) A monthly service charge shall be paid by all residential customers.
(2) A minimum monthly service charge shall be paid by all commercial customers, which shall
include the first 5,000 gallons of water used or wastewater produced, as more specifically set forth
hereinafter.
(3) A monthly volume charge shall also be charged to all customers, per 1,000 gallons of water
used or wastewater produced, as more specifically set forth hereinafter.
(4) The monthly volume charge for residential class customers will be based on the individual
customer's average monthly water use during the previous winter quarter months of December,
January and February, but in no event shall the volume used to compute this monthly charge exceed
15,000 gallons. The volumes used to compute these charges are based on the amount of water
used by the residential customer, as measured by a meter. Where no previous winter quarter
average is available from the records, the director shall estimate a volume not to exceed 6000
gallons per month per resident, or 15,000 gallons per living unit. The monthly charges to commercial
and industrial class customers will be based on total water use as measured by appropriate water
meters, with the provision that, if a customer can show to the satisfaction of the director of the
waterworks department that a significant portion of the metered water usage does not enter the
sanitary sewer system, the customer will be charged for only that volume entering the sewers, as
determined by a method approved by the director.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-44; 1998 Code, sec. 130-53; Ordinance 2013-10-003 adopted 10/15/13)
Sec. 60-127. Determination of sewage volume for customers with noncity water supply; sewage
charge for multifamily uses without individual meters.
(a) All customers connected to the sanitary sewer system who have a source of water supply that is in
addition to, or in lieu of, the city water supply, and is capable of and liable to discharge into the city sanitary
sewer, in the judgment of the director, must have a meter approved by the city water department on that source
of water supply. The volume charge as set forth hereinbefore shall be based on the sum of the volumes
delivered by all sources of supply. Such method of volume determination shall not apply if the customer installs
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/554
a meter approved by the city water department on the wastewater produced by the customer before it enters
the city sanitary sewer.
(b) Multifamily (apartment) developments and mobile home or HUD code manufactured housing parks
without individual water meters shall be charged a rate equal to the residential sewer charge (without regard to
water usage) multiplied by the number of residential dwelling units therein. This rate shall be applicable whether
such customers are served by city water supply or not.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-45; 1998 Code, sec. 130-54; Ordinance 97-970039, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/97)
Sec. 60-128. Rates charged to city departments.
Charges paid by municipal departments for water and sewage services shall be paid at the rates in effect at
that time. (1976 Code, sec. 32-46; 1998 Code, sec. 130-55)
Sec. 60-129. Sewer taps and laterals; charges for street repair.
(a) The portion of the building sewer known as the sewer tap and that portion known as the sewer service
lateral shall be constructed only by city forces or by a contractor employed or approved by the city. Such
construction shall be in accordance with the general specifications of the city water department. The plumber or
other person seeking to connect to a city sanitary sewer shall apply for a sewer tap and/or sewer service lateral
at the office of the water department. The plumber shall obtain a written description or sketch from the office of
the water department showing the approximate location of the sanitary sewer serving the property, and the
water department, upon application, shall furnish such written description or sketch to the plumber and to the
plumbing inspector. Charges for construction of a sewer tap and/or service lateral shall be due and payable
when the application is made.
(b) There will be charges as established by the city council for a sewer tap and/or sewer service lateral of the
size eight inches or less, to be installed by city forces.
(c) There will be charges as established by the city council for street repair to permanent type paving,
including concrete, hot mix or flexible base and penetration type paving described as water tap and sewer tap
and/or sewer service lateral.
(d) Charges for all taps of any size installed by a contractor employed or approved by the city, and charges
for sewer taps exceeding eight inches installed by city forces, shall be the installation cost of materials,
equipment and labor. Street and alley repair charges shall be paid in accordance with rates established by the
director of the department of public works.
(e) 1f the sewer tap and/or sewer service lateral is installed by a contractor employed or approved by the city,
the charges shall be the actual cost of construction as established by the bid item in the construction contract
(f) The charges set forth in this section shall be in addition to the applicable fee or fees provided for in the city
plumbing code. No plumbing permit for work which involves the construction of the sewer tap and/or sewer
service lateral shall be issued until the charges have been paid and receipt evidencing such payment is
presented to the person issuing the plumbing permit.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-48; 1998 Code, sec. 130-56)
Sec. 60-130. Installation of taps and sewer laterals prior to street paving.
(a) In cases where the city council has ordered an unimproved street to be paved and such unimproved
street contains existing water or sewer mains but no sanitary sewer, and water taps have been extended to one
or more of the abutting lots, in order to prevent future paving cuts the city waterworks department is authorized
to install or cause to be installed a sanitary sewer tap or water tap to connect the water or sewer mains to each
such lot.
(b) The city waterworks department is authorized to make a charge according to the schedule determined by
the director against the owner of each abutting lot served by each water tap constructed.
(c) The city waterworks department is authorized to make a charge against the owner of each abutting lot
served by each sewer tap and/or sewer service lateral constructed.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/554
(d) If the applicable charges for water or sanitary sewer taps installed hereunder are not paid prior to the date
such street is improved by paving, an additional $30.00 shall be charged for each water or sanitary sewer tap.
These charges shall be payable at the time the property is connected to the water or sewer line of the city.
(e) For the purpose of this section, the term “sanitary sewer tap” means a connection to a public sanitary
sewer located in a public street and extended to a point approximately three feet behind the curbline adjacent to
the property served thereby.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-49; 1998 Code, sec. 130-57)
Sec. 60-131. Rates for sales of natural gas.
(a) Effective immediately upon passage of this rate section, the maximum general service rate for sales of
natural gas rendered to residential and commercial consumers within the city limits, by TXU Gas Distribution, a
division of TXU Gas Company, a state corporation, its successors and assigns, is hereby fixed. In regard to
industrial customers in the city, and in accordance with Texas Utilities Code sec. 104.003(b), contractual
industrial gas rates are considered to be just and reasonable.
(b) The residential and commercial rates set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be adjusted upward of
downward from a base of $2.7535 per Mcf by a gas cost adjustment factor expressed as an amount per 1,000
cubic feet (Met) of natural gas for changes in the intercompany city gate rate charge as authorized by the
Railroad Commission of Texas or other regulatory body having jurisdiction for gas delivered to the city's
distribution system. The industrial and transportation rates shall be adjusted in accordance with their contract
terms.
(c) Residential and commercial rates shall also be subject to weather normalization adjustments.
(d) The residential and commercial rates set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be adjusted upward
or downward for changes in taxes and other governmental impositions, rental fees or changes. Industrial rates
shall be adjusted in accordance with their contract.
(e) In addition to the rates set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the company shall have the right to
collect such reasonable charges as are necessary to conduct its business and to carry out its reasonable rules
and regulations. Services for which no charge is set out may be performed and charged for by the company at
a level established by the normal forces of competition.
(f) In addition to the rates set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the company is authorized to recover the
current rate case expense through a surcharge designed for a six-month nominal recovery period. The
surcharge per Mcf will be calculated by dividing the rate case expense to be recovered by one-half of the
adjusted annual sales volume to residential and commercial customers. The company will provide monthly
status reports to the city to account for the collection of rate case expense.
(g) The rates set forth in this section may be changed and amended by either the city or the company in the
manner provided by law. Service hereunder is subject to the orders of regulatory bodies having jurisdiction, and
to the company's rules and regulations currently on file in the company's office.
(h) Unless otherwise noted herein, other than TXU Gas Distribution (a named party), no person or entity has
been admitted as a party to the rate proceedings.
(1998 Code, sec. 130-58; Ordinance 200111, secs. 1–8, adopted 1/16/01)
Secs. 60-132–60-160. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. INDUSTRIAL WASTE REGULATIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 60-161. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/554
Abnormal sewage means any industrial waste discharged into the authority sanitary sewer which when
analyzed shows by weight a daily average total suspended solids (TSS) concentration greater than 240 mg/l or
a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) concentration greater than 210 mg/l. In addition, the director may judge
independently a waste's suitability for discharge to the POTW based upon BOD, TSS or other characteristics,
and classify the waste as abnormal. Any waste in this classification must be acceptable for discharge into the
POTW as defined in this article.
Act means the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended.
Authority means the city.
Authorized representative means the authorized signatories for wastewater discharge permit applications and
for reports submitted under this article and includes the following:
(1) A responsible corporate officer, if the discharger submitting the application or report is a
corporation. This includes the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of the corporation in
charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking
functions for the corporation.
(2) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more
than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in
second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the
manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(3) For a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or the proprietor, respectively.
(4) The principal executive officer or director having responsibility for the overall operation of the
facility if the discharger is a federal, state or local governmental entity, or their agents.
(5) A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4)
of this definition if:
a. The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsections (1), (2), (3)
or (4) of this definition;
b. The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates (such as a plant manager),
a position of equivalent responsibility or having overall responsibility for environmental matters
for the company; and
c. The written authorization is submitted to the city.
If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility,
a new authorization must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports signed by an
authorized representative.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, as specified in Standard Methods, in five days at 20
degrees Celsius, expressed as parts per million by weight or in terms of milligrams per liter.
Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams or wastewater from any portion of a discharger's
wastewater treatment equipment or pretreatment facility.
Categorical pretreatment standards means limitations on pollutant discharges to POTWs promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with section 307 of the Clean Water Act that apply to specified process wastewater of
particular industrial categories (40 CFR 403.6 and 405 through 471).
CFR means Code of Federal Regulations.
Composite sample means a mixture of grab samples collected at the same sample point at different times and
composed of not less than four samples. The series of samples may be collected on a time or flow proportional
basis.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/554
(1) The term “time proportional composite sample” means a sampling method which combines
discrete samples of constant volume collected at constant time intervals (e.g., 200-milliliter samples
collected every half hour for a 24-hour period).
(2) The term “flow proportional composite sample” means a sampling method which combines
discrete samples collected over time, based on the flow of the wastestream being sampled. There
are two methods used to collect this type of sample. One method collects a constant sample volume
at time intervals which vary based on the stream flow (e.g., 200 milliliters of sample collected for
every 5,000 gallons discharged). The other method collects samples of varying volume, based on
stream flow, at constant time intervals.
Cooling water means the water discharged from any system of condensation such as air conditioning, cooling
or refrigeration, or water used as a coolant in cooling towers where the only pollutant is thermal.
Director means the director of public works of the city or his authorized representative.
Discharger means any nonresidential user discharging an effluent into a POTW by means of pipes, conduits,
pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, intercepting
ditches and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto. The term “discharger” includes owners
and occupants of such premises.
Garbage means solid waste from domestic or commercial preparation, cooking or dispensing of food or from
the handling, storage and sale of produce.
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to the
flow of the wastestream and without consideration of time. The sample is collected over a period of time not
exceeding 15 minutes.
Industrial waste means solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade, or
business process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, both:
(1) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and
(2) Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)), including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
Maximum daily average means the maximum concentration of a substance allowed in a discharge as
determined from a laboratory test of a daily composite sample. When wastewater are collected and stored for
more than a day prior to discharge, such as batch discharges, a laboratory test of a grab sample of the stored
wastewater may be used to determine the maximum daily average concentration.
Maximum grab means the maximum concentration of a substance allowed in a discharge as determined from a
laboratory test of a grab sample.
mg/l means milligrams per liter.
New source means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
(1) The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is
located;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/554
(2) The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source;
(3) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or
installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same
general type of activity as the existing source should be considered; or
(4) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather
than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of subsection (2) or (3) of this section but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment. Construction of a new source as defined under this
subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has:
a. Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program;
1. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
2. Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation or removal of
existing buildings, structures, facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly
or installation of new source facilities or equipment.
b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection.
NPDES means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program of the Environmental
Protection Agency.
O and M means operation and maintenance.
Other wastes means decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar,
chemicals and all other substances except sewage and industrial wastes.
Owner or occupant means the person, firm or public or private corporation using the lot, parcel of land, building
or premises connected to and discharging sewage, industrial wastewater or liquid into the sanitary sewage
system of the city, and who pays, or is legally responsible for the payment of, water rates or charges made
against the said lot, parcel of land, building or premises, if connected to the water distribution system of the city,
or who would pay or be legally responsible for such payment if so connected.
Pass through means the discharge of pollutants through the POTW into navigable waters in quantities or
concentrations which are a cause of or significantly contribute to a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
NPDES permit.
Permit means a wastewater discharge permit, issued to nondomestic dischargers of industrial waste into the
sanitary sewerage system of the POTW.
Person means any individual, business entity, partnership, corporation, governmental agency, or political
subdivision, or any agent or employee thereof.
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of
solution, measured and calculated in accordance with Standard Methods.
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of
the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sanitary sewer.
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other
than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/554
Pretreatment standards, national pretreatment standards or standards means any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act, which
applies to industrial users. The term “pretreatment standards,” “national pretreatment standards” or “standards”
includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5.
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means any sewage treatment plant owned and operated by the
authority or any other city or political subdivision receiving the city's sanitary sewer discharge and the sewers,
pipes and conveyances that convey wastewater to the POTW. The term “POTW” includes any devices and
systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a
liquid nature.
Sanitary sewer means a publicly owned pipe or conduit designed to collect and transport industrial waste and
domestic sewage to the POTW.
Severe property damage.
(1) The term “severe property damage” means substantial physical damage to property, damage
to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent
loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass.
(2) The term “severe property damage” does not mean economic loss caused by delays in
production.
Sewage means water-carried human wastes or a combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings. institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water,
stormwater or other waters as may be present.
Significant change means an increase or decrease in the volume of wastewater discharged by more than 20
percent from the data submitted in the permit application, or the deletion or addition of any pollutant regulated
by the authority or by a categorical standard. Volumes are those measured by the water service meter, a
verifiable estimate or a permanently installed effluent flow meter approved by the authority.
Significant industrial user means all industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards and any other
industrial user that:
(1) Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to a POTW
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling or boiler blowdown wastewater);
(2) Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry
weather hydraulic or organic capacity of a POTW; or
(3) Is designated as such by the authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting a POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
Upon a finding that a noncategorical industrial user meeting the criteria for a significant industrial user has no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting a POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the authority may at any time on its own initiative, or in response to a petition received from a
noncategorical industrial user, determine such user is not a significant industrial user.
Slug or slug load means any substance (including biochemical oxygen demand) released in a discharge at a
flow rate and/or concentration which will cause a violation of the specific discharge prohibitions in section 60-
163(b), (d) or (e) or hydraulically overload the sanitary sewer collection system. The term “slug” or “slug load”
includes, but is not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
Standard methods means Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, a publication
prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks
Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation, as it may be amended from time to time.
Total suspended solids (TSS) means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water,
sewage or other liquid and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/554
Unpolluted water or waste means any water or liquid waste containing none of the following:
(1) Phenols or other substances to an extent imparting taste and odor in receiving waters;
(2) Toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution;
(3) Noxious or odorous gases;
(4) More than 10,000 parts per million, by weight, of dissolved solids, of which not more than
2,500 parts per million are chloride;
(5) More than ten parts per million each of TSS and BOD;
(6) Color not exceeding 50 color units;
(7) A pH value of less than 5.0 or higher than 12.0; and
(8) Any water or waste approved for discharge into a stream or waterway by the appropriate state
authority.
Upset means an exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of
noncompliance with the standards established in this article, due to factors beyond the reasonable control of
the discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper
operation thereof.
Wastewater means industrial waste, sewage or any other waste that has been used by and discharged to the
POTW from any industry, commercial enterprise, household or other water consumer, including that which may
be combined with any groundwater, surface water or stormwater.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-55; 1998 Code, sec. 130-81; Ordinance 200101-3200, sec. 1, adopted 1/2/01)
Sec. 60-162. Purpose and policy.
(a) This article provides for prohibitions on discharges of certain substances into the public sewer system of
the city from all sources, domestic, commercial, or industrial. A further purpose of this article is to set forth
uniform requirements for industrial dischargers into the POTW authority wastewater collection and treatment
systems, and to enable the authority to protect the public health in conformance with all applicable state and
federal laws relating thereto. Parts of this article are enacted pursuant to regulations established by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as set forth in 40 CFR 403.
(b) All categorical pretreatment standards, lists of toxic pollutants, industrial categories and other standards
and categories which have been or which will be promulgated by the EPA shall be incorporated as a part of this
article, as will EPA regulations regarding sewage pretreatment established pursuant to the act, and amendment
of this article to incorporate such changes shall not be necessary. The authority shall maintain current
standards and regulations, which shall be available for inspection and copying.
(c) The objectives of this article are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the authority wastewater system which will interfere
with the normal operation of the system, including interference with the use or disposal of sludge, or
contaminate the resulting sludge;
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the authority wastewater system which do not
receive adequate treatment in the POTW, and which will pass through the system into receiving
waters or the atmosphere, or which are otherwise incompatible with the system; and
(3) Improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim municipal and industrial wastewater and sludges.
(d) The regulation of discharges into the authority wastewater system under this article shall be
accomplished through the issuance of permits, as specified in section 60-165, and by monitoring and inspection
of facilities, according to this article.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/554
(e) The director shall have the authority to promulgate such administrative regulations as are from time to
time necessary for the enforcement of this article.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-56; 1998 Code, sec. 130-82; Ordinance 200101-3200, sec. 1, adopted 1/2/01)
Sec. 60-163. Discharge prohibitions and limitations.
(a) Discharge of wastewater to storm drains and watercourses. It shall be unlawful for any person to
discharge or cause to be discharged any wastewater into any storm drain or watercourse within the city, except
for those persons with approved permits for such discharges.
(b) Discharge of unpolluted water to sanitary sewer. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or drainage from downspouts, yard drains, yard
fountains and ponds or lawn sprays into any sanitary sewer. Water from swimming pools, unpolluted industrial
water or cooling water from various equipment shall not be discharged into sanitary sewers if an alternate
acceptable means of disposal is available. If an alternate acceptable means of disposal is not available, such
water may be discharged into the sanitary sewer, provided the water meets the discharge prohibitions and
limitations of this article.
(c) Unapproved discharges prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge into the
sanitary sewer any wastewater or solid, including trucked or hauled wastes, unless such deposit or discharge,
at a designated discharge point, has been approved by the authority.
(d) Prohibited wastewater constituents. No person shall contribute or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, into any public sanitary sewer, any of the following described substances, materials, water or waste:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees
Celsius).
(2) Any water or waste which contains wax, grease, oil, plastic or other substance that will solidify
or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees to 150 degrees Fahrenheit,
thereby contributing to clogging, plugging or otherwise restricting the flow of wastewater through the
collection system.
(3) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewer system or POTW, including, but
not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60
degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. This includes flammable or
explosive liquids, solids or gases such as gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, etc., which by
reason of their chemical properties or quantity may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction, to
cause fire or explosion.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities capable of causing obstruction in the flow in sewers
or other interference with proper operation of the POTW, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch
manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint
residues or bulk solids.
(5) Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no
particle greater than one half inch in any dimension.
(6) Any noxious or malodorous substance which can form a gas which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, is capable of causing objectionable odors or hazards to life or forming
solids in concentrations exceeding limits established in this article, or which creates any other
condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes, or requires unusual provisions, attention
or expense to handle such material.
(7) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction are
capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or which may prevent entry into the sewers for
their maintenance and repair.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/554
(8) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or treatment residues, sludges, or
scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or interfere with the reclamation process as
determined pursuant to criteria in this article. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW
cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under section 405 of the act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting
sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state
standards applicable to the sludge management method being used.
(9) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES or other disposal system
permits, or the receiving stream water quality standards.
(10) Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but
not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(11) Any slug load.
(12) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
(13) Any dump or slug load of waste containing concentrated organic solvents or mixtures of
solvents which are defined as hazardous by the federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
(14) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that
will cause obstruction of flow in the sewer line, or interference or pass through.
(e) Wastewater limitations. No person shall contribute or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, into
any sanitary sewer any wastewater containing or having:
(1) Free or emulsified fats, oils, and greases exceeding 200 mg/l as determined by the freon
extraction analytical procedure. A concentration of 500 mg/l is allowable, providing the authority has
specifically determined that the waste:
a. Derives from animal or vegetable materials;
b. Biodegrades readily in the POTW;
c. Does not cause an obstruction of flow in the sewer line; and
d. The discharge is pretreated by discharge through an approved grease trap or other
pretreatment process.
(2) Acids or alkalis capable of causing damage to sewage disposal structures or personnel or
having a pH value lower than 5.0 or higher than 12.0.
(3) Metals in the form of compounds or elements with total concentrations exceeding the
following:
Maximum Daily
Average (mg/l)
Maximum Grab
(mg/l)
Arsenic 0.1 0.3
Cadmium 0.3 0.3
Chromium 5.0 5.0
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/554
Copper 3.0 4.75
Lead 2.9 2.9
Mercury 0.01 0.01
Nickel 2.0 2.0
Silver 0.1 2.0
Zinc 5.0 5.0
(4) Cyanide or cyanogens compounds (expressed as total CN-) in excess of one mg/l.
(5) Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide in excess often parts per million.
(6) Radioactive wastes or isotopes with a half-life or concentration exceeding limits established by
the authority in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(7) Toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure
or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
pass through the treatment plant and impair aquatic life in receiving water, as expressed by the
results of acute or chronic toxicity tests of the POTW effluent.
(8) A temperature which inhibits or interferes with biological activity in the POTW treatment plant.
In no case shall wastewater be introduced which would have a temperature exceeding 40 degrees
Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) upon entering the POTW treatment plant.
(9) Pollutants in excess of the limitations established in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard set forth in title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
(10) Wastewaters which emanate vapors causing the atmosphere in the sewer system to exceed
20 percent of the lower explosive limit in the immediate area of the discharge.
(11) Limit for oil and gas at 250 mg/l.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-57; 1998 Code, sec. 130-83; Ordinance 200101-3200, sec. 1, adopted 1/2/01)
Sec. 60-164. Special rules relating to industrial dischargers.
(a) Compliance with standards.
(1) State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all dischargers
which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this article or any other applicable ordinance.
(2) No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way for the purpose of
diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with the standards set forth in this article.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/554
(3) Where deemed appropriate, the authority may apply mass limitations expressed in pounds per
day of pollutant discharged.
(b) Accidental discharges. Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited or
regulated materials or substances established by this article. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's cost and expense. When
applicable, detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the authority for review, and shall be approved by the authority before construction of the facility.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the authority shall not relieve the discharger
from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. Dischargers
shall notify the authority immediately upon the occurrence of a slug or accidental discharge of substances
prohibited by this article. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of
waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken, and be signed by the discharger's authorized
representative. Any discharger discharging slugs of prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss or
damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the authority under state or federal
law. Each employer shall instruct all applicable employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with
respect to emergency notification procedures, including the proper telephone number of the authority to be
notified.
(c) Wastewater discharges into private sewer systems. All dischargers who discharge wastewater into a
private sewer system shall comply with this article, including section 60-J 65(a); provided, however, that flow
measurement may be based on metered water consumption. Each discharger shall provide an agreement,
signed by the owner of the sewer system, which authorizes the authority's personnel to enter onto the owner's
property for purposes of inspection and monitoring of discharger's premises, and for enforcement pursuant to
the terms of this article.
(d) Prohibition of bypass.
(1) Bypass of a discharger's treatment equipment or treatment facility is prohibited and the
authority may take enforcement action against the discharger unless:
a. The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property
damage;
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as use of auxiliary treatment
facilities, retention of untreated wastewater, or maintenance during normal periods of
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if, in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment,
adequate backup equipment should have been installed to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or maintenance; and
c. The discharger submitted advance written notice of the need for a bypass.
(2) The discharger shall submit oral notice to the authority of an unanticipated bypass that
exceeds categorical standards or other discharge limits within 24 hours of the time the discharger
becomes aware of the bypass. Written notice shall be provided within five days of the time the
discharger becomes aware of the bypass. The written notice shall include a description of the
bypass and its causes, duration of the bypass, and steps taken to prevent the reoccurrence of the
bypass, and must be signed by the authorized representative of the discharger.
(3) The authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if it
determines that the bypass will meet all of the conditions of subsection (d)(1) of this section.
(e) Notification of hazardous waste discharges. All dischargers shall notify the authority, the EPA regional
waste management division director, and the state water commission hazardous and solid waste division
director, in writing, of any discharge into a POTW of any substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Any notification under this subsection must be submitted in conformance
with 40 CFR 403.12(p).
(1976 Code, sec. 32-58; 1998 Code, sec. 130-84; Ordinance 200101-3200, sec. 1, adopted 1/2/01)
Sec. 60-165. Administration by permit.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/554
(a) Classification of dischargers and permits.
(1) All nondomestic users which discharge into the sanitary sewer system of the authority shall be
grouped according to the following definitions:
a. Group I-Significant industrial users.
b. Group II-Commercial facilities and small industrial users: Those commercial facilities and
industrial users which are not included in group I and which do not discharge a significant
amount of regulated pollutants on a regular basis. Examples include automotive service shops,
small food processors and photographic developing shops.
c. Group III-Classed high strength users: Restaurants, carwashes or other businesses which
can be classed according to an average strength or abnormal strength of their wastewater.
d. Group IV-Wastewater haulers: Transporters of wastewater desiring to discharge into the
authority's sanitary sewage system.
(2) All group I dischargers shall submit a wastewater discharge permit application to the authority
on a form provided by the authority.
(3) No new group I user shall be allowed to discharge until issued a valid permit.
(4) The authority will evaluate the completed applications and data furnished by the discharger
and may require additional information. If, after evaluation, the application is deemed satisfactory,
then a wastewater discharge permit shall be issued within 60 days after the evaluation is complete.
The wastewater discharge permit shall be subject to the terms and conditions specified herein and
to the regulations of the authority.
(5) If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing within 30 days of the
reasons for such denial. If denial is based on the authority's determination that the applicant cannot
meet the wastewater discharge limitations of this article, the authority may specify that the applicant
be required to provide pretreatment of the waste before it is deemed acceptable for sewer
discharge.
(6) Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to
comply with this article, pursuant to subsection (a)(5) of this section, the discharger shall provide a
declaration of the shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or implement added operational and maintenance activities.
a. The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for
the discharger to comply with the requirements of this article, including, but not limited to, dates
relating to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, and all
other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this article.
b. The time increments between milestone dates established shall be the shortest
practicable for the completion of the required work. Under no circumstances shall the authority
permit a time increment for a single step in the compliance schedule to exceed nine months.
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established
for applicable categorical pretreatment standards.
c. Not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for
compliance, the discharger shall submit a progress report to the authority, including a
statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that
milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the discharger to return the
construction to the approved schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse
between such progress reports to the authority.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/554
(7) Prior to the approval of a permit, unless exempted by the authority, all dischargers shall
provide monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and/or flow measurement of wastewater
before entering the sanitary sewer of the authority. Each monitoring facility shall be located on the
discharger's premises; provided, however, where such location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship to the discharger, the authority may approve the placement of monitoring facilities in the
public street or sidewalk area. All monitoring equipment and facilities shall be maintained in a safe
and proper operating condition at the expense of the discharger. Failure to provide proper monitoring
facilities shall be grounds for denial of a permit
(b) Permit conditions. Permits are issued to a specific discharger for a specific operation and are not
assignable to another discharger or transferable to any other location without the prior written approval of the
authority. Permits may include, as applicable, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
(1) Limits on the average and maximum amount of certain wastewater constituents to be
discharged;
(2) Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge and/or requirements for flow
regulation and equalization;
(3) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
(4) Location of approved discharge points;
(5) Additional conditions as the authority may reasonably require under particular circumstances,
applying to the monitoring of a given discharge, including sampling locations, frequency of sampling,
number, types and standards for tests, laboratory analysis method and reporting schedule;
(6) Compliance schedules;
(7) Requirements for submission of special technical reports or discharge reports where same
differ from those prescribed by this article;
(8) Duration of permit;
(9) Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements; and
(10) Statement of nontransferability.
(c) Reporting requirements for dischargers.
(1) Baseline report. Within 180 days following the effective date for new or revised categorical
pretreatment standards, or at least 90 days prior to commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW by a new discharger, any discharger subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard shall submit to the authority a report (in a form provided by the authority),
indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its
discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, what
additional O and M or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards. This report shall be signed by an authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional as stated in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(6).
(2) Ninety-day compliance report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance by the
discharger with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or 90 days following commencement
of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new discharger, any discharger subject to
categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the authority a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge, and the average
and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, what
additional O and M or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or requirements. This report shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the discharger.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/554
(3) Periodic compliance reports. Any discharger subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
made a part of this article shall submit to the authority a report indicating the nature and
concentration of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent which are limited by the
categorical pretreatment standards hereof. Reports are required after the compliance date of such a
pretreatment standard, or in the case of a new discharger, after commencement of the discharge,
and are to be submitted during the months of July and January of each year. In addition, where
applicable, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated average and maximum
daily flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow specified in section
60-165(b)(1) and (2). Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement; provided,
however, where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the authority may accept reports of average
and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques. The authority, taking into consideration
extenuating factors, may authorize the submission of said reports on months other than those
specified in this subsection and subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section.
(4) Analysis and sampling procedures. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with
procedures contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures
approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
approved by the EPA. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutants in question, or where the EPA determines that the 40 CFR 136 techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated
analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures
suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the EPA.
(5) Reporting of additional monitoring. If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of
this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the authority, using the
procedures prescribed in subsection (c)(4) of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report.
(6) Significant noncategorical industrial user reporting. Significant noncategorical industrial users
shall submit to the authority at least once every six months (on dates as specified by the authority) a
description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the
authority. These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered
by the report and performed in accordance with the techniques described in subsection (c)(4) of this
section. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the authority in lieu of the significant
noncategorical industrial user.
(7) Notification of changed discharge. Dischargers shall give prior written notification to the
authority of any significant change in the volume or character of pollutants in the discharge.
(8) Authority monitoring. Sampling and analysis for the reports required by subsections (c)(1), (2),
(3) and (6) of this section may be performed by the authority in lieu of the discharger. If all
information required for the report, including flow data, is collected by the authority, the discharger
will not be required to submit the report or certifications.
(9) Signatory requirements. All applications and compliance reports submitted to the authority
must contain the following certification statement and be signed by the authorized representative: “I
certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(d) Inspection and flow measurement.
(1) Inspection. The authority may inspect the facilities of any discharger to determine compliance
with the requirements of this article. The discharger shall allow the authority or its representatives to
enter upon the premises of the discharger at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, or examination of records. All reports and records related to the provisions of this article
shall be made available for copying and inspection by the authority. The authority shall have the right
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/554
to set upon the discharger's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and metering or measuring operations. The inspectors, agents or
representatives of the authority charged with the enforcement of this section shall be deemed to be
performing a governmental function for the benefit and health and welfare of the general public, and
neither the authority nor any individual inspector, agent or representative shall be held liable for any
loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused or alleged to have been caused as a result of the
performance of such governmental function. The failure or refusal of such owner or discharger to
comply with this provision shall be grounds for the disconnection of water or sewer services to the
facility. The industrial waste discharged or deposited into the sanitary sewers shall be subject to
periodic inspection and sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the authority. Samples
shall be collected in such manner as to be representative of the character and concentration of the
waste under operational conditions. The laboratory methods used in the examination of said waste
shall be those set forth in 40 CFR 136. The determination of the character and concentration of
industrial waste shall be made at such times and on such schedules as may be established by the
authority. Should a discharger desire a determination of the quality of such industrial waste be made
at some time other than that scheduled by the authority, such special determination may be made by
the authority at the expense of the owner or discharger.
(2) Measurement of flow. The volume of flow used in computing sewage charges shall be based
upon metered water consumption or discharge as shown in the records of meter readings
maintained by the city water department. Where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the director
that a substantial portion of the metered water does not enter the sanitary sewer, the director may
require or permit the installation of additional approved meters at the owner's expense, to measure
the quantity of water actually entering the sewer system. If approved by the director, the measured
quantity of water actually entering the sewer system will be used to determine the sewer service
charge. Any discharger who procures all or part of its water supply from sources other than the city
water department, all or part of which is subsequently discharged into the sanitary sewer, shall install
and maintain at its expense an effluent meter or flow-measuring device approved by the director for
the purpose of determining the proper volume of flow to be used in computing sewer service
charges. Such meters or measuring devices shall be read monthly. If the director determines that it
is not practicable to measure the quantity or quality of waste by the aforesaid meters or monitoring
devices, the quantity or quality of the waste shall be determined in any manner or method the
director may find practicable in order to arrive at the percentage of water entering the sanitary
sewage system of the authority and/or the quality of the sewage to be used to determine the sewer
service charge.
(e) Permit modifications.
(1) The authority reserves the right to amend any permit issued hereunder in order to ensure
compliance by the authority with applicable laws and regulations. The authority may amend any
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following:
a. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
b. Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's operation processes, or
discharge volume or character, which were not considered in drafting the effective permit.
c. A change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
d. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the authority's
collection and treatment systems, POTW personnel or the receiving waters.
e. Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit.
f. Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in
any required reporting.
g. To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.
h. To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/554
i. Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any
applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and regulations.
(2) All categorical pretreatment standards promulgated and adopted by the EPA after the effective
date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall automatically become a part of this
article. Where a discharger. subject to a categorical pretreatment standard. has not previously
submitted an application for a permit as required by subsection (a)(2) of this section. the discharger
shall apply for a permit from the authority within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable
categorical pretreatment standard by the EPA. In addition. the discharger with an existing permit
shall submit to the authority. within 180 days after promulgation of an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. the information required by subsection (c)(1) of this section. The discharger
shall be informed of any proposed changes in its permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of
change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
(f) Confidential information.
(1) All information and data submitted by a discharger to the POTW may be submitted to any state
or federal agency governing the POTW. Such information shall be considered subject to public
disclosure; provided, however, that the discharger may request that information not be subject to
public disclosure, in accordance with 40 CFR 2, as follows:
a. A discharger may assert a business confidentiality claim covering part or all of the
information in a manner described subsection (f)(2) of this section, and that information
covered by such a claim will be disclosed only by means of the procedures set forth in
subsection (f)(2) of this section.
b. If no claim of business confidentiality is asserted, all information will be subject to public
disclosure without further notice to the discharger.
(2) Method and time of asserting business confidentiality claim. A discharger which is submitting
information to the authority may assert a business confidentiality claim covering the information by
placing on or attaching to the information, at the time it is submitted to the authority, a cover sheet,
stamped or typed legend, or other suitable form of notice employing language such as “trade
secret,” “proprietary,” or “company confidential.” Allegedly confidential portions of otherwise
nonconfidential documents should be clearly identified by the discharger, and may be submitted
separately to facilitate identification and handling by the authority. If the discharger desires
confidential treatment only until a certain date or until the occurrence of a certain event, the notice
should so state.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prevent the disclosure of information and data regarding the
nature and content of a discharger's effluent, and the frequency of discharge. or a standard or
limitation to be met by the discharger, and this information shall be available to the public with no
restrictions. Effluent data which cannot be held as confidential is as defined in 40 CFR 2.302.
(4) The provisions of this section shall be subject to any public disclosure requirements which may
exist under Texas Government Code ch. 552.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-59; 1998 Code, sec. 130-85; Ordinance 200101-3200, sec. 1, adopted 1/2/01)
Sec. 60-166. Enforcement.
(a) Revocation of permit. The authority may revoke the permit or terminate water or sewer service of any
discharger which fails to:
(1) Factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
(2) Report significant changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics;
(3) Allow reasonable access to the discharger's premises by representatives of the authority for
the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/554
(4) Pay sewer charges;
(5) Meet compliance schedules; or
(6) Fulfill the conditions of its permit, this article or to obey any final judicial order with respect
thereto.
(b) Notification of violation; administrative adjustment. Whenever the authority finds that any discharger has
engaged in conduct which justifies revocation of a permit, pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the
authority shall serve or cause to be served upon such discharger a written notice, either by personal delivery or
by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation. Within 30
days of the date of receipt of the notice, the discharger shall respond in person or in writing to the authority,
advising of its position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the parties shall meet to ascertain the veracity
of the allegations and, where necessary, establish a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof.
(c) Show cause hearing. Where the violation of subsection (a) of this section is not corrected by means of
administrative adjustment, the authority may order any violating discharger to show cause, before the authority
or its duly authorized representative, why the proposed permit revocation action should not be taken. A written
notice shall be served on the discharger by personal service, or by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the authority or its designee regarding the
violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, and the proposed enforcement action, and
directing the discharger to show cause before the authority or its designee why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served no less than ten days before the hearing.
Service may be made on any agent, officer, or authorized representative of the discharger. The authority shall
then enter appropriate orders with respect to the alleged improper activities, if any.
(d) Right of appeal of administrative ruling. Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to
request in writing an interpretation or ruling by the authority on any matter covered by this article and shall be
entitled to a prompt written reply. In the event that such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of
performance or compliance with this article or deals with a permit issued pursuant hereto for which enforcement
activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject, receipt of a discharger's request shall stay all enforcement
proceedings pending receipt of the aforesaid written reply; provided, however, the authority may take any action
it deems necessary to protect its wastewater collection and treatment system or to comply with its NPDES
permit or to comply with any contract the authority has for the treatment of wastewater.
(e) Judicial proceedings. The authority, with respect to the conduct of any discharger contrary to the
provisions of this article, may authorize its attorney to commence any legal action in a court of competent
jurisdiction for equitable and/or legal relief.
(f) Emergency suspension of service and discharge permits. The authority may, for good cause shown,
suspend water or wastewater service to the discharger's facility when it appears to the authority that an actual
or threatened discharge presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of
persons or substantial danger to the environment, interfere with the operation of a POTW, or violate any
pretreatment limits imposed by this article or any permit issued pursuant to this article. Any discharger notified
of the suspension of the authority's water or wastewater service and/or the discharger's permit shall, within a
reasonable period of time, as determined by the authority, cease all discharges. In the event of the failure of the
discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the authority may
commence judicial proceedings to compel the discharger's compliance with such order or may immediately
disconnect such discharger's service line from the city water and sanitary sewer system. In the case of
emergency disconnection of service, the director shall make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner or
discharger before disconnecting the service line. The party whose service has been disconnected shall have an
opportunity for a hearing on the issue of the illegal discharge and the disconnection as soon as possible after
such disconnection has taken place. The authority may reinstate the permit and/or the wastewater or water
service upon proof by the discharger of the cessation of the noncomplying discharge or elimination of
conditions creating the threat of imminent or substantial danger as set forth in this subsection. The city water
and/or wastewater service shall be reconnected at the discharger's expense.
(g) Operating upsets. Any discharger which experiences an upset in operations which places the discharger
in a temporary state of noncompliance with this article shall inform the authority within 24 hours of first
awareness of the commencement of the upset. Where such information is given orally, the authority may at its
discretion require the discharger to file a written report within five working days. The report shall specify:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/554
(1) Description of the upset, its cause and the upset's impact on a discharger's compliance status.
(2) Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and, if the
noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur.
(3) All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or
other conditions of noncompliance.
Any operating upset which was not the result of negligence on the part of the discharger, and which has been
documented and verified in the manner stated in this subsection, shall be an affirmative defense to any
enforcement action brought by the authority against a discharger for any noncompliance with this article which
arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset.
(h) Recovery of costs incurred by the authority. Any discharger who discharges or causes a discharge
producing a deposit or obstruction or causing damage to or impairing the authority's wastewater system shall
be liable to the authority for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The authority
shall bill the discharger for the costs incurred by the authority for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work
caused by the violation or discharge. Failure to pay such bill may result in the termination of water or
wastewater service.
(i) Unpaid fines or penalties. Unpaid fines or penalties shall constitute a lien against the discharger's property.
(j) Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this article, or falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or
method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-15
(1976 Code, sec. 32-60; 1998 Code, sec. 130-86; Ordinance 200101-3200, sec. 1, adopted 1/2/01)
Sec. 60-167. Miscellaneous provisions.
(a) Removal credits. Where applicable, the authority may elect to initiate a program of removal credits as part
of this article to reflect the POTWs ability to remove pollutants in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7.
(b) Net/gross calculations. The authority may elect to adjust categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the discharger's intake water, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
(c) Preservation of records. All dischargers subject to this article shall retain and preserve, for no less than
three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries
thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or on behalf of a discharger in
connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative
adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the authority pursuant hereto shall be
retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of
limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired.
(d) Charges for costs of administering program. The authority may make such charges, known as monitoring
and pretreatment charges, as are reasonable for services rendered in administering the programs outlined in
this article. Such charges may include, but are not limited to:
(1) Permitting industrial facilities;
(2) Inspection;
(3) Sample analysis;
(4) Monitoring; and
(5) Enforcement.
(e) Right of revision. The authority reserves the right to amend this article to provide for more or less
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives set forth in section 60-162
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/554
(f) Publication of list of significant violators. The authority shall annually publish in the largest local daily
newspaper a list of users that have significantly violated federal pretreatment requirements during the previous
12 months. The definition of the term “significant violation” shall be the definitions listed in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)
(vii) and in the authority's NPDES permit.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-61; 1998 Code, sec. 130-87; Ordinance 200101-3200, sec. 1, adopted 1/2/01)
Secs. 60-168–60-187. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. FORT WORTH CITY CODE
Sec. 60-188. Adoption of certain portions of Fort Worth City Code.
(a) Portions of chapter 12.5. Pursuant to agreements pertaining to sanitary sewage treatment of industrial
waste water and sewage between the City of Forest Hill, Texas, and the City of Fort Worth, Texas, the city does
hereby adopt the following portions of chapter 12.5, environmental protection and compliance, of the Fort Worth
City Code:
(1) Article I, division I, general provisions, sections 12.5–103 through 12.5–105;
(2) Article I, division 3, enforcement options, sections 12.5–111 through 12.5–123; and
(3) All of article VI, industrial wastewater.
Such provisions are incorporated herein by reference as if fully stated verbatim herein and are attached hereto.
(b) Deletions, exceptions and modifications.
(1) Throughout the provisions adopted herein, the following deletions, exceptions or modifications
are made:
a. Whenever the words “City,” “City of Fort Worth” or “Fort Worth” are used, there shall be
substituted “City of Forest Hill” unless otherwise noted.
(2) The following deletions, exceptions and modifications are made to Article I, Division I:
a. General Provisions. In Section 12.5-103, Definitions:
1. “City” shall mean the City of Forest Hill, Texas.
2. “Collect” is deleted.
3. In the definitions of “Disposal” and “Disposer,” the words “in Article VII of the
Chapter” are deleted.
4. “Environmental Manager” shall mean the City Manager of the City of Forest Hill and
his authorized representatives.
5. In the definition of “Generator,” the words “in Article VII of this chapter” are deleted.
6. In the definition of “Polluted water,” the words “in Article V, Division 2 of the Chapter”
are deleted.
7. In the definition of “Pollution hazard,” the words “in Article V, Division 3” are deleted.
8. In the definition of “POTW (Publicly Owned Treatment Works),” the word “City” shall
and does mean the City of Fort Worth, Texas.
9. “Site operating plan” is deleted.
(3) The following deletions, exceptions and modifications are made in Article I, Division 3:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/554
a. Enforcement.
1. In Section 12.5-111(a), “Director” is defined as and shall mean the City Manager of
Forest Hill or the authorized representative of the City Manager.
2. Section 12.5-111(b) is deleted in its entirety.
3. In Section 12.5-112, the words “Fort Worth Municipal Court” are changed to “Forest
Hill Municipal Court.”
(4) The following deletions, exceptions and modifications are made in Article VI, Industrial Waste
Water:
a. In Division I, General Provisions:
1. In Section 12.5-600, the term “Director” shall mean the City Manager of the City of
Forest Hill or the authorized representative of the City Manager.
b. In Division 2, Discharge Prohibitions and Limits:
1. Section 112.5-610(b)(19) shall have the words “1 mg/l” added at the end.
2. Attached to the ordinance from which this provision is derived is a table that
replaces the table set out in section 12.5-610(d)(1). That column labeled “Proposed Local
Limit mg/l” shall go into effect and be applicable from and after the time the same limits
are passed and established by the City of Fort Worth.
c. In Division 3, Pretreatment of Water:
1. Section 12.5-621(c)(3) is modified to read: “Grease and grit traps shall be inspected,
cleaned and repaired as specified elsewhere in the City Code of Ordinances by the user
at the user's expense.”
2. Section 12.5-621(c)(4) is amended to read: “Grease traps located on the premises
of food establishments shall be 100 percent pumped out at a minimum of once every 90
days, and at all other times as necessary to maintain their effectiveness. The Director
may order a generator to have its grease traps pumped out more often if the Director
determines it is necessary for the protection of the sanitary sewer.”
3. Section 12.5-623(b) is deleted.
d. In Division 5, Waste Water Discharge Permit Issuance Process:
1. In Section 12.5-645(a)(13) the words “or Article VII” are deleted.
2. Section 12.5-647 is deleted.
3. Section 12.5-648 is deleted.
(1998 Code, sec. 130-108; Ordinance 200650, sec. I, adopted 7/11/06; Ordinance 2012-01-002, sec. I, adopted
1/10/12)
Secs. 60-189–60-214. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. UTILITY EXTENSION
Sec. 60-215. Pro rata charges.
(a) A charge, which shall be known as the pro rata, shall be made against each lot or tract of land and the
owner thereof whose water and sewer line shall be hereafter connected with any water main or sanitary sewer
line in the city constructed by a developer with whom the city has contracted for reimbursement of oversizing or
constructing water or sewer mains or lines. The charge shall be at a rate per lot or acre as was agreed to by
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/554
such contract, which shall be based on total evaluated or contract cost divided proportionately by acreage or
number of lots served.
(b) Pro rata charges shall be collected at the time of platting or, if the city's records do not show that such pro
rata charges were paid at the time of platting, prior to issuance of a building permit.
(c) Such charges shall be placed in trust funds for the reimbursement of the developer who constructed the
line and transmitted to such developer as soon as practicable.
(d) Upon the expiration of the pro rata contract for reimbursement of the developer, such charge shall not be
collected.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-80; 1998 Code, sec. 130-111)
Sec. 60-216. Council to determine nature and extent of improvements.
The city council shall, from time to time, fix and determine the nature and extent of water and sanitary sewer
improvements and the kind of material and construction in such improvements. The city shall be under no
obligation under this article to expend funds to extend water or sewer service to any area within the city or to
permit connections to its water or sewer system if there is reason to believe such systems are inadequate to
serve the existing service area after such connections are made. The city shall never be obligated to serve any
area outside the city. (1976 Code, sec. 32-81; 1998 Code, sec. 130-112)
Sec. 60-217. Plans required.
Prior to the approval of any final plat, the owner of the tract or subdivision shall submit, to the same officer as
plats are submitted to, a map or plat showing the location and size of water and sanitary sewer mains and
valves and fire hydrants which will be required to ensure adequate service and fire protection to the lots
specified in such proposed tract or subdivision. Such plans shall be deemed a portion of the required materials
for the plat, and should such plans not in the opinion of the city provide adequate service and protection, then
such plats may be denied. The owner of any tract or subdivision of land within and without the city which has
already been laid out in lots for the purpose of sale for residences or for other purposes, but in which water and
sanitary sewer mains, valves and fire hydrants have not been installed as herein provided, shall, prior to
connection to any city main, submit such plans as would be required as if the plat were then being offered.
Should such plans not, in the opinion of the city, furnish adequate service and protection, no connection to city
services will be allowed. (1976 Code, sec. 32-82; 1998 Code, sec. 130-113)
Sec. 60-218. Extensions within property to be developed; refunds for oversize mains.
(a) Developers of property will defray the entire cost of the water and sanitary sewer systems within their
subdivision, except that the city will refund the oversize cost of any water main or sewer main larger than eight
inches in size unless a larger size is required to serve the subdivision in question. Size of mains for adequate
service shall be determined by the director of public works, and his decision will be final. Refunds of oversize
cost will be made upon acceptance of the system by the city.
(b) For mains eight inches and smaller constructed alongside a tract and serving property other than a
subdivision for which the extensions are made, the developer will be refunded one-half the oversize cost, such
refunds to be made upon acceptance of the system by the city.
(c) Where such along-site mains larger than eight inches serve other property, the developer will be refunded
100 percent of the difference between the cost of such main and the cost of an eight-inch main or such larger
sizes as are required to serve a subdivision for which the extension is required. Where such mains are laid by
city contract in conjunction with the development, the developer will pay the city one-half the evaluated cost of
an eight-inch water or sanitary sewer main, where such sizes as are required to serve the subdivision. All
refunds under this section, when due, will be made upon acceptance of the system by the city. Cost as used in
this section shall be deemed to mean evaluated cost, as hereinafter set forth.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-83; 1998 Code, sec. 130-114)
Sec. 60-219. Extensions for subdivisions generally.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/554
Water and/or sewer mains may be extended to serve property which has been subdivided or platted for
development and resale, on the following basis and in accordance with the minimum standards and
procedures:
(1) On-site extensions totally within property to be developed. A developer shall defray the entire
cost of water and sewer mains and all appurtenances that lie totally within a subdivision, except that
the city will:
a. Credit against water and sewer impact fees the cost of such water and sewer
improvements as appear on the impact fee capital improvements plan; and
b. In the case of noncapital improvement plan improvements, enter into a pro rata refunding
contract for the evaluated oversize cost of any main larger than necessary to serve the
property to be developed; provided, however, the city shall not contract for the cost of any main
except those larger than eight inches. The cost of oversize mains shall be evaluated as set
forth in section 60-221. Size of mains necessary for adequate service shall be determined by
the city.
(2) Along-site mains lying along one or more sides of subdivided tract and serving property other
than the subdivision for which the extensions are made. For water and sewer mains not on the city's
capital improvement plan which serve property adjacent thereto, the developer may request and the
city may grant a pro rata refunding contract for a portion of the cost of such line, as provided by
section 60-215
(3) Off-site extensions totally outside of property to be developed. Where water and/or sewer
facilities are not available to a tract to be developed, mains may, at the discretion of the city, be
extended to the subdivision at the expense of the developer requiring such extension. If the mains
appear on the capital improvements plan upon which the water and/or sewer impact fees are based,
the developer shall be allowed a credit as provided by the impact fee regulations. If such mains do
not appear on such plan, the city will enter into a pro rata refunding contract with the developer to
pay the cost of such line at the time it is paid for by the developer whose property it serves;
provided, however, the city shall not be obligated to pay more than the amount of actual pro rata
charges which it has collected for connections to the line.
(4) Substandard mains area. In an area where a subdivider's property is not adjacent to existing
mains meeting current city size specifications, but substandard mains are adjacent, the subdivider
must reconstruct off-site mains to city specifications and construct mains to city specifications within
the subdivision, subject to a pro rata refunding contract and/or credits against impact fees.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-84; 1998 Code, sec. 130-115)
Sec. 60-220. Methods by which water and sanitary sewer mains may be constructed.
Water and sanitary sewer main extensions to serve a real estate subdivision of the city may be accomplished
by private contract (with or without pro rata refund). Upon approval by the city, a developer of an addition or plat
shall design and prepare construction plans of water and sanitary sewer facilities to serve the subdivision,
including any access or off-site facilities that may be required. These plans shall conform in all details to the
city's standard as to design, grade, location, size and quality of materials and construction.
(1) Plans and profiles submitted by the developer's engineer shall be inked on standard 24-inch
by 36-inch sheets of tracing linen. Plans and profiles shall be shown at scale of one inch to 40 feet
horizontal and one inch to four feet vertical, unless otherwise approved by the city. Plans and
profiles shall show clearly all surface improvements, all existing or proposed subsurface utility lines
and obstructions and street and alley grades as approved by the city. The engineer submitting the
plans and profiles must be a registered professional civil engineer in the state, and he must affix his
seal and signature to the tracings of all plans and profiles.
(2) Upon preliminary approval of the plans by the city, the developer may enter into a contract with
any individual or may himself construct a system so planned; provided, however, that the
construction and installation of the water mains and sanitary sewer mains shall be supervised by
inspectors of the city to see that the installation is made in accordance with the plans and the city's
standard specifications, which in every instance shall be a part of such installation contract.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/554
(3) The completed tracings for water and sanitary sewer plans and profiles shall then be
submitted to the city for final approval, accompanied by two copies of the plans and profiles of the
storm sewers and street grades as approved by the city and one copy of the plat of the addition that
has been recorded in the records of the county and has been so stamped. Upon final approval, the
tracings will be returned to the developer's engineer for the purpose of making such prints as the city
may require, after which the tracings shall be returned to become permanent property of the city.
(4) When the project is ready for construction and the plat approved by the city is filed for record,
line and grade stakes will be set by the developer's engineers subject to the approval of the city, but
these stakes will not be set until the developer's engineer has properly staked on the ground with
iron pins all points of curves, all points of tangency, all block comers, and all lot comers within the
subdivision.
(5) No installation of water mains will be made at any other location except a dedicated street,
alley or an easement running in favor of the city which shall be filed of record by the owner of such
addition.
(6) Any such installation, when made, shall become the property of the city, free and clear of all
encumbrances, and any contract entered into between the developer and a contractor shall provide
for a performance bond and payment bond equivalent to that which the city uses in its standard
specifications and which shall be a part of such installation contract. The city shall be named as one
of the beneficiaries in such bond.
(7) In the event the developer makes the installation himself then he shall execute a performance
and payment bond in favor of the city in the same form and condition and in the same manner as
provided for in the standard contract document used by the city in the making of water and sanitary
sewer installations.
(8) Such installation by the developer or a contractor shall be made in a manner which will not
interfere with or damage existing water or sewer mains. Any damage, relocation or revision
necessitated by other construction shall be charged to the developers account, and water and sewer
service shall be withheld by the water utilities department until such account is settled.
(9) The city specifically reserves the option to advertise for bids to install all or any portion of
extensions to water and sanitary sewer lines over eight inches in size where evaluated prices are
not specified as set forth hereinafter.
(10) At the option of both the city and the developer, the city and the developer may enter into a
refunding pro rata contract, not to exceed seven years, by which the city will refund to the developer
all or a portion of the pro rata payments received during such time by the city for service connections
to lines constructed at the sole or partial expense of the developer. All such refunds shall be made
on April 1 and October 1 of each year and shall include funds then accrued to the credit of the
developers. No refunds will be made by the city to any developer after seven years from the date of
the contract, nor shall the city ever be liable for payment of interest on any refunds provided for
herein.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-86; 1998 Code, sec. 130-116)
Sec. 60-221. Evaluated cost tables for oversized along-site or off-site facilities.
The city shall use the following tables to calculate costs for city participation and pro rata refunding contracts:
TABLE 1. WATER MAINS AND APPURTENANCES
4" cast iron pipe, per linear foot $9.00
4" ductile iron pipe, per linear foot 9.00
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/554
4" plastic pipe, per linear foot 8.00
6" asbestos-cement pipe, per linear foot 18.00
6" cast iron pipe, per linear foot 18.00
6" ductile iron pipe, per linear foot 19.00
6" plastic pipe, per linear foot 19.00
8" asbestos-cement pipe, per linear foot 15.00
8" cast iron pipe, per linear foot 20.00
8" ductile iron pipe, per linear foot 20.00
8" plastic pipe, per linear foot 21.00
12" asbestos-cement pipe, per linear
foot
25.00
12" cast iron pipe, per linear foot 26.00
12" ductile iron pipe, per linear foot 26.00
12" plastic pipe, per linear foot 18.00
16" asbestos-cement pipe, per linear
foot
30.00
16" ductile iron pipe, per linear foot 32.00
18" ductile iron pipe, per linear foot 40.00
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/554
20" ductile iron pipe, per linear foot 55.00
24" ductile iron pipe, per linear foot 60.00
4" gate valve, each 350.00
6" gate valve, each 650.00
8" gate valve, each 820.00
12" gate valve, each 1,300.00
16" gate valve, each 2,350.00
18" gate valve, each 3,850.00
20" gate valve, each 4,550.00
Cast iron fittings, per ton 1,200.00
Fire hydrant, each 780.00
1/4" copper deadhead, each 115.00
1" copper deadhead, each 160.00
1½" copper deadhead, each 275.00
2" copper deadhead, each 75.00
Evaluated cost for polyethylene wrap used as a corrosion protection shall be calculated by multiplying $0.08 per
foot by the diameter of the pipe in inches.
Unit prices in this table include all items, except polyethylene wrap, which are necessary to produce a complete
job.
TABLE 2. SANITARY SEWER MAINS AND APPURTENANCES
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/554
6" concrete pipe, per linear foot $8.00
6" clay tile pipe, per linear foot 19.00
6" plastic pipe, per linear foot 19.00
8" concrete pipe, per linear foot 20.00
8" clay tile pipe, per linear foot 20.00
8" plastic pipe, per linear foot 21.00
12" concrete pipe, per linear foot 26.00
12" clay tile pipe, per linear foot 28.00
12" plastic pipe, per linear foot 28.00
18" concrete pipe, per linear foot 38.00
18" clay tile pipe, per linear foot 40.00
18" plastic pipe, per linear foot 40.00
6" street lateral, each 200.00
6" alley lateral, each 150.00
Standard cleanout, each 250.00
Standard 4' manhole, each 2,000.00
Standard 4½' manhole, each 2,600.00
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/554
Standard 5' manhole, each 3,100.00
Standard 5½' manhole, each 3,600.00
Standard 6' manhole, each 4,000.00
Type “S” manhole, each 4,500.00
Evaluated cost for an extra-depth manhole shall be calculated by adding ten percent of the manhole unit price
for each foot in excess of ten feet below approved street grade to the unit price.
Unit prices in this table include all items, except an extra-depth manhole, which are necessary to produce a
complete job.
TABLE 3. MISCELLANEOUS MAINS
Gravel paving, per cubic yard $15.00
Asphalt paving, per ton 40.00
Concrete paving, per cubic yard 60.00
Sidewalk, per square yard 15.00
Curb and gutter, per linear foot 8.00
Crushed rock, per cubic yard 18.00
Granular material or sand backfill, per cubic
yard
4.50
2,000# concrete, per cubic yard 80.00
3,000# concrete, per cubic yard 100.00
Stabilized backfill, per cubic yard 48.00
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/554
(1976 Code, sec. 32-87; 1998 Code, sec. 130-117)
Sec. 60-222. Permit required.
(a) No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or replace any water or sanitary sewer
improvements on any public property within the city limits, without first obtaining from the engineering
department a permit to do so.
(b) No such permit shall be granted unless the two-year maintenance bond provided for in section 60-224 is
in full force and effect at the time of request for such permit, and the doing of the work.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-88; 1998 Code, sec. 130-118)
Sec. 60-223. Permit fees.
No person shall be granted a permit to construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or replace any water or
sanitary sewer improvements on any public property without paying certain fees to the city for inspection of
such work, which fees are established as three percent of the total contract price. (1976 Code, sec. 32-89; 1998
Code, sec. 130-119)
Sec. 60-224. Bond required; conditions; term; suits on bond.
(a) Bond required. No person shall construct, reconstruct or repair any water or sanitary sewer improvement
in the city without executing and delivering to the city a bond in the sum of $10,000.00 for each $100,000.00 of
construction work performed, payable to the city, from an approved surety company.
(b) Conditions. Such bond shall be conditioned that all work done in the construction, reconstruction or repair
of any water or sanitary sewer improvements shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner, and that such
person shall faithfully and strictly comply with the specifications and with the terms of this Code and such
ordinances, resolutions or regulations that may be passed by the city council governing and relating to the
construction, reconstruction, or repair of any water or sanitary sewer improvement, and that the city shall be
fully indemnified and be held whole and harmless from any and all costs, expense or damage, whether real or
asserted, on account of any injury done to any person or property in the prosecution of such work, or that may
arise out of or be occasioned by the performance of such work. Such bond shall be conditioned further that the
principal shall, without additional cost to the person for whom the work was done, maintain all water and sewer
improvements so constructed, reconstructed, or repaired by the principal for a period of two years from the date
of final acceptance of such construction, reconstruction or repair to the satisfaction of the engineering
department of the city, and shall reconstruct or repair any water or sanitary sewer improvement to the
satisfaction of the engineering department of the city at any time within two years after the final acceptance of
the construction, reconstruction, or repair of any water or sanitary sewer improvement and after ten days' notice
from the engineering department to reconstruct or repair the same, and that the opinion of the engineering
department as to the necessity of such reconstruction or repair shall be binding on the parties thereto.
(c) Term. Such bond shall, for the purposes mentioned in subsection (b) of this section, be in force for two
years after the final acceptance of any water or sanitary sewer improvement which is constructed,
Riprap, per cubic yard 60.00
Excavation in excess of ten feet in depth below approved
grade:
In dirt, per cubic yard 7.50
In rock, per cubic yard 2.50
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/554
reconstructed, or repaired, and one recovery shall not exhaust the bond, but such bond shall be a continuing
obligation against the sureties thereon until the entire amount therein provided for shall have been exhausted.
In case the bond shall be decreased on account of any recovery which may be obtained, arising out of the
violation of any condition of the same, the city council shall require, upon notice to it of such fact, an additional
bond to be given in accordance with this section in an amount sufficient, when added to the nonexhausted
amount of the original bond, to be at all times equal to the sum of $10,000.00 for each $100,000.00 of the
construction work performed.
(d) Suits. The city may, for itself or for the use and benefit of any person injured or damaged by reason of any
defective construction, reconstruction or repair of any water or sanitary sewer improvement by any person,
maintain suit on such bond in any court having jurisdiction thereof, or suit may be maintained thereon by any
person injured or damaged by reason of the failure of any person who shall construct, reconstruct, or repair any
water or sanitary sewer improvement in the city to observe the conditions of such bond.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-90; 1998 Code, sec. 130-120)
Sec. 60-225. Specifications for improvements.
Water and sanitary sewer improvements shall be constructed, reconstructed or repaired in accordance with
water and sanitary sewer specifications for the city on file in the office of the city secretary and city engineer
styled Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, first edition, 1983, by the North Central Texas
Council of Governments, and Standard Plans for Water, Sanitary Sewer, Paving and Storm Drains, Forest Hill,
Texas, dated September 28, 1984. (1976 Code, sec. 32-91; 1998 Code, sec. 130-121)
Sec. 60-226. Supervision and approval of work.
All work in construction, reconstruction, and repairing of water and sanitary sewer improvements shall be done
under the supervision and subject to the direction and approval of the city public works department, whose
decision shall be final. (1976 Code, sec. 32-92; 1998 Code, sec. 130-122)
Secs. 60-227–60-245. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. WATER AND WASTEWATER IMPACT FEES
Sec. 60-246. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in this section:
Advisory committee means the city's planning and zoning commission, with or without supplementary members
as appointed heretofore.
Final plat recordation means the filing of the final plat with the county following compliance with all conditions of
approval pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations.
Property owner means any person, group of persons, firm, corporation or any other legal entity having legal title
to or sufficient proprietary interest in the property on which new development is to occur. The term “property
owner” includes the developer for the new development.
Service area, for the purpose of this article, means the land within the city.
Service unit means one equivalent meter unit, which is the standardized measure of consumption, use or
generation of wastewater or water facilities equivalent to the consumption, use or generation of such facilities
attributable to a single-family dwelling unit and utilizing a three-quarter-inch water meter.
Utility connection means the physical connection of the new development to the city's water system or the city's
wastewater system.
Wastewater facility.
(1) The term “wastewater facility” means land or easements and improvements associated with
wastewater treatment facilities, whether or not such facilities are owned and operated by the city or
on behalf of the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/554
(2) The term “wastewater facility” excludes wastewater collection mains and facilities.
Wastewater facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing wastewater facility for the
purpose of serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization or
expansion of an existing wastewater facility to serve existing development.
Water facility.
(1) The term “water facility” means land or easements or improvements associated with water
treatment facilities, water storage, and water pumping facilities.
(2) The term “water facility” excludes waste distribution mains and facilities.
Water facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing water facility for the purpose of
serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an
existing water improvement to serve existing development.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-100; 1998 Code, sec. 130-151)
Sec. 60-247. Applicability.
The provisions of this article apply to all new development within the corporate boundaries of the city. (1976
Code, sec. 32-101; 1998 Code, sec. 130-152)
Sec. 60-248. Payment required as condition of development approval.
No final plat or replat for new development shall be approved for recording without assessment of an impact fee
pursuant to this article, and no building permit shall be issued nor shall any utility connection be made until the
applicant has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated herein. (1976 Code, sec. 32-102; 1998 Code, sec.
130-153)
Sec. 60-249. Land use assumptions.
The land use assumptions for water and wastewater are set forth in exhibit A, styled City of Forest Hill Land
Use Assumptions, Water and Wastewater, and exhibit A is attached to Ordinance Number 772 and is
incorporated herein by reference. (1976 Code, sec. 32-103; 1998 Code, sec. 130-154)
Sec. 60-250. Impact fees per service unit.
(a) Maximum impact fees per service unit shall be calculated for wastewater facilities separately for
wastewater and for water and shall be the amount set forth in schedule 1 attached to Ordinance Number 772
and made a part of this article by reference.
(b) The impact fee per service unit for each category of capital improvements, which is to be paid by each
new development, shall be that established by the city council as may be amended from time to time and shall
be not more than the maximum impact fee per service unit established in subsection (a) of this section. Impact
fees which are to be paid shall be as set forth in schedule 2 attached to Ordinance Number 772 and made a
part of this article by reference.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-104; 1998 Code, sec. 130-155)
Sec. 60-251. Assessment of impact fees.
(a) Assessment of the impact fee for any new development shall be made as follows:
(1) For development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations
following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, assessment shall
occur at the time of final plat recordation, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per
service unit then in effect, as set forth in schedule 1 attached to Ordinance Number 772. The city in
its sole discretion may provide the subdivider with a copy of schedule 1 attached to Ordinance
Number 772 prior to final plat approval, but such shall not constitute assessment within the meaning
of this chapter.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/554
(2) For development which has received final plat approval prior to the said effective date, for
which no replatting is necessary prior to the issuance of a building permit, and which plat has been
recorded with the county, or for lots which predate the city's subdivision regulations and which are
exempt from platting requirements, assessment shall occur on the effective date of this article, and
shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit set forth in schedule 1 attached to
Ordinance Number 772.
(b) Following assessment of the impact fee for a new development pursuant to subsection (a) of this section,
the amount of the impact fee per service unit for that development cannot be increased, unless the owner
proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a new application for final plat approval, in
which case the impact fee will be reassessed at the schedule 1 attached to Ordinance Number 772 rate then in
effect.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-105; 1998 Code, sec. 130-156)
Sec. 60-252. Computation and collection of impact fees.
(a) The impact fees due for the new development shall be collected prior to or at the time of issuance of the
building permit or prior to or at the time of connection to the city's water or wastewater system, whichever
occurs first, unless an agreement has been executed between the property owner and the city providing for a
different type of payment.
(b) Following the filing and acceptance of an application for a building permit or the request for connection to
the city's water or wastewater system, the city shall compute the impact fees due for the new development in
the following manner:
(1) The amount of each impact fee due shall be determined by multiplying the number of service
units generated by the new development by the impact fee due per service unit using schedule 2
attached to Ordinance Number 772. The number of service units shall be determined by using the
conversion table contained in the impact fee capital improvements plan.
(2) The amount of each impact fee due shall be reduced by any allowable credit for that category
of capital improvements as herein provided.
(c) The amount of each impact fee due for a new development shall not exceed an amount computed by
multiplying the maximum impact fee per service unit under schedule 1 attached to Ordinance Number 772 by
the number of service units generated by the development.
(d) If the building permit for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, and a new application is
thereafter filed, the impact fees due shall be computed using schedule 2 attached to Ordinance Number 772
then in effect and previous payments of impact fees shall be credited against the new fees due.
(e) Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a development, the
additional impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined by using schedule 2 attached to
Ordinance Number 772 then in effect, and such additional fees shall be collected either prior to or at the time of
issuance of a new building permit, or prior to or at the time of the connection to the city's water or wastewater
system, or enlargement of such connection.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-106; 1998 Code, sec. 130-157)
Sec. 60-253. Suspension of fee collection for certain developments.
(a) For any new development which has received final plat approval in accordance with Texas Local
Government Code ch. 212, or pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations, or for which an application for final
approval has been made, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the city
may assess but shall not collect any water impact fee as herein defined, on any service for which a valid
building permit is issued within one year subsequent to the effective date of said ordinance.
(b) If the building permit which is obtained within the period provided for in subsection (a) of this section
subsequently expires, and no new application for a building permit is approved within such period, the new
development shall be subject to the payment of an impact fee, as provided in section 60-252
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/554
(1976 Code, sec. 32-107; 1998 Code, sec. 130-158)
Sec. 60-254. Credits against impact fees.
A property owner who has paid a wastewater system facility access fee may reduce the amount of a
wastewater impact fee due for a new development on that lot or tract by the amount of the access fee paid,
following written request and approval by the city, provided that no construction has occurred on the lot or tract
and that no utility connection has been made. (1976 Code, sec. 32-108; 1998 Code, sec. 130-159)
Sec. 60-255. Establishment of accounts; financial records.
(a) The city shall establish an account to which interest is allocated for each type of capital facility for which
an impact fee is imposed pursuant to this article. Each impact fee collected shall be deposited in such account
(b) Interest earned on the account into which the impact fees are deposited shall be considered funds of the
account and shall be used solely for the purpose authorized by this article.
(c) The city shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed
from the account are utilized solely for the purposes authorized. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by
the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter;
provided, however, that funds shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten years
from the date that an impact fee has been paid.
(d) The city shall maintain and keep financial records for impact fees, which shall show the source and
disbursement of all fees collected in or expended from each benefit area. The records of such accounts shall be
open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-109; 1998 Code, sec. 130-160)
Sec. 60-256. Use of proceeds of accounts.
(a) The impact fees collected pursuant to this article may be used to finance or to recoup the costs of any
capital improvements or facility expansion identified in the applicable capital improvements plan, including, but
not limited to, the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, and land acquisition costs
(including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees). Impact fees may
also be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations
issued to finance such capital improvements or facility expansion.
(b) Impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses:
(1) Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements other than those identified in
the applicable capital improvements plan;
(2) Repair, operation, or maintenance of any capital improvements or facility expansion;
(3) Upgrade, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements to serve existing
development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;
(4) Upgrade, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements to provide better service
to existing development; provided, however, that impact fees may be used to pay the costs of
upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new
capital improvements generated by new development; or
(5) Administrative and operating costs of the city.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-110; 1998 Code, sec. 130-161)
Sec. 60-257. Appeals.
(a) The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the following decisions to the city
council:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/554
(1) The applicability of an impact fee to the development.
(2) The amount of the impact fee due.
(3) The denial or determination of the amount of a credit.
(4) The application of a credit against an impact fee due.
(5) The amount of a refund due, if any.
(b) The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee or the amount of
the credit was not calculated according to the applicable schedule of impact fees or the guidelines established
for determining credits.
(c) The appellant must file a written notice of appeal with the city within 30 days following the decision. The
development application may be processed while the appeal is pending, if the notice of appeal is accompanied
by a bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the original
determination of the impact fee due.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-111; 1998 Code, sec. 130-162)
Sec. 60-258. Refunds.
(a) Upon application, any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to this article which has not been
expended within the benefit area within ten years from the date of payment shall be refunded, upon application,
to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid, or, if the impact fee was paid by another
governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to
the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in Texas Finance Code sec. 302.002, or its successor
statute. An impact fee shall be considered as expended on a first-in, first-out basis.
(b) An impact fee collected pursuant to this article shall also be considered expended if, within ten years
following the date of payment, the total expenditures for capital improvements or facility expansion exceed the
total fees collected for such improvements or expansions during such period.
(c) If a refund is due pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city shall divide the difference
between the amount of expenditures and the amount of fees collected by the total number of service units
assumed for the period to determine the refund due per service. The refund to the record owner shall be
calculated by multiplying the refund due per service unit by the number of service units for the development for
which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount.
(d) Upon completion of all the capital improvements or facility expansions identified in the capital
improvements plan, the city shall recalculate the maximum impact fee per service unit using the actual costs for
the improvements or expansions. If the maximum impact fee per service unit based on actual cost is less than
the impact fee per service unit paid, the city shall refund the difference, if such difference exceeds the impact
fee paid per service unit by more than ten percent. If the difference is less than ten percent, no refund shall be
due. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying such difference by the number of service
units for the development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-112; 1998 Code, sec. 130-163)
Sec. 60-259. Rebates.
If the building permit for a new development for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, no utility
connections for that category of capital improvements have been made to the development, and a modified or
new application has not been approved within six months of such expiration, the city shall, upon written
application, rebate the amount of the impact fee to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee
was paid. If no application for rebate pursuant to this section has been filed within this period, no rebate shall
become due. (1976 Code, sec. 32-113; 1998 Code, sec. 130-164)
Sec. 60-260. Updates to plans and revision of fees.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/554
(a) The city shall update its land use assumptions and capital improvements plans at least every three years,
commencing from the date of adoption of such plans, and shall recalculate the impact fees based thereon in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Texas Local Government Code ch. 395, or in any successor
statute.
(b) The city may review its land use assumptions, capital improvements plans, impact fees and other factors
such as market conditions more frequently than provided in subsection (a) of this section to determine whether
the land use assumptions and capital improvements plan should be updated and the impact fees recalculated
accordingly, or whether schedules 1 and 2 attached to Ordinance Number 772 should be changed.
(c) If, at the time an update is required pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the city council determines
that no change to the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan or impact fee is needed, it may
dispense with such update by following the procedures of Texas Local Government Code sec. 395.0575, or any
successor statute.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-114; 1998 Code, sec. 130-165)
Sec. 60-261. Fees additional and supplemental to other requirements.
Impact fees established by this article are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other
requirements imposed by the city on the development of land, the issuance of building permits, or the
connection of utilities. Such fee is intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of the city's
comprehensive land use plan, the capital improvements plan, the zoning ordinance, the subdivision regulations
and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate
public facilities in conjunction with the development of land. Except as otherwise herein provided, the
assessment and collection of an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to and not in substitution of
any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and due against the property. (1976
Code, sec. 32-115; 1998 Code, sec. 130-166)
Sec. 60-262. Relief and variance procedures.
(a) Any person who has paid an impact fee or an owner of land upon which an impact fee has been paid may
petition the city council to determine whether any duty required by this article, other than those matters which
may be appealed as herein provided, has not been performed within the time so prescribed. The petition shall
be in writing and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and request that the duty be performed within
60 days of the request. If the city council determines that the duty is required pursuant to this article and is late
in being performed, it shall cause the duty to commence within 60 days of the date of the request and to
continue until completion.
(b) The city council may grant a variance from any requirement of this article, upon written request by a
property owner subject to this article, following a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict application of
such requirement would, when regarded as a whole, result in confiscation of the property.
(c) If the city council grants a variance that reduces the amount of the impact fee due for a new development
under this article, it shall cause to be appropriated from other city funds the amount of the reduction in the
impact fee and deposit such funds in the impact fee account where such funds would have otherwise been
deposited.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-116; 1998 Code, sec. 130-167)
Sec. 60-263. Exemptions from article.
Any building permit application which was duly accepted for filing prior to the effective date of the ordinance
from which this article is derived and which is subsequently granted shall be exempt from the assessment and
payment of an impact fee, unless such application thereafter expires. (1976 Code, sec. 32-117; 1998 Code,
sec. 130-168)
Sec. 60-264. Fee schedules.
(a) The maximum impact fees per water meter for water and wastewater facilities are hereby adopted and
incorporated in schedule 1 attached to Ordinance Number 772 and made a part hereof by reference.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/554
(b) The impact fee per service unit for water and wastewater facilities which are to be paid by each new
development are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule 2 attached to Ordinance Number 772 and made
a part hereof by reference.
(c) The impact fees per service unit for water and wastewater facilities may be amended from time to time.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-119; 1998 Code, sec. 130-170)
Sec. 60-265. Enlargement of connection by existing development.
If the property owner of any existing development within the benefit area requests enlargement of a water meter
presently serving the development, and no new development is to occur on the property, the owner shall pay
the fee prescribed by section 60-251 for the increase in size of the meter prior to installation of the enlarged
meter. (1976 Code. sec. 32-120; 1998 Code, sec. 130-171)
Sec. 60-266. New connection by existing development.
If any existing development within the benefit area presently utilizes a water well, a septic tank, or an individual
waste disposal system and the property owner requests to be connected to the city's water or wastewater
system, the customer shall pay the fees prescribed by section 60-251 prior to connection to such systems.
(1976 Code, sec. 32-121; 1998 Code, sec. 130-172)
Secs. 60-267–60-295. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
Sec. 60-296. Plan adopted by reference.
The city council hereby approves and adopts the NTMWD Model Water Conservation Plan (the “plan”),
attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived, as addendum A, as if recited verbatim herein. The
city commits to implement the requirements and procedures set forth in the adopted plan. (Ordinance 2010-03-
001, sec. 1, adopted 3/2/10)
Sec. 60-297. Penalties.
Any customer, defined pursuant to 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 291 failing to comply with the provisions of the plan
shall be subject to a fine of up to $2,000.00 and/or discontinuance of water service by the city. Proof of a
culpable mental state is not required for a conviction of an offense under this section. Each day a customer fails
to comply with the plan is a separate violation. The city's authority to seek injunctive or other civil relief available
under the law is not limited by this section. (Ordinance 2010-03-001, sec. 2, adopted 3/2/10)
Secs. 60-298–60-299. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. MUNICIPAL STORM WATER (DRAINAGE) UTILITY SYSTEM
Sec. 60-300. Purpose and adoption.
(a) Purpose. The city finds it to be in the public interest to protect the public health and safety from loss of life
and property caused by surface water overflows and surface water stagnation within the boundaries of the city,
and further finds that to protect such public interests:
(1) The city will establish a schedule of drainage charges against all real property in the city
subject to charges under Texas Local Gov't Code, chapter 552, subchapter C, municipal drainage
utility systems, section 552.041 et seq.; and
(2) The city will provide drainage for all real property in the city upon payment of drainage
charges, except such real property exempted therefrom as authorized by the act; and
(3) The city will offer such drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable
terms.
(b) Adoption. The city is authorized and does hereby declare under the Texas Constitution and Vernon's
Texas Codes Annotated (V.T.C.A.), Local Government Code, chapter 552, subchapter C, entitled, “Municipal
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/554
Drainage Utility Systems,” section 552.041 et seq., that such act is hereby adopted, and it is declared that the
drainage of the city shall be a public utility. Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
section 552.046, the city incorporates its existing drainage facilities, materials, equipment and supplies into the
system. The boundaries of the drainage utility system service area shall be the municipal boundary of the city.
(Ordinance 2013-01-001 adopted 1/15/13)
Sec. 60-301. Director.
The director will be assigned by the city manager and a member on staff at the city, knowledgeable with the
management and operation of the system. The director shall administer the storm water utility system. The
director shall keep an accurate record of properties benefited or served by the storm water utility system and
the storm water utility fee charged for each parcel or portion of a parcel. (Ordinance 2013-01-001 adopted
1/15/13)
Sec. 60-302. Program implementation.
The city council retains full discretion in establishing the time and quantitative priorities in expending funds on a
reasonable basis as the same become available to meet the storm water needs of the city. The passage of this
article shall not be construed to relieve private land owners, developers or other individuals or entities from
providing storm water improvements pursuant to the ordinances of the city and the laws of this state which
relate to storm water or storm water improvements. This article does not warrant, guarantee or provide any
assurance that a benefited property will be free from flooding or erosion, and does not create additional duties
nor waive any immunities on the part of the city. (Ordinance 2013-01-001 adopted 1/15/13)
Sec. 60-303. Billing for service.
The city is hereby authorized to bill the drainage charges incurred as a result of the adoption of the act through
the establishment of the municipal drainage utility system. The storm water utility fee shall be separately
identified from other public utility billings. (Ordinance 2013-01-001 adopted 1/15/13)
Sec. 60-304. Authority to levy charges.
The city may levy a schedule of drainage charges upon satisfaction of the procedural requirements provided in
the act, including public hearings and adoption of the requisite ordinances. (Ordinance 2013-01-001 adopted
1/15/13)
Sec. 60-305. Storm water utility fund.
The finance director shall maintain a stormwater utility fund which may consist of one or more accounts. The
income of the storm water utility shall be segregated and completely identifiable in the city accounts. Funds and
revenues in the storm water utility fund may be paid over and transferred to the city's general fund as allowed
by law. (Ordinance 2013-01-001 adopted 1/15/13)
Sec. 60-306. Fees.
(a) The city council hereby establishes the stormwater utility fees as set forth herein. Stormwater utility fees
will be levied against all real property in the established service areas except real property that is exempted by
section 552.053(b)(3) and (c) of the Texas Local Government Code.
(b) Stormwater utility fees shall be calculated as follows for residential and nonresidential properties:
(1) Stormwater utility fees for residential property, defined as an improved parcel which not more
than four (4) dwelling units are constructed, shall be calculated for each dwelling unit at the following
flat rate per dwelling unit:
Fee= $4.00 per dwelling unit per month
(2) Stormwater utility fees for non-residential property shall be calculated for each improved parcel
based upon the parcel's total land area in square feet (SF) as identified on Tarrant Appraisal District
(TAD) maps per the following rate table.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/554
Tier Parcel Area in SF Monthly Fee
1 Less than 20,000 $6.62
2 20,000 to 49,999 $14.81
3 50,000 to 99,999 $36.51
4 100,000 to 199,999 $60.33
5 200,000 or more $153.63
(c) Billing of stormwater fees shall be provided as identified below.
(1) The stormwater utility fee for a parcel will be billed to the owner or customer who receives the
water, sewer or solid waste billing for the parcel, as recorded in the city's utility billing system.
(2) The fee for a non-residential parcel which has multiple or shared utility billing accounts may be
allocated to each utility billing account in proportion to the percentage of the land area that is
allocated for use by each owner or customer compared to the total area on the parcel.
(3) Where an improved parcel is not occupied by a customer that may use water, wastewater,
solid waste or other utility service and considered by the city to be vacant, either on a temporary or
permanent basis, the city may bill the owner of the parcel for the stormwater utility fee.
(4) Where the city does not bill water, wastewater or solid waste service to an owner or customer,
the city is hereby authorized to establish a “stormwater only account” and to bill the stormwater utility
fee to either the owner or customer, as the director determines is appropriate.
(d) All stormwater utility fees shall be deposited in the stormwater utility fund created under section 60-305.
(e) The stormwater utility fee will be utilized to fund stormwater projects, equipment, personnel and other
costs of service as authorized in section 552.044(2) of the Texas Local Government Code and the stormwater
ordinance.
(Ordinance 2013-04-001 adopted 4/2/13)
CHAPTER 62
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 62-1–62-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. AMBULANCE SERVICE*
Sec. 62-19. Statutory authority.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/554
This article is enacted by the city (“this jurisdiction”), pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code, section 773.051,
which provides that local governments may establish standards for ambulances, and pursuant to Tex.
Government Code chapter 791, which authorizes combinations of local governmental units to contract for the
provision of governmental services, including the creation of administrative agencies to promote public health
and welfare. (Ordinance 2017-2-01, sec. 1, adopted 2/21/17)
Sec. 62-20. General purposes and intent of article.
It is the purpose of this article:
(1) To establish a regulated prehospital emergency medical services and medical transportation
system which can provide quality clinical care with performance measures and standards, with the
goal of facilitating the best possible outcomes for each patient;
(2) To establish a mobile integrated healthcare program with effective medical direction and
quality assurance and review;
(3) To form an administrative agency to administer and operate the prehospital emergency
medical services and medical transportation system in a service area comprised of member
jurisdictions and to administer and operate the mobile integrated healthcare program;
(4) To designate the administrative agency as the sole provider of emergency and non-emergency
ambulance service within this jurisdiction to maintain consistent, high-quality service while controlling
costs through efficiencies and economies of scale;
(5) To provide for effective medical direction by establishing a multi-jurisdictional emergency
physicians advisory board to advise the administrative agency's board and, through the agency's
office of the medical director, to oversee and regulate all clinical aspects of prehospital emergency
medical services, the administrative agency's mobile integrated healthcare program, and medical
transportation which affect patient care in the service area; and
(6) To provide for effective coordination and communication between first responder agencies in
the service area, the emergency physicians advisory board, and the board of the administrative
agency by establishing a multi-jurisdictional first responder advisory board.
(Ordinance 2017-2-01, sec. 2, adopted 2/21/17)
Sec. 62-21. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them by this section:
Advanced life support. Out-of-hospital care that uses invasive medical acts (as defined in Tex. Health and
Safety Code, section 773.003(1)).
Aeromedical transportation unit. Any rotary or fixed wing aircraft providing basic or advanced life support
services and patient transportation that originates within the service area.
Ambulance mutual aid agreement. A written agreement between the authority and one or more entities
whereby the signing parties agree to provide backup ambulance service to one another under the terms and
conditions specified in the agreement.
Ambulance service. The transportation of patients by emergency or non-emergency ambulance.
Associate medical director. A licensed physician who assists the medical director in carrying out EPAB's duties
under this article through the OMD.
Authority (Metropolitan Area EMS Authority). The public administrative agency, formerly known as the Area
Metropolitan Ambulance Authority, established to administer and operate the medical transportation and
prehospital emergency medical services system and the MIH program established by this article.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/554
Basic life support. Out-of-hospital care that uses noninvasive medical acts (as defined in section 773.003(2),
Tex. Health and Safety Code).
Board. The board of directors of the authority.
Emergency care attendant. A person certified as an “emergency care attendant” under sec. 773.046 of the Tex.
Health and Safety Code.
Emergency medical technician (EMT). A person certified as an “emergency medical technician” under section
773.047 or an “advanced emergency medical technician” under section 773.048 of the Tex. Health and Safety
Code, and any other class of EMT recognized by state law or regulation.
EMS communications center. The single facility designated by the authority as the central communications
center from which all services offered by the authority shall be dispatched and controlled.
First responder. Any agency that provides first response to requests for emergency medical services and, in
cooperation with the ambulance service, provides immediate on-scene care to ill or injured persons but does
not transport those persons to healthcare facilities.
Medical director. The licensed physician appointed by EPAB who is responsible for carrying out EPAB's duties
and for directing the office of the medical director.
Medical transportation. The transportation of patients by ambulance, specialized mobile intensive care unit,
specialty care transport, or aeromedical transportation unit, including both emergency and non-emergency
transports, where such transportation originates within the service area.
MIH associate medical director. An associate medical director who is specifically tasked with assisting the
medical director in overseeing the clinical aspects of the authority's MIH program.
Mobile integrated healthcare (MIH). Services provided by the authority that are designed to enhance,
coordinate, effectively manage, and integrate out-of-hospital care, in order to improve outcomes, enhance the
client's experience of care, and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of healthcare services provided to the
enrolled clients.
Office of medical director. The clinical office of the authority through which EPAB carries out its rights and duties
under this article. The office of the medical director is comprised of the medical director, the MIH associate
medical director and any other associate medical directors, and the employees of the authority who are
assigned to the office of the medical director to assist the medical directors in carrying out EPAB's rights and
duties under this article.
Paramedic. A person qualified as a certified or licensed “paramedic” as defined by Tex. Health and Safety Code
sections 773.049 and 773.0495.
Patient. An individual who is ill, sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise incapacitated, and in need of or at risk of
needing medical care at the scene of a medical emergency or during transport to or from a healthcare facility.
Person. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, governmental entity, or other group, or a
combination of the same acting as a unit.
Restated interlocal cooperative agreement. The interlocal contract, as it may be amended from time to time,
adopted by this jurisdiction concurrently with the passage of this article pursuant to chapter 791 of the Tex.
Government Code (the Interlocal Cooperation Act).
Service area. That geographical area which is contained within the boundaries of all the jurisdictions which
become members of the authority by adopting the Uniform EMS Ordinance from which this article derives and
executing the restated interlocal cooperative agreement.
Special event. Any public event located within the service area for which standby ambulance service is
arranged in advance, and for which an ambulance is hired by the sponsor of the event or other interested party.
Specialty care transport. The transportation of a critically injured or ill patient at a level of service beyond the
scope of the EMT-paramedic when the patient's condition requires ongoing care that must be furnished by one
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/554
or more health professionals in an appropriate specialty area; for example, emergency or critical care nursing,
emergency medicine, respiratory care, cardiovascular care, or a paramedic with additional training.
Specialized mobile intensive care unit. A vehicle which is specially constructed, equipped, staffed, and
employed in the inter-facility transport of patients whose requirements for en route medical support are likely to
exceed the clinical capabilities of an advanced life support ambulance.
(Ordinance 2017-2-01, sec. 3, adopted 2/21/17)
Sec. 62-22. Emergency physicians advisory board.
(a) There is hereby created an emergency physicians advisory board (“EPAB”) which, acting through the
office of the medical director, shall, on behalf of this jurisdiction, oversee and regulate all clinical aspects of
medical transportation, the authority's MIH program, and prehospital emergency medical services in this
jurisdiction, including such services provided by the authority and first responders, and shall exercise
independent professional judgment in all matters related to patient care.
(b) EPAB's membership and other matters relating to EPAB shall be set forth in the restated interlocal
cooperative agreement and in the bylaws adopted by EPAB.
(Ordinance 2017-2-01, sec. 4, adopted 2/21/17)
Sec. 62-23. Metropolitan Area EMS authority.
(a) By adopting this article and executing and approving the restated interlocal cooperative agreement, this
jurisdiction has joined the authority, which shall now be known as the Metropolitan Area EMS Authority:
(b) The authority shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) The authority is hereby designated as the sole provider of ambulance service and special
event ambulance standby service within this jurisdiction, whether directly or indirectly through
contractors, pursuant to the terms, conditions and provisions of the restated interlocal cooperative
agreement, except for those services exempted by section 62-25(b) of this article.
(2) The authority shall comply with all terms of the restated interlocal cooperative agreement and
have all the powers and duties enumerated therein.
(3) The authority is required to provide this jurisdiction with basic and advanced life support
ambulance service in accordance with system performance standards and all applicable law, rules
and regulations, as well as all patient care standards that EPAB may from time to time promulgate.
(4) The authority is authorized to operate an MIH program on a non-exclusive basis in this
jurisdiction.
(5) The authority shall enter into a first responder agreement with this jurisdiction and may issue,
suspend, revoke, and renew permits for the delivery of first responder services in this jurisdiction by
other agencies, subject to the credentialing process by EPAB and the office of the medical director
and subject to rights of appeal to the board.
(6) The authority shall adopt standards approved by EPAB governing the operation of specialized
mobile intensive care units and for specialty care transport within the service area, including
standards limiting the types of patients which may be transported thereby, and, subject to the
credentialing process by EPAB and the office of the medical director, may issue, suspend, revoke,
and renew permits for the operation of such units as required by this article.
(7) The authority shall adopt standards approved by EPAB governing the operation of
aeromedical transportation units within the service area, including standards defining the
circumstances under which such units may be deployed to emergency scenes and, subject to the
credentialing process by EPAB and the office of the medical director, may issue, suspend, revoke,
and renew permits for the operation of such units as required by this article.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/554
(8) The authority shall adopt standards approved by EPAB governing the provision of special
event ambulance standby service within the service area and, subject to the credentialing process
by EPAB and the office of the medical director, may issue, suspend, revoke, and renew permits for
the provision of such ambulance standby service.
(c) The authority board's membership and other matters relating to the authority shall be set forth in the
restated interlocal cooperative agreement and in the bylaws adopted by the authority's board.
(Ordinance 2017-2-01, sec. 5, adopted 2/21/17)
Sec. 62-24. First responder advisory board.
(a) There is hereby created a first responder advisory board (“FRAB”) which shall advise and inform the
authority and EPAB on matters related to first response and prehospital emergency medical services in the
service area.
(b) The FRAB's membership and other matters relating to the board shall be set forth in the restated
interlocal cooperative agreement and in the bylaws adopted by the FRAB.
(Ordinance 2017-2-01, sec. 6, adopted 2/21/17)
Sec. 62-25. Violations.
(a) It shall be unlawful:
(1) To knowingly give false information to induce the dispatch of an ambulance or aeromedical
transportation unit;
(2) To perform duties as an ECA, EMT, paramedic or emergency ambulance dispatcher without
current credentials issued by the office of the medical director, unless participating in a training
program approved by office of the medical director;
(3) To permit a person to work as an ECA, EMT, paramedic or emergency ambulance dispatcher
without current credentials issued by the office of the medical director, unless participating in a
training program approved by office of the medical director;
(4) To use, or cause to be used, any ambulance service other than the authority, except as
permitted in subsection (b) below;
(5) For any person or entity other than the authority to provide ambulance service within this
jurisdiction, unless pursuant to a written agreement with the authority;
(6) For any person to provide medical transportation originating in the service area without a
permit issued by the authority;
(7) For any agency to provide first responder services without a first responder permit issued by
the authority, unless pursuant to a first responder agreement with the authority or a written automatic
aid or mutual aid agreement with this jurisdiction;
(8) To use an ambulance for the transportation of persons other than in connection with the
transportation of a patient.
(b) It shall be a defense to any alleged violation of this section that a vehicle is being used or service is
provided solely in any of the following manners:
(1) As a privately owned vehicle not ordinarily used in the business of transporting persons who
are sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated or helpless;
(2) Rendering service as an ambulance at the request of the EMS communications center upon
the declaration of a disaster by this jurisdiction, the State of Texas, or the United States; or a
declaration of a major catastrophe or extreme system overload by the chief executive officer of the
authority;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/554
(3) Any ambulance owned or operated by the federal or state government;
(4) Ambulance mutual aid calls when rendered pursuant to an ambulance mutual aid agreement
approved by the authority;
(5) Special event ambulance standby coverage, so long as such service is provided without
charge by an emergency medical services volunteer provider, as defined in Tex. Health and Safety
Code sec. 773.003(13), or the authority has first declined to provide coverage and the entity
providing coverage has been a permit by the authority;
(6) Wheelchair transport services for persons other than patients, when the service is not provided
by ambulance; and
(7) Medical transportation of a patient where the transport originates outside the service area.
(Ordinance 2017-2-01, sec. 7, adopted 2/21/17)
Sec. 62-26. Penalties.
(a) Any person convicted of violating the provisions of section 62-25 shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor
and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 (Tex. Penal Code section 12.23).
(b) This section does not serve to limit any other remedies available to the jurisdiction in law or equity.
(c) Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2017-2-01, sec. 8, adopted 2/21/17)
Sec. 62-27. Traffic laws; exemption.
When the driver of an emergency medical response vehicle has reasonable grounds to believe that an
emergency exists, as determined by the EMS communication center, the vehicle shall be treated as an
“authorized emergency vehicle” within the meaning of chapter 546 of the Tex. Transp. Code and shall be
exempt from traffic laws as provided therein. (Ordinance 2017-2-01, sec. 9, adopted 2/21/17)
Secs. 62-28–62-53. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. AUTOMOBILE WRECKERS*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 62-54. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Consent tow.
(1) The term “consent tow” means any tow of a motor vehicle initiated by the owner or operator of
the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody or control of the vehicle.
(2) The term “consent tow” does not include a tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a peace officer
investigating a traffic accident or a traffic incident that involves the vehicle.
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled.
Nonconsent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow.
Owner means any person who holds the legal title of a motor vehicle or who has the legal right of possession
thereof, or the legal right of said vehicle.
Street means any street, alley, public place, square or highway within the corporate limits of the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/554
Vehicle means every device in or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a
public highway, except devices moved only by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks,
and shall include trailers and semitrailers.
Wrecker means any motor vehicle used for the purpose of towing or removing disabled or wrecked vehicles.
Wrecker business means the business of towing or removing disabled or wrecked vehicles on the public
streets, regardless of whether the purpose of the towing is to remove, repair, wreck, store, trade or purchase
such disabled or wrecked vehicles.
Wrecker company means any person engaged in the wrecker business.
Wrecker selection form means the form for selection of wrecker companies, prepared and used as provided in
section 62-57.
(1976 Code, sec. 8-1; 1998 Code, sec. 26-1)
Sec. 62-55. Invitation of wrecker to scene of accident required; exception.
No person shall drive a wrecker to or near the scene or situs of an accident or collision on the streets of the city,
unless such person has been called to the scene by the police department of the city, provided that when it is
necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in an accident or collision, any other person
may summon a wrecker and the prohibition of this section shall be inapplicable. (1976 Code, sec. 8-2; 1998
Code, sec. 26-2)
Sec. 62-56. Soliciting business prohibited.
No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets of the city, the business of towing any
vehicle which is wrecked or disabled on a public street, regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose
of soliciting the business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or purchasing said vehicle.
Proof of the presence of any person engaged in the wrecker business or the presence of any wrecker or motor
vehicle owned or operated by any person engaged in the wrecker business, either as owner, operator,
employee or agent, on any public street in the city, at or near the scene or situs of a wreck, accident or collision
within one hour after the happening of a wreck, accident or collision, shall be prima facie evidence of a
solicitation in violation of this section. (1976 Code, sec. 8-3; 1998 Code, sec. 26-3)
Sec. 62-57. Wrecker selection form-Contents.
The chief of police shall cause a wrecker selection form to be prepared which shall:
(1) Contain a statement by the owner of the disabled vehicle designating in blank spaces therein
the wrecker company (one authorized under this article to engage in the wrecker business) which he
desires to remove the disabled vehicle and the place to which he desires said vehicle removed;
(2) Contain a statement authorizing any police officer to call the designated wrecker company to
remove the disabled vehicle;
(3) Contain a statement in the alternative that the owner has no preference as to a wrecker
company and authorizes any police officer to call the wrecker service under contract to the city and
that he desires the vehicle to be removed to the place designated by him in the blank space therein;
and
(4) Provide space for signature of the owner of the vehicle.
(1976 Code, sec. 8-4; 1998 Code, sec. 26-4)
Sec. 62-58. Same-Use.
(a) When a police officer investigating an accident determines that any vehicle which has been involved in a
collision or accident upon a public street is unable to proceed safely under its own power, or when the owner
thereof is physically unable to drive such vehicle, such officer shall request the owner to designate on a wrecker
selection form the wrecker company the owner desires to remove the vehicle. Such designation by the owner
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/554
shall be indicated on said form and when completed shall be signed by the owner. The police officer shall give a
copy of the authorization thus made on the form to the owner and shall retain for record the original thereof.
Upon leaving duty on the same day, the police officer shall place such original in a well-bound book in the police
department provided for that purpose.
(b) When the owner has designated the wrecker company desired, the police officer shall communicate the
fact immediately to police department headquarters and it shall be the duty of the officer receiving such
information at headquarters to call the designated company to send a wrecker to the scene of the accident or
collision.
(1976 Code, sec. 8-5; 1998 Code, sec. 26-5)
Sec. 62-59. Wrecker used in absence of designation.
In the event the owner of a disabled vehicle involved in an accident or collision fails or refuses to designate a
wrecker company, or if it becomes necessary to have abandoned or untended vehicles removed from public or
private property, the investigating officer shall cause the wrecker company under contract to the city for such
service to be summoned to provide such service. (1976 Code, sec. 8-6; 1998 Code, sec. 26-6)
Sec. 62-60. Influence or recommendation by police as to selection of wrecker prohibited.
No police officer investigating or present at the scene or situs of any wreck, accident or collision on a public
street shall, directly or indirectly, either by word, gesture, sign or otherwise, recommend to any person the name
of any particular person engaged in the wrecker service or repair business; nor shall any such police officer
influence or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of any person in choosing or selecting a wrecker or
repair service. (1976 Code, sec. 8-10; 1998 Code, sec. 26-7)
Sec. 62-61. Following vehicles in response to accident report prohibited.
No person shall follow in a wrecker any ambulance or police car which is traveling on a public street in
response to report of an automobile collision or accident. (1976 Code, sec. 8-11; 1998 Code, sec. 26-8)
Sec. 62-62. Impoundment of wrecked vehicle.
Any police officer, in the exercise of his discretion as a police officer, may direct that any vehicle shall be taken
by the driver of the wrecker towing the vehicle directly to the city pound and there held by the city for inspection
or investigation to determine the cause or reason for the accident such vehicle was involved in or such vehicle's
disability or for any lawful purpose. (1976 Code, sec. 8-12; 1998 Code, sec. 26-9)
Sec. 62-63. Signs required on wreckers.
Each wrecker doing business in the city shall be marked by displaying a sign on each door with the name,
address and telephone number of the wrecker service in letters at least one-inch-high. (1976 Code, sec. 8-18;
1998 Code, sec. 26-10)
Secs. 62-64–62-84. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
Sec. 62-85. Required.
Every owner of a tow truck that performs nonconsent tows in the city regardless of whether the owner's tow
truck operations has a place of business in the city, as well as every owner of a tow truck that performs consent
tows in the city and has a place of business within the city, shall first obtain a permit for each wrecker which
shall engage in such business. It shall be unlawful to engage in the wrecker business within the city without first
obtaining a permit. Such permits shall be kept in the permitted wrecker and shall be available for inspection by
any city police officer. (1976 Code, sec. 8-27; 1998 Code, sec. 26-31)
Sec. 62-86. Application.
Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this article shall file a sworn written application
therefor with the city secretary, which such application shall contain the following:
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/554
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The number of wreckers proposed to be operated by the applicant.
(3) The address and telephone number of the business location from which the applicant will
operate such wrecker business, if he secures a permit.
(4) The types of wrecker equipment which he proposes to place in operation.
(5) Whether the applicant has available space for properly accommodating and protecting all
disabled motor vehicles to be removed by him from the places where they are found disabled.
(6) Whether the applicant desires his name to appear on the wrecker rotation list.
(7) Such other information as the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to effectuate the
purpose of this article and to arrive at a fair determination of whether the terms of this article have
been complied with.
(1976 Code, sec. 8-28; 1998 Code, sec. 26-32)
Sec. 62-87. Fee.
At the time the application for a permit to be issued under the provisions of this article is filed with the city
secretary, the applicant shall pay to the city secretary a fee as established by the city council for each wrecker
proposed to be operated in the city thereunder. Such fee shall not be returned to the applicant in the event the
permit is refused. (1976 Code, sec. 8-29; 1998 Code, sec. 26-33)
Sec. 62-88. Issuance.
Upon the filing of an application for a permit together with the required insurance and fees, the city secretary
shall issue a permit to the applicant. (1976 Code, sec. 8-30; 1998 Code, sec. 26-34)
Sec. 62-89. Liability insurance required.
No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article unless the applicant therefor shall procure and
keep in full force and effect a policy or policies of public liability and property damage insurance issued by a
casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the state and in the standard form approved by the
state board of insurance commissioners, with the insured provisions of said policy or policies including the city
as a named insured, and the coverage provision insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to
any personal property by reason of the operation of a wrecker of such company and providing that the amount
of recovery on each wrecker shall be in limits of not less than the following sums:
(1) For damages arising out of bodily injury or death of any one person in any one accident:
$100,000.00.
(2) For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one
accident: $300,000.00.
(3) For injury to or destruction of property in any one accident: $50,000.00.
Proof of the existence of such a policy shall be required by the city secretary prior to the issuance of any permit.
(1976 Code, sec. 8-31; 1998 Code, sec. 26-35)
Sec. 62-90. Removal of debris at scene of accident.
Each permitted wrecker company called to the scene of an accident shall completely remove from the street all
resulting wreckage or debris, including all broken glass, before leaving the scene. (1976 Code, sec. 8-32; 1998
Code, sec. 26-36)
Sec. 62-91. Duration.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/554
Permits issued under the terms and provisions of this article shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year
of issuance. (1976 Code, sec. 8-40; 1998 Code, sec. 26-37)
Sec. 62-92. Revocation.
The city council shall revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this article when it finds any of the
following:
(1) The permit was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a material fact, either in
the written application or at the hearing before the chief of police on the application.
(2) The permit holder has violated any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city
ordinance, rule or regulation.
(1976 Code, sec. 8-41; 1998 Code, sec. 26-38)
Secs. 62-93–62-112. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. TAXICABS*
Sec. 62-113. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Conduct a taxicab business means the use of one or more taxicabs within the city, by the owner thereof, for the
purpose of carrying passengers for hire, either by driving the same himself or having the same driven by some
other person; provided that this definition shall not apply to any licensed chauffeur hired as a driver by any
person holding a license to conduct a taxicab business in the city.
Taxicab means any and all vehicles carrying passengers for hire, except motor buses or motor coaches
operated by bus lines over designated routes in and through the city.
(1976 Code, sec. 30-1; 1998 Code, sec. 122-1)
Sec. 62-114. Exclusion from article provisions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to passenger buses operating under the regulations of the state
railroad commission and coming into or passing through the city for the purpose of loading and unloading
passengers. (1976 Code, sec. 30-2; 1998 Code, sec. 122-2)
Sec. 62-115. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a taxicab business within the city without having first obtained a
license therefor. (1976 Code, sec. 30-15; 1998 Code, sec. 122-31)
CHAPTER 64
ZONING*
ARTICLE I. TITLE AND PURPOSE
Sec. 64-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City of Forest Hill, Texas.”
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-2. Purpose.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/554
The purpose of this chapter is to zone the entire area of the City of Forest Hill into districts as made and
provided by Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended in accordance with a
comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting health, safety, and the general welfare of the general public.
This chapter has been designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to provide safety from fire, panic, and other
dangers; to provide adequate light and air, to prevent overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of
population, to provide and facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, automobile parking, water, sewage,
schools, parks, and other public requirements. Said districts have been created with fair and reasonable
consideration, among other things, for the character of each particular district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses; and thereby conserve the value of land and buildings in each particular district; and with a view
of insuring a harmonious and appropriate use of all property and to prohibit the inharmonious and inappropriate
use of all property and thereby promote the general good and welfare of the public throughout the City of Forest
Hill. (Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-3. Minimum requirements.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, or general welfare.
It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenants, or other
agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the
use of buildings, or premises or upon height of buildings or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or
required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provision of
this chapter shall govern.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-4–64-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Sec. 64-21. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words as used herein are defined as follows. Definitions not expressly
prescribed herein are to be construed in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and
engineering practices. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the singular number
include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular. The word “building” includes the
word “structure.” The word “shall” or “will” is mandatory and not permissive; whereas the word “may” is
permissive.
Above-Ground Flammable or Combustible Liquid Storage Tanks: A tank listed in accordance with UL 2085
consisting of a primary tank provided with protection from physical damage and fire-resistive protection from a
high-intensity liquid pool fire exposure. The tank may provide protection elements as a unit or may be an
assembly of components, or a combination thereof.
Access: Means of approaching or nearing; includes a rite of passage to and from an adjacent street.
Accessory Building - Commercial: In a service, commercial, business, or industrial district, a subordinate
building attached or detached, and used for a purpose customarily incidental to the main structure. No
accessory structure shall be allowed without a principle structure and shall be located on the same lot as the
principle structure.
Accessory Building - Residential: A subordinate building detached, and used for a purpose customarily
incidental to the main use including, but not limited to, a private garage for automobile storage, tool house,
gazebo, greenhouse as a hobby (not for business), home workshop, children's playhouse, storage house, and
a garden shelter, and said building shall in no way involve the conducting of a business.
Aircraft Hardware Parts Manufacturing: An establishment or manufacturing facility which produces one or more
components for aircrafts.
Airport or Landing Field: An area improved for the landing or takeoff of aircraft, approved by the Federal
Aviation Administration for operation as an airport.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/554
Alcoholic Beverage Sales/Off-Premise Consumption: An establishment which offers to its patrons a variety of
alcoholic beverages packaged for consumption away from the premises.
Alcoholic Beverage Sales/On-Premise Consumption: An establishment which offers to its patrons alcoholic
beverages or mixed alcoholic beverages for consumption on site in opened containers or vessels.
Alley: A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties.
Ambulance Service: An establishment which provides ambulatory transport of persons, to or from a medical
facility for a fee.
Amusement Center, Indoor: A facility providing game equipment for entertainment and amusement as its
primary source of income. Games contained in the facility may include coin-operated machines utilizing balls,
pins, and baskets, video equipment, and pinball. Other equipment may include skill games such as pool,
billiards, bowling, shuffleboard, darts, and batting cages. Any combination of these games may be used in the
facility. Games of wagering, sweepstakes, and chance that may be categorized as gambling are prohibited and
not included in this use.
Amusement Center, Outdoor: An amusement enterprise offering entertainment or games of skill to the general
public for a fee or charge wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open which includes but is not
limited to a miniature golf course, go-cart track, bumper boats, roller coasters, paint ball courses, and other
associated amusement type rides. This shall include water parks, amusement parks, carnivals, etc.
Animal Grooming: An establishment that offers to the general public the service of animal grooming for
domestic pets. No boarding or medical care is provided.
Antique: All goods, materials, articles, or merchandise at least one hundred (100) years of age which derive
value from age.
Antique Shop: An establishment offering for sale items such as glass, china, furniture, or similar furnishing and
decorations which have value and significance as a result of age or design with no outside display or storage.
Apartment: A room or group of rooms used as a dwelling for one (1) family unit with cooking and restroom
facilities therein located in a building where other family dwelling units are located.
Apartment Building: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to
be occupied as three or more families living independently of each other maintaining separate cooking and
restroom facilities.
Apparel Alteration and Repair or Tailor Shop: An establishment that offers individual alteration, repair, or
creation of clothing and apparel to the public.
Appliance Repair, Household: A shop specializing in repair of household appliances including but not limited to
stoves, refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, televisions, and freezers. This use shall not permit outside
display or storage of appliances or appliance parts.
Appliance Store (Retail): An establishment offering for sale new or refurbished household appliances including
but not limited to stoves, refrigerators, washing machines, clothes dryers, televisions, and freezers that shall not
permit outside storage or display.
Art Gallery or Museum: An establishment exhibiting articles or art, which are for sale, such as paintings,
sculptures, etc.
Arts, Crafts, and Hobby Shop: An establishment offering for sale those items commonly associated with
hobbies, including display areas for hobbies. This shall include but is not limited to art supplies, ceramics,
sewing supplies, craft supplies, plaster working supplies, scrapbooking items, flower arranging items, etc.
Asphalt/Concrete Batching: A facility which mixes asphalt or cement with various aggregates and water in large
quantities.
Assembly Plant: A facility for the assembly of equipment including automobiles, trucks, farm machinery, railroad
cars, engines, and appliances from components fabricated for the most part in other locations.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/554
Assembly/Dance/Banquet Hall: A building and associated facilities for lease, rent or hire dedicated to social or
recreational activities without the serving of alcohol.
Athletic Field and Play Field, Commercial: An athletic field or stadium owned and operated privately, including a
baseball field, golf course, football field, or stadium which may be lighted for night-time play.
Athletic Field and Play Field, Public: An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a public agency for the
general public, including a baseball field, soccer field, golf course, football field, or stadium which may be
lighted for night-time play.
Bakery (Retail): An establishment which produces bakery goods and various confectionery items, such as rolls,
bread, cakes, etc. for direct sale to the consumer.
Bakery, Wholesale Candy: A manufacturing facility for either baked goods or candy with the purpose of selling
the products at off-site retail locations.
Bank: An establishment for receiving or lending money, various other financial services may be offered, usually
regulated by the Federal Reserve Board, insured by FDIC.
Bar, Nightclub: A place where spirituous, vinous, malt or other alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on
premises; provided however, that incidental holding areas within restaurants for customers awaiting seating and
in which alcoholic beverages are served shall not be construed to be “bars” so long as such holding area or
areas do not exceed 25% of the total square footage of the restaurant, excluding kitchen areas, and the gross
sales for alcoholic beverages within the restaurant excluding such holding areas do not exceed 20% of the
gross receipts of the restaurant; and, further, provided that restaurants which derive 20% or less of their gross
receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages shall not be construed to be “bars.”
Barber Shop or Beauty Salon: An establishment which provides personal services including haircuts, perms,
color treatments, manicures, pedicures, and other personal beauty services staffed by licensed persons.
Batting Cages: A private, commercial enterprise offering outdoor batting cages to the general public for a fee or
charge.
Bingo Establishment: An establishment, operated by a licensed non-profit organization, which offers a specific
game of chance, commonly known at [as] bingo or lotto, in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated
numbers or symbols on a card conforming to number or symbols selected at random. Establishment and
operators must meet all regulations as required by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
Block: A tract of land bounding by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad
right-of-way, airport boundaries, bulkheads, or shore lines where no bulkheads have been established, or
corporate boundary lines of the City. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine the outline of the block.
Board of Adjustment: The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of Forest Hill, Texas.
Boat and Accessories, Sales and Service: An open area or lot used for the display or sale of boats includes
building which may display boats and contain, therein, an area where boats are serviced, no parts or damaged
merchandise awaiting installation or repair, respectively, shall be visible on the premises.
Bookstore: An establishment where books, magazines, periodicals, or newspapers are sold. This is to not
include adult books, adult magazines, etc., as defined in the SOB Ordinance.
Bottling Plant: A facility for the bottling of products for off-site retail sales.
Bowling Alley: A facility housing a series of wooden lanes on which a hard ball is rolled down in an effort to
knock down wooden pins, usually having facilities for food or drink. Should this use include the selling of
alcoholic beverages, then a Specific Use Permit shall be required.
Breezeway: A covered passage one story in height and six (6) feet or more in width connecting a main structure
and an accessory building. A breezeway shall be considered an accessory building.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/554
Buffer Area: An area of land together with specified planting and/or structures thereon, which may be required
between land uses of different intensities to eliminate or minimize conflicts between such uses.
Build: To erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct, restore, or alter a building or structure.
Building: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattels or removable property of
any kind and which is affixed to the land. This term does not include fences, but does include swimming pools.
Building Area: The gross area covered by the building or buildings placed on a lot.
Building Code: Those regulations adopted in Chapter 10 of the Forest Hill Code of Ordinances.
Building Line: A set-back line from a public or private street. See “Setback Line.”
Building Maintenance and Repair Services: A contractor's facility specializing in construction repair or
remodeling.
Building Material Manufacturing: A facility for the production of building materials which include fiberglass,
wallboard, shingles, etc.
Building Materials and Lumber Sales: An establishment which distributes or sells building materials, such as
hardware, plumbing material, electrical material, lumber, fencing wire, bricks, cement cinder blocks,
landscaping stones, and other materials used in the building trade. All outside storage shall be enclosed with a
solid screening device.
Building Official: The City Manager of the City or the person otherwise duly designated to act in such capacity
for the City.
Building Permit: An instrument in writing signed by an enforcing officer authorizing described construction on a
particular lot.
Bus, Train, and Taxi Station or Terminal: A facility that provides for regularly scheduled transit services,
passenger lounges, ticketing, and customer parking.
Business Office: A room or group of rooms where the general administration and affairs of a business are
carried on, but where no retail transactions are conducted.
Cabinet Shop: A shop for the assembly of cabinetry for domestic use.
Cable Television Transmission Lines: Wires conducting television signals for charge to subscribers.
Cafeteria/Cafe/Restaurant/Fast Food: A commercial eating establishment where snacks or meals are vended
for consumption primarily on the premises. This definition is intended to include establishments with delivery
offered to automobiles away from the main building.
Camp Ground and Related Facilities: An area that is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by
transients using recreational vehicles, tents, or other temporary dwellings for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping
purposes. The use may also include cooking facilities, bathhouses, and recreation areas. This does not include
a manufactured housing community.
Candy Shop: An establishment which offers for sale various confectionery items.
Car Wash/Detail Car Center: A commercial operation which washes, waxes, buffers, or launders cars or other
automotive equipment. Must have proper drainage inlets as required by the City's Building Officials or designee.
Caretaker, Guard or Servant, Residence or Apt. Garage: A residence located on a premise with a main
nonresidential or residential use occupied only by an employee of the principal use, and serviced through the
same utility meters or connections as the principal use to which it is accessory. Manufactured homes are not
permitted for this use.
Cargo/Storage Container: A standardized, reusable vessel that is or appears to be: Originally, specifically or
formerly designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, goods or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/554
commodities, and/or designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a rail car, and/or designed for or
capable of being mounted on a chassis or bogie for movement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship. Shall not be
allowed more than two (2) months in a residential district.
Carnival or Circus: A traveling amusement show featuring exhibits and rides or varied performances by
acrobats, clowns, and trained animals.
Carpet and Rug Cleaners: An establishment which cleans commercial and residential carpets and rugs on site.
Carpet Manufacturing: An establishment which manufactures commercial and residential carpets and rugs.
Carpet Store (Retail): An establishment which offers for sale commercial and residential carpets and rugs.
Catering Service: A facility where food is prepared in large quantities to be transported to, served, and
consumed at an off-site location.
Cement or Hydrated Lime: A manufacturing facility and process for making cement, hydrated lime, and
byproducts, including storage of product and raw materials.
Cemetery, Mausoleum, Crematorium: An area or structure designed to contain the remains of humans or
animals for permanent interment.
Certificate of Occupancy: A written instrument signed by the Building Official authorizing a described use at a
described location.
Certified Public Account's [Accountant's]Office: A place or space used by an accountant who has successfully
completed all five (5) parts of the state CPA examination, has met all background checks, and is licensed by the
State.
Chemical Blending Plant: A building or facility that is used for the mixing or blending of various chemicals both
liquid and powder chemicals in order to produce various cleaning products for distribution. No outside storage
of chemicals either raw or blended shall be allowed.
Child Care Center or Facility: A facility that provides care or supervision for children who are not related by
blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day for
more than twelve (12) children under the age of fourteen (14), whether or not the facility is operated for profit or
charges for the services it offers.
Child Care Home Occupation: The use of a single-family home for the purpose of caring for more than three but
not exceeding 12 children, other than the care givers own children.
Chiropractor's Office: A place or space used by one who uses a method of treating disease by manipulation of
the joints of the body, especially the spinal column.
Chlorine/Chemical Manufacturing: A manufacturing facility that produces chlorine or other chemicals.
Christmas Tree Sales: An area enclosed or not enclosed used for only a short time each year for the sales of
Christmas Trees. This is not to include the recycling of Christmas trees.
Church, Rectory: Any structure used principally as a place wherein persons regularly assemble for public
worship, including sanctuaries, chapels and cathedrals and on-site buildings adjacent thereto for such
accessory uses as parsonages, friaries, convents, fellowship halls, rectories, Sunday schools, nursery services,
and recreation facilities, but not including primary and/or secondary educational facilities. This uses shall not
include a day care facility open to the public for profit.
City: The City of Forest Hill, Texas.
City Council: The legislative body of the City of Forest Hill.
City Engineer: The City Manager, or the person or contracted firm otherwise duly designated to administer the
provisions of this chapter.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/554
City Manager: That person holding the office of City Manager under the terms of the Forest Hill Charter.
City Secretary: The Forest Hill City Secretary as designated by the City Manager.
Cleaning or Laundry Pick-up Station: An establishment which accepts articles of clothing for the purpose of
freeing these articles of dirt and other impurities, process may be done at establishment or sent away for
processing.
Cleaning or Laundry Self-Service: An establishment which provides machines for a fee to individuals for the
purpose of freeing articles of clothing of dirt and other impurities, often referred to as “Laundromats.”
Cleaning Plant Commercial: An industrial laundry or cleaning plant doing cleaning or laundry for off-premises
service outlets and retail establishments.
Clothing or Similar Manufacturing: An industrial facility for the assembly of clothing or wearing apparel.
Clothing Store: An establishment where clothing, wearing apparel, shoes, belts, and accessories are sold to the
general public. This is to include dress shops, bridal boutiques, and other similar uses. This use does not
include shoe cobbling.
Coffee Shop: A restaurant where coffee and light refreshments are served.
Collector Street: A street which carries traffic from local streets to the system of major streets, including the
principal entrance streets or streets into a subdivision development and streets designed primarily to provide
traffic circulation within or between one or more subdivisions.
Commercial Parking Garage: A building or structure used for the temporary parking of automobiles for a fee not
to include trucks over two (2) tons, truck trailers, utility trailers, and mobile recreational vehicles. The term
temporary shall not allow for overnight parking.
Commercial Parking Lot: A lot devoted to the temporary parking of automobiles for a fee not to include trucks
over two (2) tons, truck trailers, utility trailers, and mobile recreational vehicles. The term temporary shall not
allow for overnight parking.
Commercial Swimming Pool: A recreational facility, privately owned, which offers that opportunity to swim for a
specified fee.
Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Forest Hill, Texas.
Community Center: A building dedicated to social or recreational activities dedicated to promoting the health,
safety, morals, or general welfare of its patrons.
Computer Store: An establishment where computers are sold or repaired.
Contractor Office: A business such as an electrician, mechanic, or plumber whose primary use provides a
service by installing electrical, mechanical, or plumbing systems; which also may have limited sales of
electrical, mechanical, or plumbing supplies or equipment as a secondary use incidental to its primary use. No
outside storage permitted.
Contractor Yard: An area located on the same lot or separate lot as the principal use, used for outside storage
of construction equipment, including vehicles and construction material. All outside storage shall be hidden by
screening fence.
Convalescent Center: A building or structure used for or customarily occupied by persons recovering from
illness or suffering from infirmities of age.
Convenience Store with or without Automotive Fuel Sales: A neighborhood store offering limited amounts of
consumer goods, and permitting automotive fuel sales. This use includes small neighborhood grocery stores
and drugstores whose purpose is to serve the immediate neighborhood, as distinguished from large chain
stores and being in the tradition of “the small mom and pop grocery store.” This use shall not include the
servicing of vehicles.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/554
Convent or Monastery: A place of religious training of recognized religious [religions], including the on site
housing of ministers, rabbis, priests, nuns and similar staff persons.
Copy Shop: A small commercial printing shop which sells on-site most of the items printed, along with
associated items.
Corner Lot: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
Cosmetic Tattoo Establishment: An establishment where trained personnel apply microinjections of pigment to
the dermal layer of skin such that facial cosmetics are applies[d] on a permanent basis. This does not include a
tattoo parlor.
Counseling Facility: A place where one can go to discuss problems, be given advisement, and plan resolutions,
often in a clinical atmosphere.
Country Club: An area containing a golf course and a clubhouse and available only to private specific
membership. Such a club may contain adjunct facilities such as a private club (only in conformance with these
regulations and applicable state statutes), dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts, and similar recreational
or service activities.
Court: An open, unoccupied space bounded on more than one side by the walls of a building or buildings and
used as a primary means of access to all or any part of said buildings. For the purpose hereof, an alcove or
entranceway less than twenty feet (20') in depth shall not be considered a court.
Craft and Antique Retail Center: An indoor facility specializing in the selling of antiques, handicrafts, and other
new retail items, including plants, books, and trinkets. Handicrafts shall be defined as items that are made
completely by hand or by using simple tools that may include woodcrafts, scrapbooking materials, jewelry,
canvas works, crocheted materials, knitted materials, embroidered items, pottery, dolls, baskets, glass items,
metal items, etc. Antiques shall be defined as goods, materials, articles, or merchandise at least one hundred
(100) years of age which derive value from age and/or furniture, made or manufactured in a former period, such
as an eighteenth century roll-top desk. This definition shall not be construed as allowing second hand retail
sales or the rental of booths or space to additional vendors not being the applicant of the Certificate of
Occupancy. This definition may include the selling of consignment items.
Cul-de-sac: A street having but one (1) outlet to another street and terminated on the opposite end by a
vehicular turnaround.
Dairy Processing: A commercial plant for the storage and processing of milk and milk products.
Dance Hall: Any building or space used primarily for the purpose of dancing. This can include the serving of
refreshments but does not include serving or consuming alcoholic beverages.
Day Camp for Children: A facility and activity conducted on a temporary basis for the organized recreation and
instruction of children including, but not limited to, outdoor activities in conformance with state regulations and
license provisions.
Day Care Center, Adult: An agency at which six or more disabled or elderly adults not related to the proprietor,
are left for care for a part of the 24 hours of the day.
Density: The measure of the degree to which land is filled with residential units designed to accommodate a
family group. Measurement excludes public or private streets in calculating density per acre.
Dental Laboratory: A facility for the fabrication of dental appliances such as crowns, bridges, braces, etc.
Dentist's Office: A place or space used by one whose profession is the care and repair of teeth.
Department Store: A large store offering a variety of comparison and consumer goods at a retail price and shall
not include the selling of used or consignment items.
Developer: The legal or beneficial owner of a lot or parcel of land proposed for inclusion in a development
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/554
Development or to Develop: “Development” shall mean the construction of one or more new buildings or
structures on one or more building lots, the location of an existing building or another building lot, or the use of
open land for a new use. “To Develop” shall mean to create a development.
Display: The exhibition of goods, wares or merchandise for retail sale, rental or lease for a period of time not in
excess of one (1) business day.
Distribution Center: A building or group of buildings with storage space which is used for the storage of
merchandise, goods, and wares which are intended to be distributed to other retail or wholesale
establishments.
District: A zoning district under this chapter.
Dormitory: Any structure in an institution in which students are housed.
Drapery, Sewing, or Weaving Shop: A shop offering custom made draperies and other sewn goods and hand or
machine woven goods for sale.
Drive-In Eating Establishment: Any structure and premises specifically designed for the preparations and
dispensing of food and meals for consumption in a vehicle parked on the premises with delivery of food to
customers in cars away from the main building.
Drive-Thru Convenience Store: A facility offering convenience items to consumers without the requirement of
the consumer leaving their vehicle.
Drug Store or Pharmacy: An establishment offering over-the-counter and prescription drugs and allied products
for retail sale.
Dump or Sanitary Landfill: A state-approved area for disposal of nonhazardous waste materials in conformance
with the permit and associated regulations.
Dwelling: A building or a portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including single
family dwellings, two family dwellings and multiple family dwellings, but not including hotels or motels.
Dwelling, Assisted Living Facility: A facility intended to provide dwelling units for occupancy by persons
requiring the level of care and support defined by the State of Texas as “supervised living.”
Dwelling, Attached: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a partial wall or walls.
Dwelling, Detached: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on its building lot.
Dwelling, Guesthouse: A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be
occupied as living quarters for one family and including facilities for food preparation and sleeping.
Dwelling, HUD-Code Manufactured Home: A structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the
rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length; or,
when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
Dwelling, Mobile Home: A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length; or
when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
Dwelling, Multifamily: A residential building containing three or more dwelling units, with the number of families
in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
Dwelling, Single Family Attached: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party
wall or abutting separate wall and which is designed for occupancy by one family and is located on a separate
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/554
lot delineated by front, side, and rear lot lines.
Dwelling, Single Family Detached: A dwelling designed and constructed as a free-standing structure for
occupancy by one family and located on a lot and having no physical connection to a building located on any
other lot.
Dwelling, Two Family: Residential dwelling, on a single platted lot having separate accommodations for and
occupied as, or to be occupied as, a dwelling for only two (2) families.
Dyeing/Laundry Plant; Commercial: A facility for the off-site laundering, bleaching, dyeing, of bulk commercial
clothing.
Easement: Authorization by a property owner of the use by another, including the City and/or public agencies,
for a specified purpose, of any designated portion of his property. A “surface” easement describes an easement
for which the authorization of use includes activities which occur at or above ground level and which inhibit the
use of such property for any other above ground use.
Electric, Electronic Component/Equipment Manufacturing: A facility which produces electrical parts, such as
plugs, switches, and electronic parts, such a[s] capacitors, circuit boards, transistors, etc., also produces
electrical equipment such as power tools, etc., and electronic equipment such as computers, video games, etc.
Electrical Generating Station: A facility designed to convert electrical current from other energy sources for
consumption by dwellings and other structures.
Electrical Sales and Service: An establishment selling electrical supplies and parts and/or providing the
servicing and installation of electrical equipment and fixtures with no outside storage being allowed.
Electrical Transmission Line: A high voltage line used to transmit electrical current to or between electrical
substations or long distances and customarily associated with towers.
Electronics Manufacturing: A facility for the production of printed circuit boards, microchips, and other electronic
parts which may be assembled on site into end products such as computers, televisions, radios, and
communication equipment.
Electronics Store (Retail): A retail facility which offers for purchase electronics that may include but is not limited
to televisions, surround sound systems, stereo systems, and similar items.
Electroplating: A facility whose primary trade is to deposit a coating of metal over an object, usually another
piece of metal by process of electrolysis.
Employment Agency: A business that serves as an agent to a number of employers, offering employment
usually for a fee.
Enforcing Officer: See “Zoning Administrator.”
Engineer's Office (Registered): A place or space for one registered in some branch of engineering, to include
the planning, designing, construction, or management of machinery, roads, bridges, etc.
Extended Stay Hotel/Motel: Any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used,
or which are used, rented, or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes for guests
and contain kitchen facilities for food preparation including but not limited to such facilities as refrigerators,
stoves, and ovens.
Exterminating Service Facility: A business providing extermination services for household pests, including
insects and rodents.
Factory Outlet, Retail or Wholesale Store: An establishment that offers goods and products to the public that is
obtained direct from the manufacturer at prices that reflect savings due to the reduced cost of said direct
distribution.
Fairgrounds or Exhibition Area: An outdoor area for public gathering including fairs, celebrations, carnivals,
circuses, or like events.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/554
Family: Any number of related persons or not more than five (5) unrelated persons living as a single
housekeeping unit.
Farm Machinery and Implement Sales and Service: An enclosed area designed for sales and repair of farm
machinery and equipment.
Farm or Ranch: An area of two (2) or more acres which is used for the primary purpose of growing of usual
farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain. And for the raising of the usual farm poultry and farm animals
such as horses, cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and
storing products raised on premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal and garbage to swine and
other animals. This shall not include any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or
law.
Farmer's Market: Two (2) or more stands or stalls that are owned, leased, or rented for the display or vending of
fruit, vegetables, and other garden or farm crop.
Feed Store: A commercial establishment which sells animal feed; feeding troughs; animal cages, pens, and
gates; fencing materials; pesticides; seeds; and other gardening[,] farming, and ranching supplies.
Feed Store with Animal Sales: A commercial establishment which sells animal feed, feeding troughs, animal
cages, pens, and gates, fencing materials, pesticides, seeds, and other gardening farming, and ranching
supplies, but also the selling of baby chicks, rabbits, guinea pigs, and other similar small or domesticated
animals may be permitted.
Firewood Sales: An area of one (1) acre or more that is used for the sale of firewood whether the wood was
produced on the premises or not.
Fitness Club: A private, commercial enterprise serving a limited membership and tenancy with specific fee
requirements, with facilities for exercise, swimming, playing tennis or handball, racquetball, squash or other
court games.
Flea Market, Indoor: An indoor facility containing a collection of two (2) or more stalls, booths, tables or other
similar arrangements, used by individual vendors where inexpensive, new, or secondhand goods are sold,
displayed, bartered. Absolutely no outside sales shall be allowed.
Flea Market, Outdoor: An outdoor facility containing a collection of two (2) or more stalls, booths, tables or other
similar arrangements, used by individual vendors where inexpensive, new, or secondhand goods are sold,
displayed, bartered.
Flood Fringe: That portion of the flood plain which may be filled and/or altered so as to permit the construction
of improvements provided such alterations and/or filling is approved by the City of Forest Hill, Public Works
Department, and any State of [or] Federal Agency which may have jurisdiction thereof.
Flood Plain: That area outside of the floodway which may be inundated with flood water with an average
frequency of occurrence in the order of once in one hundred years, normally referred to as the intermediate
regional flood by the U.S. Corps of Engineers.
Floodway: The channel of a stream and those portions of the flood plain adjoining the channel that are required
to carry and discharge flood waters.
Floor Area: That sum total of areas of all floors as calculated from measurements to outside walls.
Florist, Retail: An establishment which may or may not grow flowers, but sells flowers, usually in arrangement
form, to the consumer.
Food/Beverage Sales Store: A retail establishment offering food and beverage products for sale to the general
public generally for consumption off the premises. This shall not include alcoholic beverages.
Franchised Utility Shop/Yard: A storage or repair and maintenance area for a franchised utility.
Fraternal Lodge or Union Hall: The location of a society or association organized for the pursuit of a common
objective by working together in some manner.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/554
Fraternity or Sorority: An organization of a social nature associated with a recognized academic institution
which may provide housing for its membership.
Freight Terminal, Motor: A property or building in which freight is brought by common carriers during and is
stored for interstate or intrastate shipment by motor truck, including the necessary warehouse space for storage
of transitory freight.
Freight Terminal, Railroad: A property or building in which freight is brought by common carriers during and is
stored for interstate or intrastate shipment by rail, including the necessary warehouse space for storage of
transitory freight.
Front Yard: An exterior yard between an adjacent street and the entrance side of a principal structure on a lot.
Funeral Home, Mortuary: A building or part thereof used for human funeral services. Such building may contain
space and facilities for cremation facilities, embalming, and the performance of other services used in
preparation of the dead for burial; the performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures; the storage of
caskets, funeral urns, and other related supplies; and the storage of funeral vehicles. Where a funeral home is
permitted, a funeral chapel shall also be permitted.
Furniture Manufacturing: An establishment used for the manufacturing of household or commercial furniture.
This shall not include the manufacturing of appliances.
Furniture Repair: An establishment for the repair of household furniture this should not include the repair of
household appliances nor shall this use include the selling of furniture nor shall this use allow for outside
storage.
Furniture Store (Retail): An establishment offering for sale new or refurbished household or commercial
furniture and shall not permit outside storage or display.
Garage, Commercial: Any building or structure used for housing more than one commercial motor vehicle, or
where any vehicles are kept for remuneration or hire.
Garden Shop (Inside): An establishment offering for sale tools for the garden, insecticides (pest controls),
fertilizer, mowers, seeds, lawn equipment, such as lounges, chairs, side tables, etc. Some items may be
displayed in front of establishment outside during business hours.
Gas Transmission Line and Metering Station: The main line through which passes natural gas or other gases,
for use in heating, cooking, etc., and the facility which measures the amount of gas that passes through a
specific part of the line.
General Food Sales (Retail): A place or area of business which sells food to the consumer for off premises
consumption, often referred to as a grocery store or supermarket. All health permit requirements must be met.
Gift, Card, or Novelty Shop: A place or area of business which sells gifts, greeting cards, souvenirs, and
associated products for sale.
Golf Course, Commercial: An area of land designed in such a way as to present a challenge on which to play a
game in which a small resilient ball is struck by long-handled clubs into a successive number of holes which are
marked by flags which is privately owned but is open to the public for a fee.
Golf Course, Driving Range: An establishment offering areas for driving of golf balls including “pitch and putt”
facilities.
Government Administration Facility: A building or structure owned, operated, or occupied by governmental
agency to provide a governmental service to the public.
Grade: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building
and a point five (5) feet distance from said wall, or the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface between
the exterior wall of a building and the property line if it is less than five (5) feet distance from said wall. In case
walls are parallel to and within five (5) feet of a public sidewalk, alley, or other public way, the grade shall be the
elevation of the sidewalk, alley, or public way.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/554
Greenhouse or Plant Nursery: An establishment operated for commercial purposes, offering plants grown on
premises and off premises and associated products for sale for use in connection with home gardening
activities.
Grocery Store: A retail store primarily engaged in the retail sales of all sorts of canned goods, dry goods, fresh
fruits and vegetables, and fresh and prepared meats, fish, and poultry.
Gross Floor Area: The total square footage of the building, including offices, restrooms, storage area, etc.
Gross Receipts: Receipts from all retail sales from all business conducted on the premises and shall be
deemed to include the sales price received of goods, including gasoline, sold on consignment without deduction
for any amount due the consignor.
Group Home for the Disabled: A dwelling shared by disabled persons, including resident staff, who live together
as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care,
education, and participation in community activities for the residents, with the primary goal of enabling the
resident to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential. As used herein, the
term “disabled” shall mean having (1) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of
the person's major life activities so that such person is incapable of living independently; (2) a record of having
such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such an impairment. However, “disabled” shall not include
current illegal use of or addiction to controlled substance, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the
home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. The term “group home for the
disabled” shall not include alcoholism or drug treatment center, work release facilities for convicts or exconvicts,
or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration. Said facility shall meet all
regulations and standards as defined in the Texas Boarding House Model Standards and shall pass an annual
inspection to be performed by the Forest Hill Fire Marshal and Building Official.
Gun Shooting Range (Indoor): A specialized facility designed for firearms practice.
Gunsmith Shop: A facility used for the repairs, modifications, designs, or building of firearms.
Gymnasium: A building or room used for physical education and sports, which may be equipped with gymnastic
or other sports-related equipment and that, may have seating in which spectators may view sports activities.
Halfway House: A residential facility providing shelter, supervision and residential rehabilitative services for
persons who have been inmates of any county, state or federal correctional institution and released and require
a group setting to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society. Said facility shall meet all
regulations and standards as defined in the Texas Boarding House Model Standards and shall pass an annual
inspection to be performed by the Forest Hill Fire Marshal and Building Official.
Handicraft Shop and Art Objects: A shop offering handmade arts and crafts items, objects, handicraft supplies,
and associated products for sale.
Hardware Store: An establishment offering for sale household hardware including but not limited to hand tools,
power tools, keys, plumbing supplies, electrical supplies, paint supplies, and lawn and garden products to the
general public.
Hauling or Storage Company: A company engaged in local, unregulated hauling of freight and materials
providing short-term or long-term storage of associated freight.
Health and Fitness Center: An indoor facility including uses such as game courts, exercise equipment, locker
rooms, Jacuzzi, and/or sauna and pro shop, gymnasiums, private clubs (athletic, health, or recreational),
reducing salons, and weight control establishments. Also may offer classes for exercise, dance, self-defense,
and martial arts.
Health Clinic: A public or private, profit or nonprofit facility for the reception and treatment of outpatient persons
physically or mentally ill, injured, handicapped, or otherwise in need of physical or mental diagnosis, treatment,
care, or similar service.
Heavy Machinery (Sales and Services): An establishment offering for sale such items as construction graders,
earth movers, backhoes, heavy duty trucks (dirt moving), having on premises facilities for repair of same.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/554
Height of Building: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or the
deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of a highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
Heliport: A landing facility for rotary wing aircraft, subject to regularly scheduled use which may include fueling
or servicing facilities for such craft.
Hobby Studio, Private: An accessory activity area used by the occupants of the premises purely for personal
enjoyment, amusement, recreation, or cultivation of artistic talents with no sales being permitted.
Home Day Care: A residential facility licensed by the Texas Department of Human Services that regularly
provides care in the caretaker's own residence for seven (7) to twelve (12) children under the age of fourteen
(14) years of age, excluding the caretaker's own children.
Home Entertainment Sales - Electronic: An establishment which provides electronic products to the consumer
which are designed for residential use as opposed to commercial.
Home for the Aged, Residence: A home where elderly people are provided with lodging and meals without
nursing care being a primary function.
Home Occupation: An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that:
a. No person other than members of the family residing on the premises are engaged in the
occupation on the premises,
b. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation is clearly incidental and subordinate to its
use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 250 square feet of floor area of the
dwelling unit are used in the conduct of the home occupation,
c. There is no visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation from the outside the
building,
d. The home occupation is not conducted in an accessory building,
e. Any sales in connection with the home occupation are clearly secondary, and there are no
sales from the dwelling,
f. Traffic is not generated by the home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be
expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of the
home occupation is met off the street and other than in a required front yard,
g. Equipment, processes or work is not used or conducted in the home occupation which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off
the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment, process or work is used or conducted
which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or
causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises,
h. The following occupations are specifically excluded as home occupations: operation of beauty
culture schools, beauty parlors, barber shops, lawn mower or other small engine repair, automotive
repair, television, radio, or electronic repair and bicycle repair,
i. No outdoor storage or signage of any type is permitted with any home occupation.
Horizontal Directional Drilling Products - Sell, Assemble, and Repair: An establishment that sells, assembles, or
repairs products and machines used in the practice of horizontal drilling. This use shall allow for outside storage
of operable machines or other heavy equipment on an improved surface and shall not allow for outside storage
of parts, tools, supplies, or inoperable machinery.
Hospital: An institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary, and emergency services of a medical or
surgical nature to human patients and injured persons, and licensed by state law to provide facilities and
services in surgery, obstetrics, and general medical practice including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices that are an integral part of the
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/554
facilities. Hospitals may include supportive retail and personal service uses operated by or under the control of
the hospital primarily for the convenience of patients, staff, and visitors.
Hospital, Acute Care: An institution where sick or injured patients are given medical or surgical treatment
intended to restore them to health which is licensed by the State of Texas.
Hospital, Institution Care: An institution where those persons suffering from illness, injury, alcoholism, narcotics
dependency, psychiatric disorder, or deficiency of age are given care and treatment on an outpatient or resident
basis and which is licensed by the State of Texas.
Hotel or Motel: An establishment which provides lodging to be rented or leased, and may provide on premise
dining or entertainment facilities.
Ice Cream Parlor: An establishment where a food made of cream or milk, sweetened, flavored, and frozen is
served to the consumer.
Impounded Vehicle Storage Facility: A garage, parking lot or other type of facility used exclusively for the
temporary parking and storage of impounded operable or inoperable motor vehicles for a period of time not to
exceed ninety (90) days. All unenclosed facilities must be paved with an all-weather surface. An impounded
vehicle storage facility must be a licensed vehicle storage facility pursuant to V.A.T.C.S. section 6687-9a. An
impounded vehicle storage facility does not include a junkyard or an automotive wrecking and salvage yard
pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code section 396.001. Vehicles may not be salvaged, dismantled or
repaired at the facility. Entire facility must be screened from public view.
Insurance Sales Office: A business that offers to the public various types of insurance, may be one company or
a combination of several.
Intensity Class, Land Use: A measure of the magnitude and negative impact of the land use on neighboring
land uses as determined by the permissible uses. “More Intensive District” shall mean one with more permitted
uses, progressing from the first district listed in Sec. 64-41 to the last district listed (the most intensive) and Sec.
64-41 progressing from the first district listed to the last district listed. Special purpose districts shall not be
considered either more or less intensive than any other district. The term “more restrictive district” shall be
synonymous with the term “less intensive district” and the term “less restrictive district” shall be synonymous
with the term “more intensive district.”
Jewelry Store: An establishment specializing in the selling, designing, repairing, or the manufacturing of jewelry.
Job Printing (No off-set press): An establishment utilizing letter press, duplicating equipment, but not rotary
presses or linotype equipment.
Kennel, with outside runs: Any building, lot or premises on or in which five (5) or more dogs are kept, at least
eight (8) weeks of age, or any building, lot or premises where dogs or cats are housed or accepted for
boarding, for which remuneration is received, having outside runs. This term does not include a veterinary clinic
or a facility where animals are trained to fight.
Kennel, without outside runs: Any building, lot or premises on or in which five (5) or more dogs are kept, at least
eight (8) weeks of age, or any building, lot or premises where dogs or cats are housed or accepted for
boarding, for which remuneration is received, without having outside runs. This term does not include a
veterinary clinic or a facility where animals are trained to fight.
Kiosk: A freestanding structure upon which temporary information and/or posters, notices, and announcements
are posted, or a freestanding building with one or more open sides from which commercial activities are
conducted.
Laboratory, Medical and/or Dental: A facility with materials and scientific and technological equipment designed
for scientific experimentation, examination, evaluation, and documentation for medical and other technologies.
Or a laboratory for the preparation of medical and dental appliances, radiological preparations, chemical
analysis and similar activities to be used in the treatment of or research about humans.
Laboratory, Support: A facility for scientific laboratory analysis of natural resources, medical resources, and
manufactured materials. The scientific analysis is generally performed for an outside customer, to support the
work of that customer. This category includes environmental laboratories for the analysis of air, water, and soil;
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/554
medical or veterinary laboratories for the analysis of blood, tissue, or other human medical or animal products.
Forensic laboratories for analysis of evidence in support of law enforcement agencies would also be included in
this category.
Landscape Materials, Sales and Service: An establishment which sells live plants, flowers, shrubs, trees, grass,
rock arrangements of [or] other live and inanimate objects for the purpose of adorning or improving land,
providing the service of landscaping by same.
Landscaping: Adorned or improved by contouring land and placing thereon live plants, flowers, shrubs, grass,
or an arrangement of rock or other decorative material. Grasses and ground covers alone shall not constitute
adequate landscaping. All landscaping shall be maintained in such a way as to not allow for dead or dying
vegetation. A defense to this definition may be allowed for drought conditions.
Large Retail Facility: A facility offering retail sales and/or services, whether occupied by one (1) or multiply
[multiple] tenants, that is comprised of more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of floor area, which
includes gross floor area, outdoor storage areas, and any outside area that provides associated services to the
public, including, without limitation, outdoor merchandise display.
Laundry or Dry Cleaners: A building or place where clothes and linens are washed and thoroughly dried and
pressed by the use of washing, drying, and ironing machines for fee basis and shall include the term “cleaners,”
and “dry cleaners.”
Laundry/Clean Self-Service: A retail establishment providing facilities for customers to launder or dry clean
wearing apparel or other materials.
Leather Goods Shop (Retail): A commercial establishment which sells leather materials and supplies or leather
goods.
Less Intensive District: See “Intensity Class.”
Less Restrictive District: See “Intensity Class.”
Library: Buildings or structures open for the general public, for which a fee may or may not be charged for the
use of book and other media collections.
Light Manufacturing or Assembly: A facility used for subassembly, or assembly of subassemblies for industrial
purposes, generally not emitting noise, odor, dust, or other hazards.
Lighting Supply, Sales and Service: An establishment which offers replacement parts for lighting fixtures as well
as offering complete lighting units to the public.
Lithography or Print Shop: A large commercial printing shop with multiple presses and capabilities.
Local Franchise Utility: A utility such as one distributing heat, chilled water, closed circuit television or similar
service and requiring a franchise to operate in the city.
Locksmith Shop: A shop that specializes in making, selling, and repairing keys, locks, and associated materials.
Lodge, Fraternal, Sorority, and Clubs: An association of persons meeting regularly for their mutual benefit or for
the promotion of some common purpose, supported jointly through payment of membership dues, all members
having the right to vote on policies and business.
Lot: A parcel of land whose boundaries are designed [designated] on a plat recorded under the provisions of
Article 974a, Texas Revised Civil Statutes.
Lot of Record: An area of land designated as a lot on a play [plat] of a subdivision recorded pursuant to statute
with the County Clerk of Tarrant County, Texas.
Lot, Corner: A building lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior angle of such intersection not
exceeding one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/554
Lot, Double Frontage/Through: A building lot not a corner lot which adjoins two streets which are opposite each
other and which are parallel or within forty-five (45) degrees of being parallel to each other. For a double
frontage lot, front yards will be required along both streets.
Lot, Interior: A building lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, Measurement:
a. Area of the lot shall be the net area of the lot, expressed in square feet or acreage, and shall
not include portions of any public street or alley.
b. Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines
connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot
lines in the rear (the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot line).
c. Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and
rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard, provided
however that width between side lot lines at their foremost point (where they intersect with the street
line) shall not be less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot width except in the case of lots on
the turning circle of cul-de-sacs, where a seventy (70) percent requirement applies.
Machine Shop: A shop that manufactures metal products through the use of presses, stamps, and dyes.
Machinery Sales or Repair: A facility for the storage, repair, outside sales, or rental of heavy machinery or
equipment.
Maintenance Guarantee: A guarantee of facilities of [or] work to insure the correction of any failures of any
improvements required pursuant to City regulations, or to maintain same.
Major Thoroughfare: Those streets within the City of Forest Hill with right-of-way of eighty (80) feet or greater.
Manufactured Home Park: A unified development of local manufactured home spaces arranged on a large tract
or lot under single ownership, meeting all requirements of this chapter, and designed to accommodate
manufactured homes for either a temporary or permanent duration.
Manufactured or Industrialized Home Sales: An area devoted to outside sales of HUD-Code manufactured
homes or industrialized housing. For off premise residential use only.
Manufacturing Facility (Light): A facility used for sub-assembly or assembly of sub-assemblies for industrial
purposes, and may conduct manufacturing that does not emit noise, odor, dust, or other hazards.
Massage Establishment: Any building, room, place, or establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital,
where manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced upon the human body by anyone not a
duly licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or a registered nurse or a doctor whether with or without the
use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices. This term shall not include duly licensed beauty parlors or
barber shops or a place wherein registered physical therapists treat only patients recommended by a licensed
physician and operate only under such physician's direction. This term shall not include massage
establishments as defined in the Sexually Oriented Business Ordinances.
Massage, Therapeutic: The act of kneading, rubbing, stroking or other such touching as performed by duly
licensed medical doctors, doctors of osteopathy, chiropractors, registered physical therapists, registered
nurses, licensed vocational nurses at the direction or under the prescription of a medical doctor or doctor of
osteopathy when such treatment is administered or prescribed in the professional course of treatment of a
patient for a bona fide medical or mental infirmity, or massage therapist registered by the State of Texas
Department of Health. This term includes massage authorized by the state in establishments licensed by the
state as beauty shops and barber shops staffed by licensed barbers and beauticians.
May: The word “may” is permissive.
Meat Market (includes Seafood): A retail facility that offers meat, fish, and poultry products for sale to the public
and shall include the sale of meat and meat products to restaurants, hotels, clubs, and other similar
establishments when such sale is conducted as part of the retail business on the premises.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/554
Mechanical Sales and Service (A/C and Heating): An establishment selling air conditioning and heating
supplies and parts and/or providing the repair and installation of air conditioning or heating units with no outside
storage being allowed. This use shall not include the mechanical service of vehicles.
Medical Appliances Sale/Rent: An establishment specializing in the sales and rental of medical appliances.
Medical Laboratory: A laboratory facility which conducts medical analysis on various body fluids and tissue
samples, whose results are reported to the referring physician.
Medical, Dental Office: Offices for one or more physicians, surgeons, or dentists engaged in treating the sick or
injured, but not including rooms for the abiding of patients.
Medical, Dental, and Optical Retail Sales: An establishment offering prescriptions and over the counter medical
products for sale.
Mentally Handicapped Training Residence: A structure and grounds for the training and temporary housing of
mentally handicapped persons together with housing for staff engaged in such training or care of such persons
at the facility.
Metal Fabrication: An establishment that constructs, fabricates, or manufactures metal items.
Mini Warehouse: A building or group of buildings in a controlled-access and fenced compound that contains
varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the dead storage of a
customer's goods or wares. The rented space shall be for private use only. No outside storage, sales, service,
or repair activities other than the rental of dead storage of units will be permitted on the premises.
Mobile Vendor Establishment: A movable food facility that is subject to the regulations in Chapter 12 of the City
Ordinances, Article II relating to Temporary, Portable Businesses.
Modular Home: A “modular home” is a factory built dwelling unit, attached or detached, which is wholly or
partially constructed away from its building site or lot and moved to a building lot where it is affixed or situated
as a permanent building. A modular home is a residential use. A mobile home shall not be construed to be a
modular home.
Mold and Tool Shop: A facility primarily engaged in the manufacture and/or repair of stamping dies, plastic
injection molds, or patters [patterns] for the casting industry. This facility shall not engage in production
machining, fabrication, or other more intense machining uses.
Monument Manufacturing: Manufacturing of monuments including sales and storage facilities.
More Intensive District: See “Intensity Class.”
More Restrictive District: See “Intensity Class.”
Mortgage Company: An establishment which engages in financing purchases of real property where a deed to
the property is held as security.
Motel or Hotel: A building or group of buildings containing individual living or sleeping units specifically designed
as temporary quarters for transient guests and may include provisions for meals and personal service. To be
classified as a motel or hotel an establishment shall contain a minimum of six individual guest rooms or units
and may furnish customary services such as linen, maid service, telephone, use and upkeep of furniture.
Motorcycle Sales and Repair: An area designed for sales of motorcycles and a screened enclosed area for the
repair of motorcycles, with outside storage allowed but no outside engine testing or riding, except in street legal
equipment.
Movie Theater, Cineplex: Complex structures with multiple movie theaters, each theater capable of providing
performances independent of the others in the complex. Structurally, theaters in a Cineplex are grouped in a
manner that allows them to share box or ticket offices, parking facilities, lobby areas, restrooms, concession
stands, signs and marquee displays, and other service and maintenance facilities.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/554
Municipal Building and Uses: A structure or use designed to serve a public purpose of the municipality not
defined elsewhere. This shall include but is not limited to a City Hall, Fire Station, Police Station, and Public
Works Facilities.
Museum: An institution for the collection, display, and distribution of objects of art or science which is sponsored
by or owned and operated by the city, a public or quasi-public agency, and which facility is open to the general
public.
Music Store: An establishment offering music, musical instruments, and other related items for sale to the
general public. Such establishment may offer repair services of musical instruments.
Natural Gas Regulating Station: A system of regulators used by franchised natural gas distributors to lower
pressures in gas mains prior to delivery into local service mains for consumption by local customers.
Newspaper Printing Facility: A facility which uses off-set presses for production or publication of daily or weekly
news, opinions, advertisements, etc.
Nightclub or Dance Hall: An establishment operated as a place of entertainment, characterized by any of the
following as a principal use of the establishment: (1) Live, recorded or televised entertainment, including but not
limited to performances by magicians, musicians or comedians; (2) Dancing; (3) Any combination of (1) and (2).
This shall include the serving of alcoholic beverages.
Nursing Home: A structure used for or occupied by persons recovering from illness or suffering from the
infirmities of old age, including developments containing convalescent or nursing facilities.
Occupancy: Utilization of property.
Office Machine Sales and Service: A shop specializing in the sale and repair of office machinery.
Office Supply Store: A store that specializes in office supplies.
Office, Business: An office in which chattels or goods, wares, or merchandise are not commercially displayed,
created, sold, or exchanged.
Office, Business and Professional: Offices for the provision of business and professional services, not including
retail sales or production.
Oil and Gas Wells: Any single hole or bore to any horizon, formation, or strata, for the purposes of producing
gas, oil, liquid hydrocarbon, brine water or sulphur water, or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery,
disposal, or production of gas or other hydrocarbons from the earth.
Open Space: Land not occupied by buildings, signs or other structures. This may include buffer areas,
recreational areas, required set-back from street right-of-way and property lines, enclosed open space intended
for the private use of a dwelling, and other uses which are not occupied by any non-recreational uses or
structures. Open space where required shall be maintained in perpetuity so that its uses and enjoyment as
open space may not be diminished or destroyed.
Optical Clinic or Office: Offices for one or more physicians engaged in treating the eyes.
Optician Shop: A place or space for one who makes or sells eyeglasses and other instruments for the eyes.
Paint Shop: A shop for the storage, mixing and sale of a full line of retail paint supplies.
Paint Spraying, Mixing: An establishment of business whose primary trade is applying by mechanical means
lacquers, paints, coatings, enamels, etc., and which mixes its own pigments, etc.
Pallet Manufacturing: An establishment which manufactures, repairs, or constructs pallets for resale.
Paper Mill: An establishment devoted to the making of paper.
Park or Playground: An open recreation facility or park owned and operated by a public agency such as the city
or the school district and available to the general public for neighborhood use.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/554
Parking Area: An off-street area for the driving, parking, display, or storage of motor vehicles other than motor
vehicles stored in an automobile storage, lot.
Parochial School: An institution of learning, indoctrinated by the particular religious beliefs of the sponsor, not
supported by tax dollars, but by private donations and by student enrollment fees.
Pawn Shop: A shop specializing in making small loans against personal property or buying used personal
goods from individuals for resale.
Permitted Use: A use specifically allowed in one or more of the various districts without the necessity of
obtaining a Specific Use Permit. This term does not include conditional uses.
Person: A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, a firm, partnership or corporation, its
or their successors or assigns; or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
Personal Use/Temp./Portable Bldgs: A building designed and built to be movable rather than permanently
located on said property. Said building shall not be on the premises longer than 6 months and property owner
must first obtain a permit.
Pet Grooming Shop: An establishment which offers the service of bathing and/or trimming the fur of domestic
animals.
Pet Shop: An establishment offering small animals for sale, with associated goods and services.
Pet Supplies and Aquatic Pet Sales: An establishment or business having for sale pet food, grooming aids, etc.,
and having for sale, pets which live in water, along with plants which grow in or on water.
Petroleum Products Storage Bulk and Wholesale: A facility, open, fenced area containing large tanks for
containing various grades of petroleum products, i.e., kerosene, gasoline, butane, etc., for sale to wholesalers.
Must meet all requirements of the current Uniform Fire Code Manual and/or Railroad Commission.
Pharmaceutical Plant: A facility for the production of drugs for medicine.
Pharmacy: An establishment offering prescription and over the counter pharmaceuticals and other associated
products for sale to the public.
Philanthropic Institution: Any organization operating under a nonprofit charter; the activities of which are
devoted exclusively to benevolent purposes.
Photographic Equipment Sales and Service: A shop that specializes in the sale and repair of photographic
equipment.
Photographic Service: An establishment offering drop-off of film for processing, pickup of developed
photographs, and related services.
Photography Studio: Any place of business where photographic posing for portraits takes place. This shall not
to include [sic] the sale of pornographic material or pornographic photography.
Physical Therapy: A place or space for one who treats disease, injury, etc., by physical means, such as by
massage, exercise, infrared lights, etc.
Physician's Office: A place or space where a doctor of medicine (D.O. or M.D.) practices his profession.
Picture Framing Shop: An establishment which offers the service of picture framing and shall include the sale,
manufacture, or customization of frames.
Plant Nursery: An establishment which grows and sells plants, flowers, shrubs, grass and other items typically
used as and associated with outdoor landscaping or houseplants.
Plastic Products Manufacturing: A facility for the production of molded products constructed out of plastic,
fiberglass, or other composite material.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/554
Plat: A plan of a subdivision of land creating building lots or tracts and showing all essential dimensions and
other information essential to comply with the subdivision standards of the City of Forest Hill and subject to
approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Reference to a plat in this chapter means an official plat of
record which has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and filed in the plat records of
Tarrant County.
Playfield or Stadium (Public): An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a public agency for the
general public including a baseball field, soccer field, golf course, football field or stadium which may be lighted
for night-time play.
Plumbing Sales and Service: An establishment selling plumbing supplies and parts and/or providing the repair
and installation of plumbing and fixtures with no outside storage being allowed.
Pool or Billiard Hall (Dry): A place where people gather for the purpose of playing cue sports such as pool,
snooker, or billiards without the service of alcoholic beverages. Facility may include other games such as darts,
foosball, or video games, etc. Games of wagering and chance, including 8-liners, categorized as gambling are
prohibited and not included in this use.
Pool or Billiard Hall (Wet): A place where people gather for the purpose of playing cue sports such as pool,
snooker, or billiards with the service of alcoholic beverages. Facility may include other games such as darts,
foosball, or video games, etc. Games of wagering and chance, including 8-liners, categorized as gambling are
prohibited and not included in this use.
Post Office: A facility that is considered part of the Postal System for the posting, receipt, sorting, handling,
transmission, or delivery of mail.
Print Shop: An establishment utilizing letter press, duplicating equipment, rotary presses or linotype equipment
to produce in printed form orders for its clients or customers.
Prison or Penitentiary: An establishment in which convicted criminals are physically confined and housed while
serving their sentence.
Private Club: Facilities where food, beverages, including alcoholic beverages, entertainment, or meeting space
is provided to specific membership only.
Private Schools: A school that is not administered by the local, state, or national government and is funded in
whole or in part by charging the student tuition.
Psychologist's Office: A place or space used by one who deals with that pertaining to the mind or the science of
the mind.
Public Community Center/Govt. Bldg. Facility: Any building or facility either, owned or leased by local, state, or
federal governments. This shall include facilities such as maintenance yards and shops.
Public Safety Facility, Police and Fire: A facility designed to provide public protection from dangers of fire and
crime, including civil defense, operational centers, police and fire stations, and training facilities.
Public Schools: A public institution of learning supported by taxes.
Public Surveyor's Office (Registered): A place or space used by one whose business it is to calculate areas of
land and locate the boundary lines for parcels of land.
Public Utility: A closely regulated enterprise with a franchise for providing to the public a utility service deemed
necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare.
Racquetball Court: An indoor or outdoor facility for the playing of racquetball.
Radio, Microwave, TV Tower: Structure, supporting antennae and/or commercial satellite antennae dishes for
transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio spectrum, but excluding noncommercial antennae installations
for home use of radio or television.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/554
Radio, Television Station: A facility designed to create and broadcast original source programming, or relay
commercial programming from another source, including taped or prerecorded materials for any part of the
radio spectrum for commercial consumption.
Railroad Passenger or Bus Terminal: An area and structure designed to service [serve] as a ticketing and
boarding facility for passenger trains.
Railroad Tracks and ROW: The road laid with parallel steel rails along which cars are drawn by locomotives and
the area designated by the railroad over which the rails (and trains) pass and the land to a specified footage on
either side.
Real Estate Office: A facility in which real estate agents offer for sale real property, i.e., land, buildings,
businesses, and residences, usually under contract to the owner of said property.
Real Estate or Leasing Office: An office in which the business of buying, selling, or renting land, buildings, or
housing is conducted.
Rear Yard: An interior yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line and defined by a line along and
parallel to the rear lot line.
Recording Studio: A facility for sound recording and mixing.
Recreational Vehicle Park: A property that is designed, arranged or used for the purpose of parking recreational
vehicles for temporary living quarters for recreational, travel or vacation purposes. This use shall not include the
renting of spaces to be used as a permanent living quarters.
Recreational Vehicle Rental: An establishment offering recreational vehicles, including watercraft, for rent to the
general public. Said facility may display, store, and maintain said vehicles on site solely for the purpose of
renting said vehicles. No short or long term habitation of any recreational vehicle, including watercraft, is
permitted on the site. In addition, no manufacture or repair, with the exception of light maintenance, occurs on
the site.
Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service: An establishment which displays for sale a vehicular, portable structure
built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling, self-propelled or towed behind a motor vehicle.
This use may include the servicing or repairing of said vehicles or structures. No outside storage of dismantled
recreational vehicles, parts, appliances, seats, and the like shall be allowed.
Recreational Vehicle Storage (Commercial): A facility or location which, upon payment of a fee, provides for the
parking and storage of recreational vehicles.
Recycling Collection Facility: A facility designed to collect, sort, and package, by either manual or mechanical
processes, recyclable items for transport to a processing plant.
Recycling Processing Plant: A facility used to process used materials into new products to prevent the waste of
potentially useful materials.
Rehabilitation Care Facility (Criminal-Psychiatric, Mental Disorders and Substance Abuse): A facility whose
primary purpose is to provide residential and/or out-patient care, with supervisory personnel, to persons
regardless of legal relationship, who have been involved in the criminal justice system or related program
including parole or probation as authorized by the criminal justice system, and have demonstrated a tendency
toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct.
Rehabilitation Care Facility (Psychiatric and Mental Disorders): A facility which provides residence and/or outpatient
care, with supervisory personnel, to persons regardless of legal relationship, who have demonstrated a
tendency toward mental illness.
Rehabilitation Care Facility (Substance Abuse): A facility which provides residential and/or out-patient care, with
supervisory personnel to persons regardless of legal relationship who have demonstrated a tendency toward
alcoholism and/or drug abuse.
Rental Store (Appliances, Furniture, Equipment) Inside: An establishment which offers an array of items such
as appliances, furniture, stereo equipment, etc., at a stated price for a fixed interval, stored inside a building.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/554
Rental Yard Commercial and Heavy Equipment: An establishment that provides heavy equipment or
construction products for rent to contractors or the general public to be used off site. The storage of rental
equipment or goods may occur either within the limits of the primary structure, or it may be displayed and
stored outside of the primary structure. Areas reserved for repairs and maintenance of all equipment or goods
must be within the primary structure.
Restaurant or Cafeteria (Not Drive-In): An establishment serving food to the general public in designated dining
areas, but does not include drive-in establishments where food is delivered to or eaten in automobiles. This use
does not include the serving or selling of alcoholic beverages.
Restaurant, Drive-in/ Drive-thru: Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing, or serving of food,
refreshments, or beverages in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may serve
themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments, or beverages on the premises.
Restaurant, Refreshment Stand (Temporary or Seasonal): Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing, or
serving of food, refreshments, or beverages from a temporary or permanent building on a temporary or
seasonal basis. This food facility is subject to the regulations in Chapter 12 of the City Ordinances, Article II
relating to Temporary, Portable Businesses.
Restaurant, w/Alcohol Sales: An establishment serving food to the general public in designated dining areas
and may serve alcoholic beverages to the patron.
Retail Shop, Apparel, Gift and Accessories and Similar Items: Small specialty retail shops such as dress shops
or gift shops serving specific neighborhood areas as differentiated from department stores or discount stores
having community-wide service importance.
Retail Water Vending Facility (unmanned): An unmanned water or ice vending kiosk that filters City water on
site and is dispensed via a coin-operated device to drive up customers who may or may not provide their own
containers.
Rodeo Ground/Fair Ground: An outdoor entertainment area providing an arena for rodeo activities, including
grandstands and bleachers for the viewing public, storage pens, and facilities for the caring and presentation of
livestock, and open area for exhibits and carnival activities. Property must be an area of one (1) or more acres.
Roller or Ice Rink: An organized commercial enterprise featuring either roller or ice skating with locations either
indoors or outdoors.
Rooming House: A dwelling that may or may not be occupied by the owner who provides lodging for not more
than twelve persons for a fee for a period of time pursuant to previous arrangements. Said dwelling shall not be
used in conjunction with a group home for the disabled, halfway house, or transitional living for addicts.
Sand/Gravel Extraction/Storage: The area and facilities for the extraction and storage of natural sands and
gravels in conformance with applicable local, state and federal laws.
Sales Floor Area: The total square footage of the sales floor only. This does not include the square footage of
the offices or storage area, but does include the restroom area.
School, Business College: A business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction and training in a
service or art such as secretarial school, barber college, beauty school, or commercial art school, but not
including manual trade schools.
School, College or University: An academic institution of higher learning, accredited, or recognized by the state,
and offering a program or series of programs of academic study leading to a recognized degree or advanced
degree. This shall include but is not limited to junior and senior colleges, universities, conservatories and
seminaries.
School, Commercial Instruction: A facility that instructs and trains students in the arts, such as of music, dance,
gymnastics, or martial arts, and is primarily operated on a commercial basis.
School, Commercial Trade: A business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction and training in a
trade such as welding, brick laying, machinery operation, and similar manual trades.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/554
School, Home: Educational activities consisting of a defined curriculum with the purpose of satisfying the state
educational requirements and said educational activities being conducted in the home of a student living in the
home. Said educational activities shall be considered to be a part of the housekeeping activities of a family.
Scrap Metal Recycling Center: A premise upon which recyclables are brought, sold, exchanged, stored,
packed, disassembled or handled, limited to ferrous and non-ferrous scrap iron and other metals.
Screening Device: A screening wall shall be of solid wood fencing; brick or masonry structure, at a minimum
height of six (6) feet, but not more than eight (8) feet, except as otherwise noted in this chapter.
Secondhand Store: An establishment specializing in the sale of previously used materials, goods, and
merchandise which do not derive a value as a result of their age.
Set-back Line: The line which marks the setback distance from the property line and establishes the minimum
required front, side, or rear yard space of a building plot.
Sewage Pump Station: Referred to commonly as sewage lift station, sewage accumulates in either an open wet
well or a closed dry well in low areas of collection system where it is pumped by use of large pump into a sewer
force main opposite the force of gravity until it reaches a gravity feed line commonly referred to as a “lift
station.”
Sexually Oriented Business: A massage parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, love parlor, adult bookstore, adult
movie theater, adult video arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, or an adult motel. This definition shall
also include retail facilities that exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total display area square footage
including wall footage of the store with the offering for sell, rent, or exhibiting of devices or any other items that
are anatomically correct.
Shall: The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
Shoe or Boot Store: An establishment offering footwear to the consumer and/or having a repair facility on site to
reheel, patch, resew, etc., footwear.
Shooting Range, Indoor: An indoor facility specializing in the practice of firearms.
Shooting Range, Outdoor: An outdoor facility specializing in the practice of firearms.
Sign: A word, number, figure, device, design or trademark by which anything is made known, as used to
designate an individual, firm, profession, business, or a commodity and which is visible from any public street.
Sign Manufacturer: An establishment specializing in the manufacturing of signs[.]
Sign Shop, Painted or Silk-Screened: A retail business offering signs and banners for sale.
Site Area: Shall relate to mostly outside businesses with little or no inside accommodations. Site area shall be
the total square footage of the business site which would include any office, restroom, sales area, etc.
Site Plan: A scale drawing showing the use of the land including, but not limited to, locations of buildings,
drives, sidewalks, parking areas, drainage facilities, landscaping and structures to be constructed in relation to
boundaries.
Small Engine Repair: A facility for the repair of small engines such items as lawn mowers, chain saws, lawn
edgers and go-carts. No outside storage of dismantled machinery, parts, or engines shall be allowed. All
outside storage of machinery shall be properly screened with a screening fence.
Specialty Shop: An establishment for the purpose of supplying limited specialty items, such as collectible items,
coins, currency, memorabilia, stamps, etc.
Sporting Goods Store: An establishment offering for sale to the general public items used for sport or exercise.
Stable or Barn, Private: An accessory building used by the residents of the premises for sheltering and
quartering of horses, cows, or other domestic livestock that belongs only to the property owner and for which no
fee is charged for stabling of livestock.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/554
Stable or Barn, Public: An area of one (1) acre or more that is used for the sheltering and quartering of horses
for which a fee or charge is made for the stabling of said animals with the total number or [of] horses and/or
cattle being no more than one (1) head of livestock per one (1) acre of land.
Stationery Stores: An establishment where writing materials, such as paper and envelopes, etc., are sold.
Stone Monument Sales: A retail establishment offering for sale stone monuments produced off-premises,
excluding cutting of slabs.
Storage and Warehousing Establishment: A facility that is constructed such that large quantities of products or
goods may be stored for extended periods of time. Said facility may be equipped with loading ramps and docks
that facilitate the loading and off-loading of semi-trailer vehicles.
Storage Yard: Facilities to store any equipment, machinery, building materials, or commodities, including raw,
semi-finished, and finished materials outside at ground level. This use shall provide a screening fence
surrounding all outside storage.
Story: That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if
there is not floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above.
Street: Any thoroughfare or public space not less than sixteen feet (16') in width which has been dedicated or
deeded for vehicular use.
Structure: Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to
something having a permanent location on the ground.
Studio, Dance: A facility for the teaching of fine arts such as dance, cheerleading, baton twirling and
gymnastics, but not including a gymnasium, except that small gymnasiums for the purpose of gymnastics
instruction are permitted.
Swimming Pool (Private): A recreational facility used for swimming which is used by the owners, employees, or
residents of the property and their guests.
Swimming Pool (Public): A recreational facility used for swimming which is open to the public for which a
membership is required or a fee or charge is made for the use of the facility.
Tack Store: A commercial establishment which sells horse equipment such as saddles, bridles, blankets, riding
accoutrements, etc.
Tailor Shop: An establishment which employs one or more persons skilled in making, repairing, or altering
clothes.
Tanning Studio: Any business that uses artificial lighting systems to produce a tan on an individual's body. This
use specifically excludes spas, gymnasiums, athletic clubs, health clubs, and any exercise equipment.
Tattoo Parlor/Body Piercing Studio: An establishment whose principle business activity, either in terms of
operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of one or more of the following: (1) placing of designs,
letters, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances
that result in the permanent coloration of the skin, by means of the use of needles or other instruments
designed to contact or puncture the skin; (2) creation of an opening in the body of a person for the purpose of
inserting jewelry or other decoration.
Taxidermist Studio or Shop: An establishment offering the services of taxidermy or offering for sale to the public
the products produced by a taxidermist.
Telecommunications, Wireless Facility: A facility that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic signals for the
purpose of transmitting analog or digital voice or data communications. It includes antennas, microwave dishes,
horns and other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, telecommunication towers or
monopoles, or similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment buildings, shelters or cabinets, and
other accessory development. Includes personal wireless services as defined in the federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as subsequently amended, but shall not include the following: federallylicensed
amateur radio stations and facilities used exclusively for receive-only antennas.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/554
Telephone Exchange, Switching, or Relay: A facility for the exchange, switching, relaying, or transmission of
telephone services, not including public office facilities, storage, or repair facilities.
Telephone Office: An office of the franchised telephone company for distribution of services, including
conducting usual business transactions.
Temporary Construction Office/Field Office: A temporary use of a portable building, trailer, or model home
during construction of development of a subdivision, building, streets, or utilities. Not to exceed one year
without a specific use permit.
Tennis Court (Private): A concrete or clay court which is used for the playing of tennis by the owners,
employees, or residents of the property and their guests.
Tennis Court (Public): A concrete or clay court which is used for the playing of tennis by the general public and
for which membership is required or a fee or charge is made for the use of the facility.
Textile Manufacturing: Includes knitting, weaving, printing, and finishing of textiles and fibers into fabric goods.
Theater or Indoor Playhouse: A facility designed to house either a cinema, film or live theater production.
Theater; Open Drive In: An outdoor facility designed to provide patrons with viewing of a cinema or filmed
entertainment usually from their private automobiles for a fee.
Tire Recapping, Retreading: An establishment whose primary enterprise is vulcanizing a strip of rubber on the
outer surface of various sized worn tires to produce a sufficiently treaded product.
Tobacco Shop: A retail establishment offering for sale to the public tobacco products and accessories.
Topsoil/Sand Extraction/Storage: An area and facilities for extraction and storage of natural soils and stone in
conformance with applicable local, state and federal laws.
Travel Bureau or Consultant: An office that offers services to patrons as a broker for airline, train or other
transportation and lodging organizations.
Truck Rental Service: Establishments engaged in the short-term rental or extended-term leasing of trucks with a
rated capacity of one (1) ton or more according to manufacturer's classification or licensed registered weight,
truck tractors or semi-trailers. No rental trucks or trailers shall be located in any multi-use/multi-tenant shopping
center.
Truck Repair: An enclosed facility designed for the repair and maintenance of trucks with a rated capacity of
one (1) ton or more according to manufacturer's classification or licensed registered weight, truck tractors, or
semi-trailers, with outside storage of vehicles in state of repair allowed but not to exceed fourteen (14) days and
with no outside repair or maintenance conducted. This shall not include paint or body work. This is to not
include outside storage of any auto parts or components including but not limited to engines, transmissions,
brakes and brake drums, drive shafts, tires, starters, vehicle chassis, doors, seats, hoods, fenders, side panels,
etc.
Truck Sales: An open area or lot used for the display or sale of mechanically operable trucks with a rated
capacity of one (1) ton or more according to manufacturer's classification or licensed registered weight, truck
tractors, or semi-trailers. No repair work or inoperable vehicles are allowed on the property.
Truck Wash: A commercial operation which washes, waxes, buffers, or launders trucks with a rated capacity of
one (1) ton or more according to manufacturer's classification or licensed registered weight, truck tractors, or
semi-trailers. Must have proper drainage inlets as required by the City's Building Officials or designee.
Upholstery Shop: An indoor facility whose function is to provide furniture with padding, springs, webbing, and
fabric or leather covers. This use shall not allow for the upholstery work in vehicles.
Variance: A legal modification of the district provisions, such as yard, lot width and yard depth, signs, set-back,
off-street parking and loading regulations, height, access and screening granted due to the peculiar conditions
existing within a single piece of property.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/554
Variety Retail Store: A smaller version of the department store with predominantly consumer goods and shall
not include the selling of used or consignment items.
Vehicle Brake Shop: An establishment whose business is to repair or replace brakes in motor vehicles and
where parts generally are not sold without installation services. Vehicles shall not be left more than twenty-four
(24) hours and no outside storage of parts or vehicles are allowed.
Vehicle Muffler Shop: An establishment whose business is to only repair and install devices for silencing noises
from vehicle engines, may sell these devices without the installation service.
Vehicle Paint and Body Shop: An automotive shop with a primary purpose of repairing and painting the outside
surfaces of automobiles, trucks, and vans, and repairing and replacing the upholstery of such vehicles.
Vehicle Parts and Accessory Sales: A shop with a primary function of selling new and used parts and
accessories for automobiles, small trucks and vans with no outside storage of any kind. This is not to include
auto salvaging or the selling of tires.
Vehicle Rental: An establishment primarily engaged in the short-term rental or extended term leasing of
automobiles and trucks, not including truck tractors or semi-trailers.
Vehicle Repair Garage: An enclosed facility designed for the repair and maintenance of automobiles, small
trucks and vans, with outside storage of vehicles in state of repair allowed but not to exceed fourteen (14) days
and with no outside repair or maintenance conducted. This use shall not include paint or body work. This is to
not include outside storage of any auto parts or components including but not limited to engines, transmissions,
brakes and brake drums, drive shafts, tires, starters, vehicle chassis, doors, seats, hoods, fenders, side panels,
etc.
Vehicle Sales, New: An open area or lot used for the display of new automobiles, trucks, and vans. Included
with this use may be a service area for automobiles.
Vehicle Sales, Used: An open area or lot used for the display or sale of mechanically operable used
automobiles, trucks, and vans. No repair work or inoperable vehicles are allowed on the property and may not
be located within five hundred (500) feet of another used vehicle sales lot.
Vehicle Salvage Yard: A salvage yard, automotive wrecking yard, and automotive graveyard shall mean any lot
or tract of land upon which three (3) or more discarded, abandoned, junked, wrecked, dismantled, worn out, or
ruined motor vehicles (including autos, trucks, tractor-trailers, and buses), motor vehicle parts, boats, travel
trailers, trailers, and/or recreational vehicles are either: (1) kept, stored, bought, sold, recycled, or otherwise
placed; or (2) disassembled, dismantled, stripped, scrapped, recycled, or cut up. Shall require a screening
fence so that no vehicles or vehicle parts may be seen from a public or private area.
Vehicle Service Station: An establishment for the routine maintenance of automobiles, trucks, and vans
including auto tune-up, oil change or other maintenance services, in which all services provided and all storage,
supplies, parts, and equipment are indoors. Service stations shall include automobile inspection services, but
shall not include areas where heavy automobile maintenance activities such as engine overhauls, automobile
painting, and body fender work are conducted. No vehicle shall be left on site for more than twenty-four (24)
hours.
Vehicle Storage (Inoperable Lot): An off-street area (not open for customers to drive into or through), for the
storage of inoperable and/or unlicensed motor vehicles. This shall not include the salvaging of vehicle or
vehicle parts. Shall require a complete screening fence surrounding storage area.
Vehicle Tire Shop: An establishment primarily engaged in the selling and installing new or used wheels and
tires in which all services provided and all storage, supplies, parts, and equipment are kept indoors. No vehicle
shall be left on site for more than twenty-four (24) hours. No outside storage or display of tires or wheels shall
be allowed.
Vehicle Transmission Shop: An establishment whose business is to repair or replace transmissions in vehicles
and where parts generally are not sold without installation service. Vehicles shall not be left overnight for more
than fourteen (14) days and no outside storage of parts, transmissions, or dismantled vehicles.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/554
Vehicle Upholstery Shop: An indoor facility whose function is to provide vehicle seats with padding, springs,
webbing, and fabric or leather covers. This use is to not allow for the outside storage of vehicles, parts, or
seats.
Vehicle Wrecker Service w/o Outside Storage: An establishment whose primary trade is towing vehicles which
are disabled, or designated as towable by law enforcement officials, without an outside storage area for towed
vehicles and shall not allow for the salvaging of vehicles.
Vehicle Wrecker Service with Outside Storage: An establishment whose primary trade is towing vehicles which
are disabled or designated as towable by law enforcement officials, with an outside storage area to the
establishment for towed vehicles which is secured from public viewing by fencing and shall not allow for the
salvaging of vehicles.
Vehicular Racing Facility: A track or course laid out or designed for competitive racing of self-propelled vehicles
whether or not required to be registered or licensed under the laws of the State of Texas. Vehicles may not be
salvaged, dismantled or repaired except for adjustments as may be required to effectively compete.
Veterinarian; Supply Store: A retail store offering for sale to the public veterinarian supplies.
Veterinary Office, Large Animal Practice: The offices of a doctor of veterinary medicine with on-site treatment of
large domestic animals, which may consist of livestock and/or other farm animals and may include outside
treatment pens, shelters, or barns.
Veterinary Office, Small Animal Practice: The offices of a doctor of veterinary medicine with on-site treatment of
small domestic animals, which consist primarily of household pets and animals that are not sheltered in pens or
barns.
Video/Game Rental: A commercial establishment that provides as a service a library of video movies, DVD's,
and video games which may be rented on a short-term basis and returned for reuse. Shall not include the rental
of sexually oriented videos or DVD's in accordance with the Sexually Oriented Business Ordinances.
Warehousing, Freight Office and/or Storage: A use engaged in storage, wholesale sales, and distribution of
manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are flammable or
explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
Water Pump Station and Wells: Origin of water distribution system, pumping and/or production of water into
system, rates of flow and quantities measured.
Water Storage Facility: A tank or similar structure used to contain water for public use, including elevated,
ground, and underground locations.
Water Treatment Plant: A facility which processes raw water through sedimentation, filtration, etc., and chemical
disinfection into potable water for sale distribution to the user.
Welding Shop: A facility for the fabrication or sculptural process that joins metal materials by melting, which
may include forging.
Will: The word “will” is mandatory and not discretionary.
Yards: Spaces on the lot which are open and unobstructed to the sky by any structures except as herein
provided.
Zoning Administrator: The City Manager of the City or the person otherwise duly designated to administer the
provisions of this chapter.
Zoo; Private: A facility housing and displaying live animals, reptiles, or birds, privately owned and operated for a
fee or for the promotion of some other enterprise.
Zoo; Public: A publicly owned zoo or similar facility owned and operated by the city or a nonprofit zoological
society where live animals, birds, and reptiles are domiciled and displayed.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/554
Secs. 64-22–64-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ZONING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT MAP
Sec. 64-41. Districts established.
In order to regulate and restrict the location of trades, industries, and the location of buildings erected or
structurally altered, to regulate and limit population density and the intensity of the use of lot areas and to
regulate and determine the areas of yards, courts, and other open spaces within and surrounding such
buildings, the City of Forest Hill is hereby divided into eleven (11) districts. The districts are divided into use
classes to establish a hierarchy for the purpose of determining the intensity of districts.
(A) Residential Districts
R-1 Single Family Detached
Residential
R-2 Single Family Detached
Residential
R-3 Single Family Detached
Residential
R-4 Single Family Attached
Residential
2F Two-Family Residential
MF Multi-Family Residential
(B) Commercial and Industrial Districts
LR Local Retail
GB General Business
LI Light Industrial
HI Heavy Industrial
(C) Special Purpose Districts
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/554
PD Planned Development
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-42. Official zoning map.
The location and boundaries of the districts herein established are shown on the Official Zoning Map, which,
together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter. The Official Zoning Map shall bear for identification and authentication the signature of the Mayor and
the City Manager attested by the City Planner, the date of their signatures and the notion, “This is to certify that
this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Article III of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Forest Hill, Texas.”
The official zoning map shall be located and be maintained by the Planning Department and shall be available,
as a reference, for the general public during the regular office hours of the department. Another map shall be
located in the office of the City Secretary as a permanent record of the City of Forest Hill and shall not be
changed in manner and another shall be located in the Building Department for the benefit of the Inspections
and Permits Operations.
(A) Changes to Map.
If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in the district boundaries or
other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official
Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council.
Approved zoning changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map by the Zoning Administrator.
No amendment to this chapter which involves matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall
become effective until after such ordinance has been finally approved by the City Council.
No change of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except
in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind
by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this chapter and punishable hereunder.
(B) Replacement of the Official Zoning Map.
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret
because of the nature and/or number of changes and additions, the City Council may, by resolution,
adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new
Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map,
but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any
subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of
the Mayor and the City Manager attested by the City Planner and bearing the Seal of the City and
date under the following words:
“This is to certify this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted
(date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Forest Hill,
Texas.”
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or totally destroyed, the prior map or any
significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining
to its adoption or amendment.
(C) Rules for Interpreting District Boundaries.
In determining the location of zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall
apply:
Where boundaries are shown to follow streets or alleys, the centerline of such streets or alleys, as they exist at
the time of adoption of these regulations shall be the zoning boundary; or
Where boundaries are shown to enter or cross platted blocks, property lines of lots, as they exist at the time of
adoption of these regulations, shall be the zoning boundary; or
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/554
Where boundaries are shown on unsubdivided property, the location shall be determined by scale shown on
map unless dimensions are given on the map.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-43. R-1 - Single family detached residential regulations.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for single-family residential development of large lots of
relatively spacious character together with such public buildings, schools, churches, public recreational
facilities, and accessory uses, as may be necessary or are normally compatible with residential surroundings.
(B) Area Regulations. This district shall allow for single family detached dwelling units each located on one
(1) lot containing a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet and one thousand eight hundred (1,800)
square feet of living area in the dwelling unit with maximum lot coverage being forty percent (40%). See also
the Schedule of Districts Article VII.
(C) Parking Requirements. This district shall provide at the minimum two (2) car garage and two (2) car
paved driveway.
(D) Permitted Uses. See Schedule of Uses in Article IV of this chapter.
(E) Accessory Buildings and Uses.
Accessory buildings and uses including, but not limited to private garages, swimming pools, storage
buildings, hobby studio, tennis court, home workshop, children's playhouses, etc. None of the contained
accessory buildings may involve the conducting of a business.
No accessory building may be constructed on a lot without a principle structure.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-44. R-2 - Single family detached residential.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for single-family residential development of medium
size lots of relatively spacious character together with such public buildings, schools, churches, public
recreational facilities, and accessory uses, as may be necessary or are normally compatible with residential
surroundings.
(B) Area Regulations. This district shall allow for single family detached dwelling units each located on one
(1) lot containing a minimum of eight thousand (8,000) square feet and one thousand six hundred (1,600)
square feet of living area in the dwelling unit with a maximum lot coverage being fifty percent (50%). See also
the Schedule of Districts Article VII.
(C) Parking Requirements. This district shall provide at the minimum a two (2) car garage and two (2) car
paved driveway.
(D) Permitted Uses. See Schedule of Uses in Article IV of this chapter.
(E) Accessory Buildings and Uses.
Accessory buildings and uses including, but not limited to private garages, swimming pools, storage
buildings, hobby studio, tennis court, home workshop, children's playhouses, etc. None of the contained
accessory buildings may involve the conducting of a business.
No accessory building may be constructed on a lot without a principle structure.
Carports are allowed in this district without maintaining the required front yard setback in accordance with
Section 64-142(K).
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-45. R-3 - Single family detached residential.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/554
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for single-family residential development of small size
lots of relatively spacious character together with such public buildings, schools, churches, public recreational
facilities, and accessory uses, as may be necessary or are normally compatible with residential surroundings.
(B) Area Regulations. This district shall allow for single family detached dwelling units each located on one
(1) lot containing a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet and one thousand five hundred (1,500) square
feet of living area in the dwelling unit with a maximum lot coverage being fifty percent (50%). See also the
Schedule of Districts Article VII.
(C) Parking Requirements. This district shall provide at the minimum a two (2) car parking area either by
garage or paved driveway.
(D) Permitted Uses. See Schedule of Uses in Article IV of this chapter.
(E) Accessory Buildings and Uses.
Accessory buildings and uses including, but not limited to private garages, swimming pools, storage
buildings, hobby studio, tennis court, home workshop, children's playhouses, etc. None of the contained
accessory buildings may involve the conducting of a business.
No accessory building may be constructed on a lot without a principle structure.
Carports are allowed in this district without maintaining the required front yard setback in accordance with
Section 64-142(K).
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-46. R-4 - Single family attached.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for single-family residential development of small size
lots of relatively spacious character together with such public buildings, schools, churches, public recreational
facilities, and accessory uses, as may be necessary or are normally compatible with residential surroundings.
(B) Area Regulations. This district shall allow for single family detached or attached dwelling units on lots
containing at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet of
living area in a detached or attached dwelling using a zero lot line construction with a maximum lot coverage
being sixty percent (60%). See also the Schedule of Districts Article VII.
(C) Parking Requirements. This district shall provide at the minimum a two (2) car paved parking area either
by garage or driveway.
(D) Permitted Uses. See Schedule of Uses in Article IV of this chapter.
(E) Accessory Buildings and Uses.
Accessory buildings and uses including, but not limited to private garages, swimming pools, storage
buildings, hobby studio, tennis court, home workshop, children's playhouses, etc. None of the contained
accessory buildings may involve the conducting of a business.
No accessory building may be constructed on a lot without a principle structure.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-47. 2F - Two-family.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for duplex and townhomes with no more than eight (8)
dwellings units per acre, allowing for maximum usable open space areas for communal use and accessibility
from dwelling units.
(B) Area Regulations. This district shall allow for two-family attached dwelling units or duplex units on lots of
three thousand two hundred fifty (3,250) square feet and nine hundred (900) square feet of living area per
dwelling unit with a maximum lot coverage of sixty percent (60%). See also the Schedule of Districts Article VII.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/554
(C) Parking Requirements. This district shall provide at the minimum a two (2) car paved parking area either
by garage or driveway per unit.
(D) Permitted Uses. See Schedule of Uses in Article IV of this chapter.
(E) Accessory Buildings and Uses.
Accessory buildings and uses including, but not limited to private garages, swimming pools, storage
buildings, hobby studio, tennis court, home workshop, children's playhouses, etc. None of the contained
accessory buildings may involve the conducting of a business.
No accessory building may be constructed on a lot without a principle structure.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-48. MF - Multi-family residential.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this district is to accommodate the needs for medium to high density multifamily
residential development where such areas are suitable for higher impact development and allowing for
maximum usable open space for communal use and accessibility from dwelling units.
(B) Area Regulations. This district shall allow for multi-family dwelling units not to exceed a density of
fourteen (14) units per acre and with a minimum dwelling size being six hundred fifty (650) square feet for an
efficiency and one (1) bedroom units and additional bedrooms requiring an additional two hundred (200) square
feet along with other residential uses. See also the Schedule of Districts Article VII.
(C) Parking Requirements. This district shall provide at the minimum a two (2) car paved parking area either
by garage, parking lot, or driveway per unit.
(D) Permitted Uses. See Schedule of Uses in Article IV of this chapter.
(E) Accessory Buildings and Uses.
Accessory buildings and uses including, but not limited to private garages, swimming pools, storage
buildings, hobby studio, tennis court, home workshop, children's playhouses, etc. None of the contained
accessory buildings may involve the conducting of a business.
No accessory building may be constructed on a lot without a principle structure.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-49. LR - Local retail.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for retail shopping and personal service uses to be
developed either as a unit or in individual parcels to serve the needs of nearby residential neighborhoods.
(B) Area Regulations. See Schedule of Districts Article VII of this chapter.
(C) Parking Requirements. Parking requirements shall be regulated by use not district; see Article IX of this
chapter.
(D) Permitted Uses. See Schedule of Uses in Article IV of this chapter.
(E) Accessory Buildings and Uses.
Detached accessory buildings must be incidental to the principle building and must conform in
appearance to the main building with architecturally compatible construction and by utilizing like kind
materials and design. None of the contained accessory buildings may be utilized as rental space or to
conduct business.
No accessory building may be constructed on a lot without a principle structure.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/554
(F) Outside Storage. District shall not allow for outside storage or display of items, goods, or any other
matter. Sidewalk sales are prohibited.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-50. GB - General business.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide appropriate locations for all types of business,
commercial, and service activities, but is designed to discourage warehousing and manufacturing uses
generally or uses which tend to generate heavy truck traffic, open storage of materials, or the nuisance factors
of dust, odor, and noise associated with manufacturing.
(B) Area Regulations. See the Schedule of Districts Article VII of this chapter.
(C) Parking Requirements. Parking requirements shall be regulated by use not district; see Article IX of this
chapter.
(D) Permitted Uses. See Schedule of Uses in Article IV of this chapter.
(E) Accessory Buildings and Uses.
Detached accessory buildings must be incidental to the principle building and must conform in
appearance to the main building with architecturally compatible construction and by utilizing like kind
materials and design. None of the contained accessory buildings may be utilized as rental space or to
conduct business.
No accessory building may be constructed on a lot without a principle structure.
(F) Outside Storage. District shall not allow for outside storage of items, goods, or any other matter; however,
uses such as vehicle sales, recreational vehicle sales, etc. shall be exempt from this requirement for said
vehicles only. District shall not allow for outside display of goods, but may allow for sidewalk sale with the
issuance of a permit no more than 3 times a year with a maximum time limit of five (5) days per sale.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-51. LI - Light industrial.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for light manufacturing, fabricating, warehousing and
wholesale distributing which have their operations conducted predominantly within buildings, are more
compatible than heavy manufacturing uses, and do not emit noxious odors, noises, dust, smoke, and
vibrations.
(B) Area Regulations. See the Schedule of Districts Article VII of this chapter.
(C) Parking Requirements. Parking requirements shall be regulated by use not district; see Article IX of this
chapter.
(D) Permitted Uses. See Schedule of Uses in Article IV of this chapter.
(E) Accessory Buildings and Uses.
Detached accessory buildings must be incidental to the principle building and must conform in
appearance to the main building with architecturally compatible construction and by utilizing like kind
materials and design. None of the contained accessory buildings may be utilized as rental space or to
conduct business.
No accessory building may be constructed on a lot without a principle structure.
(F) Outside Storage. District may allow for outside storage of items, goods, or any other matter but must
provide a screening fence so that the view of storage is blocked completely from the general public; however,
uses such as vehicle sales, recreational vehicle sales, etc. shall be exempt from this requirement for said
vehicles only.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/554
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-52. HI - Heavy industrial.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for industrial operations of businesses that tend to emit
odors, noises, dust, and vibrations and that are least compatible with other uses.
(B) Area Regulations. See the Schedule of Districts Article VII of this chapter.
(C) Parking Requirements. Parking requirements shall be regulated by use not district; see Article IX of this
chapter.
(D) Permitted Uses. See Schedule of Uses in Article IV of this chapter.
(E) Accessory Buildings and Uses.
Detached accessory buildings must be incidental to the principle building and must conform in
appearance to the main building with architecturally compatible construction and by utilizing like kind
materials and design. None of the contained accessory buildings may be utilized as rental space or to
conduct business.
No accessory building may be constructed on a lot without a principle structure.
(F) Outside Storage. District may allow for outside storage.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-53. PD - Planned development.
(A) Purpose.
The purpose of this district is intended to accommodate unified design of residential, commercial, office,
professional services, retail and institutional uses and facilities or combinations thereof in accordance with
an approved comprehensive development plan. This district is designed to permit flexibility and encourage
a more creative, efficient and aesthetically desirable design and placement of buildings, open spaces,
circulation patterns and parking facilities in order to best utilize special site features of topography, size or
shape. It is intended that the flexibility permitted by this zoning category extends to discretionary approval,
through site plan review of items such as parking space requirements, building line setbacks, square
footage of buildings and structures, protective screening, or sign placement and specifications in order to
achieve the purposes and objectives stated in conformance with good planning practices and land
utilization.
While great flexibility is given to provide special restrictions which will allow development not otherwise
permitted, procedures are established herein to ensure against misuse of the increased flexibility.
(B) Development Requirements.
(1) Area regulations for each separate PD district shall be set forth in the ordinance granting the
PD district and may include but not be limited to uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard
depths and widths, building size, building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ration,
parking, access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, management
associations, and other requirements as the City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission may
deem appropriate.
(2) Modifications of standards may be considered if the modification substantially meets intent of
the ordinance and improves the overall development design or if a unique project design is proposed
which cannot readily be accommodated through other districts - pecuniary reason shall not be the
sole reason for modifying standards.
(3) The PD district shall conform to all other sections of the ordinance unless specifically excluded
in the granting ordinance.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/554
(C) Permitted and Proposed Uses.
A PD may be approved for any use allowed by right in the PD zoning classification of the Schedule of
Uses in Article IV of this chapter. A PD request may propose an aspect of residential, even though
residential uses are not allowed in the PD zoning district.
An application for a PD shall specify and describe the category or type of uses or the combination of uses
proposed. Any permitted uses and proposed residential uses to be considered under the PD zoning shall
be specified in each PD ordinance.
(D) Approval Process. Application for a PD or development of undeveloped property currently zoned PD shall
be made in the same manner as an application for any amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. In establishing a
PD district in accordance with this section, the City Council shall approve as part of the amending ordinance,
appropriate plans and standards for each PD district. During the review and public hearing process, the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall require a conceptual plan and/or a detailed plan.
(1) Conceptual Plan. This plan shall be submitted by the applicant. The plan shall show the
applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed PD district in a graphic manner and as
may be required, supported by written documentation of proposals and standards for development.
(a) A conceptual plan for residential land use shall show general use, thoroughfares, and
preliminary lot arrangements showing the size, type and location of buildings and building
sites, access, density, building height, fire lanes, screening, parking areas, landscaped areas,
and other pertinent development data.
(b) A conceptual plan for uses other than residential shall set forth the land use proposals in
a manner to adequately illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development. This may
include but is not limited to the types of uses, topography and boundary of the PD area,
physical features of the site, existing streets, alleys, and easements, location of future public
facilities, building height and location, parking ratios, and other information to adequately
describe the proposed development and to provide data for approval which is to be used in
drafting the final detailed plan.
(2) Development Site Plan.
Approval of a development site plan shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of building permits by the
building inspections for any property in a PD. Upon approval, the Development Site Plan shall
become a part of the amending ordinance establishing the PD. Application for a Development Site
Plan approval shall be made in the same manner as an application for any amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance. Changes in the development plan shall be considered the same as changes in
the Zoning District and shall be processed as required in Article 17 [XVII]; except that changes of
detail which do not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property and
which do not alter the uses permitted or increase the density, floor area ratio, height or coverage of
the site, or which do not decrease the off-street parking ratio, or reduce the yards provided at the
boundary of the site as indicated on the approved development plan may be authorized by the
Zoning Administrator. Any applicant may appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for review and decision as to whether an amendment to the
Planned Development District ordinance shall be required.
A Development Site Plan shall include all of the following information in graphic representation or
written document as appropriate, and shall be prepared by a registered architect, registered
engineer, or registered surveyor:
(a) Legal description and a survey or plat certified by a registered land surveyor, showing
date, scale, north point, property boundary lines, dimensions and easements.
(b) A location map showing location of site in reference to existing streets.
(c) Street address (or common description) of the property.
(d) Applicant's name and address and their legal interest in the subject property.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/554
(e) Owner's name and address, if different from applicant, with owner's signed consent to
the filing of the application.
(f) Zoning classification and present use of subject property.
(g) Land use designation as contained in the Comprehensive Master Plan.
(h) Existing and proposed topography reflecting proposed handling of on-site surface
drainage; limits of the 100 year flood plain and floodway as shown on current FEMA mapping
including location and acreage; proposed improvements and method of maintenance for any
drainage channels; existing and sanitary sewer layout; existing and proposed fire hydrant
locations; proposed locations for solid waste container pads. A written verification or impact
statement from both FEMA and the Corps of Engineers is required.
(i) Existing and proposed structures showing: approximate outline of perimeter walls and
including distances to property lines and other structures; front, side, and rear building setback
lines; proposed category of use or uses of structures; elevation views or renderings indicating
architectural design, building materials proposed and window orientations (if required); number
of stories in height and feet; gross floor area; location of entrances and exits.
(j) Computation of proposed number of dwelling units and the total acreage for residential
use and the approximate square footage of building, by type, for non-residential use.
(k) Computation of the maximum percentage of site coverage. Site coverage is defined for
the purposes of this district as including all manmade buildings, structures and paving except
that, when designated for the common use and benefit of all residents of the development,
walkways, bikeway and recreational structures such as pools, playgrounds or clubhouses shall
be excluded from this definition.
(l) This exclusion shall not be construed to include any paved areas for vehicular traffic,
parking, or maneuvering.
(m) Location, dimensions, and proposed construction of all streets, private drives, alleys,
parking areas and drive approaches; streets, drives, and alleys which are adjacent to or deadend
into the site, including the location of existing and proposed median openings and left-turn
lanes in boulevard streets; number and dimensions of parking spaces and width of drive
approaches and aisles; sidewalks and other facilities for pedestrian circulation; location, width
and curve radii for required fire lanes.
(n) Conceptual landscaping and buffer plan, including the height, location and type of any
proposed or required wall, fence, berm or living screen.
(o) Description of any proposed grading, regarding [regrading] or fill that is proposed on the
subject site.
(p) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all professional consultants, if any,
advising the applicant with respect to the proposed rezoning.
(q) SWPPP and the erosion and sediment control plan during construction.
(r) Other information the applicant and/or owner might wish to include.
(s) Each applicant shall file one (1) blueline or blackline copy, one (1) 11" X 17" copy, and
one (1) electronic version (pdf) of all conceptual or graphical representations required herein,
in a size sufficient to clearly show all information required, and one (1) copy of all written
documents.
(E) Review Process. The development plan review process shall include review by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and referral to the City Council with a recommendation and review and final approval of the
development plan by the City Council.
(F) Development Schedule.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/554
An application for a Planned Development District shall be accompanied by a development schedule
indicating the appropriated [appropriate] date on which construction is expected to begin and the rate of
anticipated development to completion. The development schedule shall become part of the development
plan and shall be adhered to by the owner and developer. (Present and future)
Annually, the Zoning Administration shall report to the Planning and Zoning Commission the actual
development accomplished in the various Planned Development Districts as compared with the
development schedule.
The Planning and Zoning Commission, shall, if the owner or owners of property are failing or having failed
to meet the approved schedule, initiate proceedings as provided in this chapter to amend the Zoning
District Map of the Planned Development District by removing all or part of the said Planned Development
District from the Zoning District Map and placing the area involved in another zoning district.
Upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and for good cause shown by the owner
and developer, the City Council may also extend the development schedule or adopt such new
development schedule as may be indicated by the facts and conditions of the case.
(G) District Establishment.
Every Planned Development District approved under the provisions of the ordinance shall be considered
an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance as applicable to the property involved.
In carrying out the development of a PD, the development conditions and the development schedule shall
be complied with and such conditions are specified for the development of a Planned Development
District shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a certificate of occupancy and
compliance by this chapter.
The development site plan must comply with all provisions of the PD ordinance specifying development
standards and substantially reflect the precepts set forth in the Concept Plan. If, in the judgment of the
City Council, a development site plan does not comply with the provisions of the PD Ordinance and the
Concept Plan incorporated therein, the City Council may reject such plan, in which case a new site plan
may be submitted or application must be made to amend the PD Ordinance, including all requirements for
notices and public hearings.
If a PD Ordinance does not specify development standards or has not incorporated a Concept Plan, the
development plan approval shall specify such standards. Development requirements on such
development plans may be revised under the same review notice and approval procedures as applied to
the original approval of the Plan and application to amend the PD ordinance shall not be required.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-54–64-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SCHEDULE OF USES
Sec. 64-71. Uses.
This schedule of uses is adopted and specifically made a part of the Zoning Ordinance in order to clarify the
permissible uses in the various zoning districts and to facilitate reference to the same. Uses not specifically
listed or provided for in this section are not permitted in any zoning district within the City.
X Permitted Uses
S Specific Use Permit Required
T Temporary Use Permit Required
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/554
Use Not Permitted
Accessory Uses R1 R2 R3 R4 2F MF LR GB LI HI PD
Above-Ground Flammable or
Combustible Liquid Storage
Tanks
S S
Accessory Building -
Commercial
X X X X X
Accessory Building, Residential X X X X X X
Cargo/Storage Container T T T T T T S S X X X
Hobby Studio, Private X X X X
X X X X
Kiosk
X X X
Personal Use/Temp./Portable
Bldgs
X X X X X X X X X X X
Swimming Pool (Private) X X X X X X X X X X X
Tennis Court (Private) X X X X X X
Residential Uses R1 R2 R3 R4 2F MF LR GB LI HI PD
Apartment
X
Apartment Building
X
Caretaker, Guard or Servant,
Residence or Apt. Garage
S S S S
Dormitory
X X X
S
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/554
Dwelling, Assisted Living
Facility
S S S
S
Dwelling, Guesthouse S S S S
Dwelling, HUD-Code
Manufactured Home
S
Dwelling, Mobile Home
S
Dwelling, Multifamily
X
Dwelling, Single Family
Attached
X X
Dwelling, Single Family
Detached
X X X X
Dwelling, Two Family
X X
Group Home for the Disabled S S S
X
Halfway House S S S
S
Home for the Aged,
Residence
S X X X
Manufactured Home Park
S
Rooming House S S S
X
Special Uses R1 R2 R3 R4 2F MF LR GB LI HI PD
A. Schools
Fraternity or Sorority S S S S S X X X X X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/554
Parochial School X X X X X X X X
Private Schools S S S S S S X X X X X
Public Schools X X X X X X X
X
School, Business College S S S S S S X X X X X
School, College or University S S S S S S X X X X X
School, Commercial Instruction S S S S S S X X X X X
School, Commercial Trade S S S S S S X X X X X
School, Home X X X X X X
B. Utilities
Cable Television Transmission
Lines
X X X X X X X X X X X
Electrical Transmission Line X X X X X X X X X X X
Gas Transmission Line and
Metering Station
X X X X X X X X X X X
Local Franchise Utility X X X X X X X X X X X
Natural Gas Regulating Station X X X X X X X X X X X
Public Utility X X X X X X X X X X X
Radio, Microwave, TV Tower S S S S S S S S X X S
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 506/554
Sewage Pump Station X X X X X X X X X X X
Telecommunications, Wireless
Facility
X X X X X X X X X X X
Telephone Exchange, Switching,
or Relay
X X X X X X X X X X X
Telephone Office
X X X X X
Water Pump Station and Wells X X X X X X X X X X X
Water Storage Facility X X X X X X X X X X X
Water Treatment Plant
S S X S
C. Other
Airport or Landing Field
X
Ambulance Service
X X X X
Athletic Field and Play Field,
Public
S S S S S S X X X X X
Bus, Train, and Taxi Station or
Terminal
X X X
Church, Rectory X X X X X X X X X X X
Community Center
X X X X X X
Convent or Monastery X X X X X X X X X X X
X X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 507/554
Fraternal Lodge or Union Hall
Government Administration
Facility
X X X X X X X X X X X
Heliport
X
Library X X X X X X X X X X X
Lodge, Fraternal, Sorority, and
Clubs
S S S S S X X X X X X
Municipal Building and Uses X X X X X X X X X X X
Oil and Gas Wells S S S S S S S S S S S
Park or Playground X X X X X X X X X X X
Philanthropic Institution
X X X X X
Post Office X X X X X X X X X X X
Prison or Penitentiary
S S
Public Community Center/ Govt.
Bldg. Facility
X X X X X X X X X X X
Public Safety Facility, Police and
Fire
X X X X X X X X X X X
Radio, Television Station
X X X X
Railroad Passenger or Bus
Terminal
X X X
Railroad Tracks and ROW X X X X X X X X X X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 508/554
Entertainment, Recreation, and
Food Uses
R1 R2 R3 R4 2F MF LR GB LI HI PD
Alcoholic Beverage Sales/Off-
Premise Consumption
S S S S S
Alcoholic Beverage Sales/On-
Premise Consumption
S S S S S
Amusement Center, Indoor
X X X X X
Amusement Center, Outdoor
S X X X
Assembly/Dance/Banquet Hall
X X X X X
Bakery (Retail)
X X X X X
Bar, Nightclub
S S S S
Batting Cages
X X X X
Bingo Establishment
S S S S
Bowling Alley
X X X X
Cafeteria/Cafe/Restaurant/Fast
Food
X X X X X
Candy Shop
X X X X X
Catering Service
X X X X
Coffee Shop
X X X X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 509/554
Country Club S S S S S S S
Dance Hall
S X X S
Drive-In Eating Establishment
X X X X X
Farmer's Market
S S S S
Food/Beverage Sales Store
X X X X X
General Food Sales (Retail)
X X X X X
Golf Course, Commercial
S X X S
Golf Course, Driving Range
S X X S
Ice Cream Parlor
X X X X X
Meat Market (includes Seafood)
X X X X X
Mobile Vendor Establishment
X X X
X
Movie Theater, Cineplex
X X X X X
Museum
X X X X X
Nightclub or Dance Hall
S S S S
Pool or Billiard Hall (Dry)
S X X X X
Pool or Billiard Hall (Wet)
S S S S S
Private Club
S S S S S
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 510/554
Racquetball Court
X X X X X
Restaurant or Cafeteria (Not Drive-
In)
X X X X X
Restaurant, Drive-in/Drive-thru
X X X X X
Restaurant, Refreshment Stand
(Temporary or Seasonal)
X X X
X
Restaurant, w/Alcohol Sales
S S S S S
Retail Water Vending Facility
(unmanned)
X X
Rodeo Ground/Fair Ground
S S S
Roller or Ice Rink
X X X X
Swimming Pool (Public) S S S S S S S X X X S
Tennis Court (Public) S S S S S S S X X X S
Theater or Indoor Playhouse
X X X X X
Theater; Open Drive In
S X X
Office Uses R1 R2 R3 R4 2F MF LR GB LI HI PD
Business Office
X X X X X
Certified Public Account's
Office
X X X X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 511/554
Chiropractor's Office X X X X X
Dentist's Office
X X X X X
Employment Agency
X X X X X
Engineer's Office (Registered)
X X X X X
Insurance Sales Office
X X X X X
Medical, Dental Office
X X X X X
Office, Business and
Professional
X X X X X
Optical Clinic or Office
X X X X X
Photography Studio
X X X X X
Physician's Office
X X X X X
Psychologist's Office
X X X X X
Public Surveyor's Office
(Registered)
X X X X X
Real Estate Office
X X X X X
Real Estate or Leasing Office
X X X X X
Temporary Construction
Office/Field Office
S S S S S S S S S S S
Travel Bureau or Consultant
X X X X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 512/554
Retail and Personal Uses R1 R2 R3 R4 2F MF LR GB LI HI PD
Animal Grooming
X X X X X
Apparel Alteration and Repair
or Tailor Shop
X X X X X
Art Gallery or Museum
X X X X X
Arts, Crafts, and Hobby Shop
X X X X X
Bank
X X X X X
Barber Shop or Beauty Salon
X X X X X
Child Care Center or Facility
X X X X X
Child Care Home Occupation X X X X
Cosmetic Tattoo Establishment
S X X X S
Counseling Facility
X X X X X
Day Camp for Children
S S X X
X
Day Care Center, Adult S S S S S S S X X S S
Gymnasium
S X X
Health and Fitness Center
X X X
X
Health Clinic
X X X X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 513/554
Hospital S X X X X X
Hospital, Acute Care
S X X X X X
Hospital, Institution Care
S X X X X
Massage Establishment
S S X
X
Massage, Therapeutic
X X X
X
Nursing Home
S
S S
Physical Therapy
X X X X X
Rehabilitation Care Facility
(Criminal-Psychiatric, Mental
Disorders and Substance
Abuse)
S S S
Rehabilitation Care Facility
(Psychiatric and Mental
Disorders)
S S S
Rehabilitation Care Facility
(Substance Abuse)
S S S
Shooting Range, Indoor
S X X
Shooting Range, Outdoor
S S
Studio, Dance
X X X X X
Tailor Shop
X X X X X
Tanning Studio
X X X X X
Tattoo Parlor/Body Piercing
S S X X S
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 514/554
Studio
Commercial Uses R1 R2 R3 R4 2F MF LR GB LI HI PD
Antique Shop
X X X X X
Appliance Repair, Household
X X X X
Appliance Store (Retail)
X X X X X
Athletic Field and Play Field,
Commercial
S S X X S
Boat and Accessories, Sales
and Service
X X X X
Bookstore
X X X X X
Building Maintenance and
Repair Services
X X X X
Building Materials and Lumber
Sales
X X X X
Car Wash/Detail Car Center
S X X X X
Carnival or Circus
X X X X X
Carpet and Rug Cleaners
X X X X X
Carpet Store (Retail)
X X X X X
Christmas Tree Sales
X X X X X
Cleaning or Laundry Pick-up
X X X X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 515/554
Station
Cleaning or Laundry Self-
Service
X X X
Clothing Store
X X X X X
Commercial Parking Garage
X X X X
Commercial Parking Lot
S S S S
Computer Store
X X X X X
Contractor Office
X X X
Convalescent Center
S
S X X
Convenience Store with or
without Automotive Fuel Sales
X X X X X
Copy Shop
X X X X X
Craft and Antique Retail
Center
S S
Department Store
X X X X X
Drapery, Sewing, or Weaving
Shop
X X X X X
Drive-Thru Convenience Store
S X X X S
Drug Store or Pharmacy
X X X X X
Electrical Sales and Service
X X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 516/554
Electronics Store (Retail) X X X X X
Extended Stay Hotel/Motel
S S S S
Exterminating Service Facility
S X X S
Factory Outlet, Retail or
Wholesale Store
X X X X X
Fairgrounds or Exhibition Area
S X X
Farm Machinery and
Implement Sales and Service
X X
Farm or Ranch S S S
Feed Store
X X X
Feed Store with Animal Sales
S X X
Firewood Sales
S X X
Fitness Club
X X X X X
Flea Market, Indoor
X X
Flea Market, Outdoor
X X
Florist, Retail
X X X X X
Furniture Repair
X X X
Furniture Store (Retail)
X X X X X
Garage, Commercial
S S X S
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 517/554
Garden Shop (Inside) X X X X X
Gift, Card, or Novelty Shop
X X X X X
Gunsmith Shop
X X X X
Handicraft Shop and Art
Objects
X X X
Hardware Store
X X X X X
Hauling or Storage Company
X X
Home Entertainment Sales -
Electronic
X X X X X
Home Occupation X X X X X X
Hotel or Motel
S S S S
Jewelry Store
X X X X X
Kennel, with outside runs
S S S S
Kennel, without outside runs
X X X
Laboratory, Medical and/or
Dental
S X X
Laboratory, Support
S X X
Landscape Materials, Sales
and Service
S X X X
Large Retail Facility
S S S S S
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 518/554
Laundry or Dry Cleaners S X X
Laundry/Clean Self-Service
X X X X
Leather Goods Shop (Retail)
X X X X X
Lighting Supply, Sales and
Service
X X X
Locksmith Shop
X X X X X
Mechanical Sales and Service
(A/C and Heating)
X X X
Medical Appliances Sale/Rent
X X X X
Medical Laboratory
S X X X
Medical, Dental, and Optical
Retail Sales
X X X X X
Mentally Handicapped Training
Residence
S S S
S
S
Mortgage Company
X X X X X
Motel or Hotel
S S S S
Music Store
X X X X X
Newspaper Printing Facility
X X X S
Office Supply Store
X X X X X
Paint Shop
X X X X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 519/554
Pawn Shop S S
Pet Shop
X X X X X
Pet Supplies and Aquatic Pet
Sales
X X X X X
Pharmacy
X X X X X
Photographic Equipment Sales
and Service
X X X X X
Photographic Service
X X X X X
Picture Framing Shop
X X X X X
Plant Nursery
X X X X
Plumbing Sales and Service
X X X
Print Shop
X X X
Recording Studio
S X X X
Recreational Vehicle Park
S S S S
Recreational Vehicle Rental
S X X
Recreational Vehicle Sales
and Service
X X X
Rental Store (Appliances,
Furniture, Equipment) Inside
X X X X X
Retail Shop, Apparel, Gift and
Accessories and Similar Items
X X X X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 520/554
Secondhand Store
S S
Sexually Oriented Business
S
Shoe or Boot Store
X X X X X
Sign Shop, Painted or Silk-
Screened
S X X X X
Small Engine Repair
S X X
Specialty Shop
X X X X X
Sporting Goods Store
X X X X X
Stable or Barn, Private S S
S S
Stable or Barn, Public S S
S S
Stationery Stores
X X X X X
Stone Monument Sales
X X
Tack Store
X X X X X
Taxidermist Studio or Shop
S S X X S
Tobacco Shop
X X X X X
Upholstery Shop
S X X S
Variety Retail Store
X X X X X
Vehicle Brake Shop
S X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 521/554
Vehicle Muffler Shop
S X X
Vehicle Paint and Body Shop
S S X
Vehicle Parts and Accessory
Sales
X X X X X
Vehicle Rental
S X X X S
Vehicle Repair Garage
S X X
Vehicle Sales, New
X X X
Vehicle Sales, Used
X X X
Vehicle Service Station
S S X X
Vehicle Tire Shop
X X X
Vehicle Transmission Shop
S X X
Vehicle Upholstery Shop
X X
Veterinarian; Supply Store
X X X X X
Veterinary Office, Large
Animal Practice
S X X
Veterinary Office, Small Animal
Practice
X X X X X
Video/Game Rental
X X X X X
Welding Shop
S X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 522/554
Zoo; Private S S S
Zoo; Public
X X
Industrial Uses R1 R2 R3 R4 2F MF LR GB LI HI PD
Aircraft Hardware Parts
Manufacturing
S X
Asphalt/Concrete Batching
S X
Assembly Plant
X X
Bakery, Wholesale Candy
X X
Bottling Plant
X X
Building Material Manufacturing
X
Cabinet Shop
X X
Camp Ground and Related
Facilities
X X S
Carpet Manufacturing
X
Cement or Hydrated Lime
X
Cemetery, Mausoleum,
Crematorium
X X
Chemical Blending Plant
S X
Chlorine/Chemical
Manufacturing
X
Cleaning Plant Commercial
X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 523/554
Clothing or Similar
Manufacturing
X X
Contractor Yard
S S X
Dairy Processing
X
Dental Laboratory
X X X
Distribution Center
X X S
Dump or Sanitary Landfill
S S
Dyeing/Laundry Plant;
Commercial
X X
Electric, Electronic
Component/Equipment
Manufacturing
X X
Electrical Generating Station
S X
Electronics Manufacturing
X X
Electroplating
X X
Freight Terminal, Motor
S X
Freight Terminal, Railroad
S X X
Funeral Home, Mortuary
X X X
Furniture Manufacturing
X
Heavy Machinery (Sales and
Services)
S S X
Horizontal Directional Drilling -
X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 524/554
Sell, Assemble, Repair
Impounded Vehicle Storage
Facility
S S
Light Manufacturing or Assembly
X X
Lithography or Print Shop
X X
Machine Shop
X X
Machinery Sales or Repair
X
Manufactured or Industrialized
Home Sales
X X
Manufacturing Facility (Light)
X X
Metal Fabrication
X X
Mini Warehouse
X X
Mold and Tool Shop
S X X
Monument Manufacturing
X X
Paint Spraying, Mixing
S S
Pallet Manufacturing
S X
Paper Mill
S X
Petroleum Products Storage
Bulk and Wholesale
S X
Pharmaceutical Plant
S X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 525/554
Plastic Products Manufacturing X X
Recreational Vehicle Storage
(Commercial)
S X X
Recycling Collection Facility
S S
Recycling Processing Plant
S S
Rental Yard Commercial and
Heavy Equipment
X X
Sand/Gravel Extraction/Storage
X X
Scrap Metal Recycling Center
S S
Sign Manufacturer
X X
Storage and Warehousing
Establishment
X X
Storage Yard
S S
Textile Manufacturing
X X
Tire Recapping, Retreading
S X
Topsoil/Sand Extraction/Storage
X X
Truck Rental Service
S X X
Truck Repair
S X X
Truck Sales
S X X
Truck Wash
S X X
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 526/554
Vehicle Salvage Yard S
Vehicle Storage (Inoperable Lot)
S S
Vehicle Wrecker Service w/o
Outside Storage
S S
Vehicle Wrecker Service with
Outside Storage
S
Vehicular Racing Facility
S
Warehousing, Freight Office
and/or Storage
X X
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16; Ordinance 2019-02, sec. 3, adopted 8/20/19)
Secs. 64-72–64-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. CLASSIFICATIONS OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES
Sec. 64-81. Procedure.
It is recognized that new types of land use not anticipated may seek to locate in the City of Forest Hill. In order
to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new
or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows:
(A) The Zoning Administrator shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the
City Planning and Zoning Commission requesting an interpretation as to the zoning classification
into which such use should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be
accompanied by a statement of the facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves
dwelling activity, sales, processing, type of product, storage, and amount or nature thereof, enclosed
or open storage, anticipated employment, the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material and
vibration likely to be generated, and the general requirements for public utilities and sanitation
collection.
(B) The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the nature and described
performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts,
after a public hearing, determine the zoning district within which such use should be permitted.
(C) Following its decision, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall submit its recommendation
to the City Council.
(D) The same public hearing procedures shall be followed as outlined in Article 17 [XVII] of this
chapter pertaining to amendments, including the public notice and hearing requirements, when
considering any zoning classification request for a new or unlisted land use.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-82–64-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. NEWLY ANNEXED AREAS
Sec. 64-101. Zoning district.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 527/554
Hereafter, when the boundaries of the City of Forest Hill have been extended so as to include any given area,
such area shall be temporarily placed in an “R-1” zoning district; and until the Planning and Zoning Commission
has made its recommendation to the City Council that all or a part of such area be placed in a different zone or
district and this chapter has been properly amended by the City Council, such areas shall be subject to the
regulations pertaining to the “R-1” district.
Whenever any street or alley is vacated, the particular district applying to property fronting on any such street or
alley shall automatically be extended to the center line of such street or alley.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-102–64-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. SCHEDULE OF DISTRICTS
Sec. 64-121. Adoption of schedule.
The schedule of districts represents the heights, yards, lot areas, dwelling size, and lot coverages with all
notions, references and other information shown thereto, shall be as much a part of this chapter as any specific
requirements or regulations as are fully set forth and described herein and shall be as binding and carry the full
force and effect of this chapter.
Minimum
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Minimum
Dwelling Size
per Unit (Sq.
Ft.)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(Feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(Feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
(Feet)*
Minimum
Side Yard
(Feet) **
Minimum
Rear Yard
(Feet)***
Maximum
Height
(Feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Single Family
Detached
R-1 10,000 1,800 125 80 30 20 20 35 40%
R-2 8,000 1,600 125 70 25 20 20 35 50%
R-3 6,000 1,500 100 60 25 20 20 35 50%
R-4 single-family 5,000 1,100 100 50 25 20 20 35 60%
R-4 two-family 5,000 900 100 50 25 15 15 35 60%
PD 7,500 1,800 125 80 25 20 20 35 50%
R-4 single-family 5,000 1,100 100 50 25 20 20 35 60%
R-4 two-family 3,125 900 100 35 25 15 15 35 60%
R-4 multi-family 3,125 900 100 35 25 15 15 35 60%
R-4 planned development 3,125 1,000 100 35 25 15 15 35 50%
R-5 two-family 3,250 900 100 60 25 15 15 35 60%
R-5 multi-family 3,250 900 100 60 25 15 15 35 60%
R-5 planned development 3,750 900 100 60 25 15 15 35 50%
R-6 apartment 1,735 sq. ft.650/efficiency and one bedroom units plus 200/additional bedroom 200 100 35 20 20 45 60%
R-6 PD - - 200 100 35 20 20 45 60%
Non-Residential
Uses
0 0 100 50 35 10 10 45 60%
Non-Residential
Uses - PD
0 0 100 50 35 10 10 45 60%
* When a property is situated along a major thoroughfare the front yard shall not be
less than thirty-five (35) feet.
**
When non-residential use abuts a residential district, a twenty (20) foot side yard is
required; otherwise side yards shall be at least ten (10) feet. When residential or
non-residential uses have side yards on streets, then the side yard shall not be less
than fifteen (15) feet from the side street property line, except that where the lot is
on a major street, the side yard shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet from the
side street property line.
*** When rear yards face a major street, then it shall not be less than twenty-five (25)
feet from the rear property line.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-122–64-140. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. DEVELOPMENTAL AND SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
Sec. 64-141. Lot regulations.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 529/554
(A) Platted Lots. Every building hereinafter [hereafter] erected, altered, remodel[ed], or changed shall be
located on a platted lot recorded in the County Records.
(B) Structures per Lot. No more than one (1) structure for permitted principal uses may be erected on a lot of
record, provided that yard and other requirements of these regulations shall be met for said structure.
Accessory structures may be only located on lots with a permitted principal structure provided that the
combined area of all buildings do not exceed the maximum lot coverage in any district.
(C) Lot to have Access. No structure shall hereafter be erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged or relocated
unto [onto] a lot unless the lot is located adjacent to an approved public or private street and is so located so as
to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking.
(D) Dimensions/Lot Area. No lot existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter
derives shall be reduced in area, width, or depth below the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter. A lot
having less area, width, or depth than required in this chapter which was platted prior to the adoption of this
chapter shall be considered to be a conforming lot.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-142. Front yard regulations.
(A) Multiple Zoning Districts. Where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is
divided by two or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive
district for the entire frontage.
(B) Building Line Established by Plat. Where a building line has been established by plat and such line
requires a greater or lesser front yard setback than is currently prescribed by this chapter for the district in
which the building line is located, the required front yard shall comply with the building line so established by
such plat. The Zoning Board of Adjustments may grant a variance to the required front yard as in other cases.
(C) Projections into Front Yard. Eaves and roof extensions may project into the required front yard for a
distance not to exceed four (4) feet; provided, however, that no supporting structure for such extensions may be
located within the required front yard.
(D) Double Frontage. Where lots have a double frontage running through from one street to another, a
required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a building line for accessory buildings has been
established along one frontage on the plat or by ordinance, in which event only one required front yard needs to
be of observed [sic].
(E) Major Thoroughfare. Unless subject to Section 64-142(B), the front yard along a major thoroughfare shall
not be less than thirty-five (35) feet.
(F) Service Station Pumps. Gasoline service station pump islands shall not be located nearer than eighteen
(18) feet to the front property line.
(G) Structures in Front Yard. No fence or structure higher shall be more than four (4) feet above the average
grade of the yard [sic] may be constructed or maintained in the required front yard. Garages, carports, and
similar structures shall meet the required front yard setback applicable to the principal building.
(H) Obstructing Vision at Intersection. Fences, walls, screens, hedges, trees, brush, shrubs, signs, carports,
and other structures or growth are deemed to be obstructions to the vision of motorists when they are so
erected, planted, or maintained as to interfere with sight lines at an elevations between two (2) feet and eleven
(11) feet above the top of the adjacent roadway for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection and
in the resulting triangle. Posts or poles of less than twelve (12) inches in diameter will be permitted within this
area.
(I) Dedicated Land. Where an official line has been established for future widening or opening of a street
upon which a lot abuts, the front yard shall be measured from said line to the front face of a structure.
(J) Storage in Front Yard.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 530/554
In commercially or industrially zoned districts, no part of any required front yard (nor side yard of a corner
lot) shall be used for more than seven (7) consecutive days for parking or storage of any vehicle, object or
material; excepting, however, trailers or motor vehicles which are both currently licensed and operable.
No material storage including waste materials, raw materials, construction materials, or salvage materials
or finished products shall be permitted in any required front or side yard.
(K) Carports in the Required Front Yard. Carports may be allowed in the R-2 Single Family Residential) and
R-3 (Single Family Residential) zoning districts without maintaining the required front yard as established by
this zoning ordinance once a permit has been secured for said structure; however the carport must:
(1) Maintain a minimum front yard setback of ten (10) feet from the curb or edge of property line
and a five (5) foot side yard setback.
(2) Shall be completely open on all sides.
(3) Shall be made of all new materials.
(4) Posts shall be constructed only using galvanized steel, decorative metal posts, wooden
beams, or masonry constructed posts.
(5) Roofs shall be constructed only using treated lumber, vinyl, steel, tin, brick or fiberglass roofing
materials.
(6) Shall be maintained in compliance with all current building codes and shall not become
dilapidated.
(7) Shall not be constructed to be a temporary or a movable structure.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-143. Special side yard regulations.
(A) Corner Lot. On a corner lot, the width of the yard along the side street shall not be less than any required
front yard on the same side of such street between intersecting streets; provided, however, that the buildable
width of a lot of record shall not be reduced to less than thirty (30) feet.
(B) Projections into Side Yard. A roof overhang, an open fire escape, an outside stairway, window sills, or
other ornamental feature may not project more than three (3) feet into a required side yard; provided, however,
that such projections shall not be closer than three (3) feet to a property line.
(C) Easements. Any dedicated easements shall not be included as part of the required side yards.
(D) Industrial Districts. In industrially zoned districts there shall be a twenty-five (25) foot side yard on all
sides abutting residentially or planned development zoned districts.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-144. Special rear yard regulations.
(A) Accessory Building.
An accessory building shall it not be closer than [sic] twenty (20) feet to the main building on any lot. Said
accessory building must maintain an eight (8) foot side yard setback and a minimum of eight (8) feet
setback from rear property line and may not exceed the height of the principal building. An accessory
building shall be of new construction and have exterior walls made of wood, stone, brick, or vinyl siding.
An accessory building shall not be made with previously used material nor shall it [sic] the exterior walls
be metal, tin, or corrugated tin material.
No accessory building shall be constructed or placed upon a lot until construction of the principal building
has commenced and no accessory building shall be used or occupied until the principal building is
completed and is being used or occupied.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 531/554
(B) Easements. Any dedicated easements shall not be included as part of the required rear yard. No
structure, fence, or gate may be constructed in an easement.
(C) Rear Yard Parking. For residentially zoned districts, any structure used for rear yard parking, including
but not limited to a carport, detached garage, or a parking pad, shall be constructed with a concrete or paved
driveway to said structure. At no time shall parking in the rear yard be allowed without a City approved drive
approach and driveway nor shall the rear yard parking be accessed by driving on abutting property owned by
another person or entity. A residential rear yard shall not be used for the storage of vehicles that are considered
junk vehicles defined in the Texas Transportation Code.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-145. Special height regulations.
Exceptions to the Height Regulations.
(A) The height regulations prescribed herein shall not apply to water standpipes and tanks,
antennas, satellite dishes, church steeples, domes and spires. Said structures may be erected in
excess of the maximum height of the zoning district, provided each required yard shall be increased
by one (1) additional foot for each foot that such structures exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
(B) Utility poles and towers, sports lighting, antennas, satellite dishes, and water tanks which
exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height shall require approval by Specific Use Permit.
(C) Flagpoles and their structures shall be limited to a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-146. Landscaping.
(A) Landscaping Area Requirements. In non-residential zoning districts, every lot shall have a minimum of
twenty percent (20%) of its area landscaped. A minimum of one-half (1/2) of the required landscaping shall be
located in the required front yard. Driveways, pave walks, right-of-way or easements for streets or alleys shall
not be counted as part of the required landscape area.
(B) Visual Landscaping.
(1) Perimeter Landscaping. Visual screening consisting of a minimum landscaping strip five (5)
feet in width with a combination of shrubs, hedges, and/or trees shall be provided between any
parking, servicing, or drive areas and the street right-of-way. A minimum of one (1) tree for each
thirty (30) lineal feet of frontage or a portion thereof, shall be planted in the required landscaping
strip. Said landscaping strip shall be solely on private property. Landscaping of right-of-way is
encouraged, but must be approved by the Zoning Administrator. Landscaping strip may include a
combination of the following:
(a) Grasses and Ground Cover. Grass and/or ground cover must be planted in that portion
of the landscaping strip not containing shrubs, hedges, or trees. Grass shall be a species
normally grown as permanent lawns in the geographical area. Grass may be sodded, plugged,
sprigged, or seeded, except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to
erosion. Ground cover may be used in lieu of grass and shall be planted in such a manner as
to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within six (6) months
after planting.
(b) Shrubs and Hedges. Shrubs and hedges should be a minimum of thirty (30) inches in
height upon planting, shall be of a non-deciduous species, and shall be planted and
maintained so as to form a continuous, solid visual screen within one (1) year after planting.
(c) Trees. Trees must be a minimum of six (6) feet in overall height and have a minimum
caliper of two (2) inches in diameter immediately upon planting.
(d) Credit for Existing Trees. Any tree preserved on a site meeting the specification noted
herein, shall be credited toward the tree requirements of this chapter. Trees of exceptional
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 532/554
quality due to size, trunk diameter, rareness, age or species may, at the discretion of the
Zoning Administrator, be credited as two trees for the requirements noted in the ordinance.
(2) Interior Landscaping. Interior planting islands shall be provided at a minimum of one every
twelve (12) parking spaces and/or at the end of each parking row. Each island shall contain a
minimum of one (1) tree with the remainder being landscaped grass, ground cover, shrubs and other
appropriate materials not to exceed three (3) feet in height. Interior planning islands shall have a
minimum size equal to the dimensions of one parking space on applicable parking lot. Interior
landscape areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment of overhang through appropriate
wheel stops or curbs. The required landscaped areas for parking lots shall be more or less evenly
distributed throughout the parking lot. Adjustments may be approved where the shape or size of the
parking lot, the location of existing trees, or other natural constraints reasonably prevent such
distribution.
(3) Residential Use. When a commercially or industrially zoned property is located adjacent to a
residential district, a visual screen shall be installed and maintained along the entire length of the
common lot line. The screen shall consist of a landscaping strip five (5) feet in width with a solid
fence of a minimum height of six (6) feet. One (1) tree for each thirty (30) lineal feet or a portion
thereof of common lot line shall be planted and maintained in the landscaping strip. These standards
shall also apply when a multi-family use is established abutting a Single-Family Residential zoning
district.
(C) Site Plans:
Prior to issuance of a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy a Landscaping Plan shall be submitted
to the Zoning Administrator.
Such plan shall show all planting areas drawn to scale and all plants and trees within shall be clearly
marked and labeled. A planting list shall accompany the Landscaping Plan indicating the botanical name,
the common name, the size and quantity of each type of proposed planting.
(D) Nonconforming Parking and Servicing Areas: Any parking, drive, or servicing areas which qualifies as a
nonconforming use upon enactment of this chapter, shall comply with all requirements of this chapter upon any
enlargement or extension equal to five (5) percent of the existing structure on site, any reconstruction or
construction of building(s) on site, any enlargement or structural alteration to the parking, drive, or servicing
areas, and if parking and servicing area remains unused due to the abandonment or vacancy of structures on
site for a continues [continuous] period of six (6) months.
(E) Certificate of Occupancy: All landscaping must be in place as indicated on the approved Landscaping
Plan prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. If seasonal considerations prohibit the immediate
installation of the required landscaping, the Certificate of Occupancy may be issued if the project conforms to
all other applicable codes and requirements relating to the C.O. issuance. All landscaping shall be installed per
the approved Screening and Landscaping Plan within six (6) months of the issuance of said Certificate of
Occupancy. Zoning Administrator may issue a citation to the applicant of the Certificate of Occupancy each and
every day as a violation of the landscaping requirements of the Zoning Ordinance until such time as the
landscaping is installed as per the approved Screening and Landscaping Plan.
(F) Maintenance:
All required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times so that there is no
dead or dying vegetation. This shall include mowing, pruning, fertilizing, watering, weeding, and any other
such activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. All plant material shall be maintained in a
healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year. Dead plant material shall be
replaced with new plant material of similar variety and size.
All landscaped areas shall be irrigated with an approved automatic irrigation system unless the
landscaped area has been designed utilizing xeriscaping methods.
(G) Exceptions and Adjustments: The Zoning Administrator may adjust the application of the landscaping
requirements, in part or in whole, if in his judgment, such adjustment is consistent with the purpose and intent of
this chapter due to drought conditions.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 533/554
(H) Restrictions of Use of Buffer Landscaping Areas and Building Setbacks: The required landscaping strip
and building setback for non-residential uses adjacent to residential uses or districts is intended to serve as a
buffer between potentially incompatible uses. Structures are not permitted to be located in this area, nor can
such area be used for signage, garbage collection, any type of storage, or any non-residential activity.
Passenger car parking, automobile and truck access, and the loading/unloading of goods during daylight hours,
shall be permitted.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-147. Fencing and screening requirements and prohibitions.
(A) Fence Requirements.
(1) Permit. A fence permit shall be required to erect or replace a fence over two and one half feet
in height, but not to repair an existing one. Replacing a fence shall be defined as replacing or
repairing more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing fence and shall require a permit.
Repairing a fence shall be defined as replacing damaged, removed, or missing portions of said
fence up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total linear footage and shall not require a permit. The
following shall be submitted for a fence permit to be issued:
(a) Building Permit Application
(b) Two (2) site plans showing the location of the fence, all structures, and all easements on
the property
(c) Landscaping plan for any fence in a non-residential district
(d) Description of new materials to be used
(2) Public Property. A fence or any part of a fence shall not be constructed upon or allowed to
protrude over a property line or lot line. All fences must be maintained so as not to overhang or
interfere with public property.
(3) Location and Height Restrictions. No fence shall be constructed at a height exceeding the
following:
(a) Rear Yard: No fence shall be constructed at a height exceeding eight (8) feet along the
rear yard or alley line.
(b) Front Yard: No fence shall be constructed at a height exceeding four (4) feet along the
front building line to the parkway or parallel with the street or easement line.
1. All stockade or picket fences which do not maintain fifty percent (50%) visibility are
prohibited in the front yard.
2. No fence shall be permitted to be closer than ten (10) feet from the curb or the front
property line, whichever is more restrictive.
(c) No fence shall be located within any easement except by prior written approval of those
agencies having interest in such easement[.]
(d) Side Yard: No fence shall be constructed at a height exceeding eight (8) feet on any side
yard line up to the building line of the property.
(e) Decorative Ornamental Iron Fencing may be constructed up to six (6) feet in height only
on lots exceeding one acre in area between the front building line and the front property line.
No fence shall be constructed which does not have at least seventy-five percent (75%) visibility
or which interferes with traffic line of sight.
(4) Approved Fencing Materials. Fences shall be constructed of all new materials being wooden
fence panels, vinyl, masonry, wrought iron, decorative metal, and chain link. Any other type of
material will require approval from the Building Official or Zoning Administrator when submitting the
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 534/554
permit application. All fences constructed within the City shall only be constructed with new metal
vertical posts that are cemented into the ground.
(5) Swimming Pool Fence Regulations.
(a) Fence must be a minimum of four (4) feet in height.
(b) Gates must have a self-closing, self-latching device located in the upper quarter of all
gates.
(c) Fence shall not have an opening greater than four (4) inches in any direction.
(d) A separate fence permit must be obtained from the swimming pool permit.
(6) Security Fences. For all properties that are zoned for commercial use or on public property
which requires protection from vandalism may construct a fence with barbed wire arms extending
outward. No such barbed wire arm shall extend outward over the property line. Fence arms with
barbed wire shall not be allowed on fences that are less than six (6) feet in height.
(7) Fence Maintenance. All fences shall comply and be maintained in accordance with all the
requirements of this chapter at all times.
(a) Fences shall not be more than twenty percent (20%) out of vertical alignment.
(b) Damaged, removed, or missing portions of a fence shall be replaced or repaired with
comparable materials to the remaining portion.
(c) The owner of any fence, existing or new, shall be responsible for the removal of any and
all graffiti.
(d) Any and all vegetation shall be kept clear of fences and shall not be allowed to grow into
a fence.
(8) Fence Restrictions.
(a) Obstructions prohibited. No fence, screen, free standing wall or other visual barrier shall
be so located or placed that it obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any
street, alley, or drive intersection. All fences constructed at street intersections shall maintain a
twenty-five (25) feet visual barrier from the property corner along the street line.
(b) Barbed Wire Fences prohibited. Fences shall not be constructed of barbed wire and
walls shall not be topped with broken glass or surfaced with any like material.
(c) Electrical Fences prohibited. No fence shall be electronically charged in any form or
fashion.
(9) Sheet Metal and Salvage Yard Fencing.
(a) All sheet metal fence applications shall require plans designed by a registered architect
or engineer and the wind load shall be determined by said architect or engineer.
(b) No sheet metal fences shall be constructed on properties within residential zoning areas.
(c) All fences for salvage yards must be constructed to allow no visibility from public and
private properties.
(10) Dilapidated Fences. Should a fence be deemed dilapidated or substandard by the Code
Enforcement Officer, then the following shall occur:
(a) A notice shall be served to the property owner informing of the fence violation.
(b) Should the violations not be corrected by the owner within a thirty (30) day time period,
the City may remove the fence at its own expense and the cost shall be charged against the
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 535/554
land and become a personal obligation of the owner.
(B) Outside Storage Areas.
Areas used for the purpose of storing machinery, merchandise, equipment or any other such items
associated with a business on site, excluding new or used car dealerships, shall be placed at the rear of
the property and shall provide a screening wall for areas adjacent to the street right-of-way. Such screen
shall be a solid wood fence or brick or masonry wall, a minimum of six (6) feet in height and not more than
eight (8) feet in height. A five (5) foot landscaping strip shall be provided for on the outside of said
screening wall with one (1) tree for every thirty (30) lineal feet of screening wall to be planted and
maintained in landscaping strip. Said landscaping strip shall be solely on private property. No fence or wall
shall be constructed closer than twenty (20) feet from the curb line or five (5) feet from property line,
whichever is greater.
A maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the total lot area may be used for outside display of merchandise
or rental equipment and shall require no screening wall between the display area and street right-of-way.
However, said display area shall meet all perimeter landscaping requirements and shall not be permitted
during such times as the business is closed or be utilized as outside storage.
When an outside storage area is adjacent to a residential use or district, a visual screen shall be installed
between the storage area and the residential use or district. The screen shall consist of a solid wall or
fence, a minimum of six (6) feet in height but not more than eight (8) feet in height.
(C) Trash and Recycle Containers.
A screening wall consisting of a solid fence having a maximum height of eight (8) feet shall be installed so
as to screen trash and recycle container(s) from street right-of-way and/or residential purposes. Said
container(s) shall be screened on a minimum of three sides, with the open side oriented so as not to be
viewed from a street or residential purpose. Said screening wall shall be sufficient to screen the entire
container.
All screening walls shall be kept in good repair so as to maintain a continuous visual screen[.]
(D) Visibility and Clearance. No landscaping, tree, fence, wall, or other similar item shall be maintained in the
vicinity of a corner, street, intersection, or access way intersecting a public right-of-way that the Zoning
Administrator or his designee determines is an obstruction to visibility, extends into sight lines, or is a traffic
hazard.
(E) Retaining Walls.
Retaining walls shall be permitted for the purpose of protecting property against sliding earth or accidental
injury to human life.
The height of a retaining wall shall be determined according to accepted engineering principals and the
design shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator. A fence erected on top of a retaining wall shall be
subject to the height limitations above, measured from the high side of the wall.
(F) Safety. No wall, fence, or screening device shall be constructed, planted, or maintained in such a manner
as would endanger the health or safety of the general public. No wall, fence, or screening device shall be
constructed, planted or maintained so that it obstructs the vision of motorists traveling upon the public street
adjacent thereto, thereby creating a traffic hazard.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-148. Swimming pools (private, public, or commercial).
(A) Fence. All swimming pools shall have a fence around the pool in accordance with Section 64-147(A)(5).
(B) Lighting. All lighting of the pool must be shielded or directed to face away from adjoining residences. If
lights are not individually shielded, they shall be so placed, or the enclosing wall or fence shall be so designed,
that direct rays from the lights shall not be visible from adjacent properties.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 536/554
(C) Drainage. No swimming pool shall empty into a sanitary sewer.
(D) Water Condition. Swimming pools shall not be allowed to become stagnant or to contain any water which,
due to its condition, is unhealthful.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-149. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be constructed in public rights-of-ways one (1) foot from property lines along every major
thoroughfare, arterial, and collector street upon which a lot or parcel has frontage; provided, however, sidewalks
may be located more or less than one (1) foot from property lines to preserve trees if deemed practical by the
Zoning Administrator. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width and constructed according to the
standards prescribed by the City of Forest Hill Design Criteria Manual. (Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted
3/15/16)
Sec. 64-150. Exterior facade requirements.
(A) All dwelling units shall have at least eighty percent (80%) of the total exterior walls below the first floor
plate line, excluding doors, windows, and garage doors constructed of masonry material. No one wall may be
less than fifty percent (50%) masonry unless said wall is on a porch, patio, courtyard, or breezeway. Detached
garages and servants' quarters shall have at least thirty-five percent (35%) of the total exterior walls
constructed of masonry. All other accessory buildings are excluded from this requirement.
(B) All Multi-Family, Apartments, or Condominium dwelling structures shall have at least eighty-five [percent]
(85%) of the total exterior walls excluding doors, windows, and garage doors constructed of a masonry product
on all elevations.
(C) All principal non-residential structures shall be constructed of at least seventy-five percent (75%)
masonry. This requirement shall apply to all wall sections on all floors above the finished floor level of the
foundation.
(D) All non-residential structures shall consist of a uniform color of earth tones, natural tones, or rust colors.
Should a business owner wish to repaint said structure, then the color standards above shall apply.
(E) For the purposes of this requirement, the following materials shall be considered “masonry”: glass,
natural stone, face brick, face tile, concrete, split face concrete masonry units (haydite block), decorative
pattern concrete block masonry unit, masonry veneer, and cement stucco. In determining the percentage of
masonry required; the surface of the exterior walls exclusive of the doors and windows shall be measured, up
to the eave area or up to a maximum of twelve (12) feet in height, whichever is less.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-151–64-170. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 64-171. Parking Requirements based on use.
In all districts there shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or structurally altered
(except as provided in the Sec. 64-172), off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following
requirements.
(A) Residential Uses.
(1) Fraternity/Sorority House, Dormitory. One (1) parking space for each two (2) beds.
(2) Boarding or Rooming House. One (1) parking space for each guest room or residence
unit.
(3) Mobile Home/Mobile Home Park. Two (2) parking spaces per mobile home unit plus
additional space as required herein for accessory uses.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 537/554
(B) Institutional and Special Uses.
(1) Church or other place of worship. One (1) space for each three (3) seats in main
auditorium or sanctuary.
(2) Community Center, Library, Museum or Art Gallery. Ten (10) parking spaces plus one
additional space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. If an auditorium is
included as part of the building, its floor area shall be deducted from the total and additional
parking provided on the basis of one (1) space for each four (4) seats that it contains.
(3) Mortuary or Funeral Home. One (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square
feet of floor area other than Chapel; one (1) for each four (4) seats in chapel.
(4) Hospital. One (1) parking space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space for
each bed.
(5) Home for the Aged, Convalescent Home, Sanitarium, or similar institution. One (1)
parking space for each six (6) beds plus one (1) space for each employee on the day shift.
(6) School, Elementary or Junior High. One (1) parking space for each classroom plus one
(1) space for each five (5) seats in the auditorium.
(7) School, High School. One (1) parking space for each classroom and one (1) space for
each five (5) students.
(8) College, University, or Trade School. One (1) parking space for each classroom plus one
(1) space for each four (4) students.
(9) Kindergarten, Day Nursery, or Day Care Center. One (1) parking space for every six (6)
pupils or children.
(C) Recreation and Entertainment Uses.
(1) Bowling Alley. Six (6) parking spaces for each lane.
(2) Bingo Establishment. One (1) for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area.
(3) Dance Hall, Assembly Hall, or Exhibition Hall without fixed seating. One (1) parking
space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area.
(4) Pool Halls, Coin Arcades, Skating Rink, or other indoor commercial amusements. One
(1) parking space for each one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet of floor space.
(5) Nightclub or Bar. One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor
area.
(6) Theatre, Auditorium (except school), Sports Arena, Stadium, Gymnasium, Athletic Field.
One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats.
(7) Private Club, Health Club, Country Club, Golf Club, Lodge or Fraternal Organization.
One (1) parking space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area.
(8) Miniature Golf, Driving Range, Go-Cart Track, Carnival or other outdoor commercial
amusements. One (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of site area,
exclusive of buildings.
(9) Restaurant/Fast Food/Eating Establishments. One (1) parking space for each one
hundred (100) square feet of floor area.
(D) Personal Service and Retail.
(1) Retail or Personal Service Establishment, except as otherwise specified herein. One (1)
parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 538/554
(2) Furniture or Appliance Store, Household Equipment, Hardware Store and Wholesale
Establishments. Two (2) parking spaces plus one (1) additional parking space for each three
hundred (300) square feet of floor area.
(3) Outside Retail Sales. One (1) parking space for each six hundred (600) square feet of
site area.
(4) Coin Operated Laundry. One (1) parking space for each one hundred twenty-five (125)
square feet of floor area.
(5) Hotel or Motel. One (1) parking space for each rentable unit plus one (1) parking space
for each one hundred (100) square feet of public areas.
(E) Business and Professional Services.
(1) Bank, Savings and Loan, or similar institution. One (1) parking space for each three
hundred (300) square feet of floor area.
(2) Medical, Dental, or Veterinary Clinic/Office. One (1) parking space for every one hundred
fifty (150) square feet of floor area.
(3) Other Offices, Business, or Professional. One (1) parking space for every three hundred
(300) square feet of floor area.
(F) Automotive, Boat, Machinery, and Equipment.
(1) Service/Filling Station. One (1) parking space for every two hundred (200) square feet of
floor area; minimum of six (6) spaces required.
(2) Auto/Boat Repair, Garage or Shop. Three (3) parking space[s] for every service bay, plus
one (1) per employee, plus one (1) per service vehicle.
(3) Vehicle, Boat, Machinery, or Equipment Sales. One (1) parking space for each five
hundred (500) square feet of sales floor area indoor and one (1) parking space for each one
thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area for outdoor sales.
(4) Auto/Boat Parts and Accessory Sales. One (1) parking space for every two hundred
(200) square feet of floor area.
(5) Car Wash. One (1) parking space per wash bay plus one (1) parking space for each one
thousand (1,000) square feet of site area exclusive of building area; minimum of ten (10)
spaces required.
(G) Storage, Wholesale, and Manufacturing.
(1) Brick, Lumber Yard, or similar area. One (1) parking space for every five hundred (500)
square feet of site area.
(2) Open Storage of Sand, Gravel, Petroleum Products, etc. One (1) parking space for every
two thousand (2,000) square feet of site area.
(3) Warehouse and enclosed storage. One (1) parking space for every one thousand (1,000)
square feet of floor area and one (1) parking space for three hundred (300) square feet of
office or sales area.
(4) Manufacturing or industrial, research or testing laboratory, creamery, bottling plant, or
similar establishment. One and one-half (1-1/2) parking spaces for each employee on
maximum working shift plus space to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in
connection therewith, but not less than one (1) parking space for each one thousand (1,000)
square feet of floor area.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 539/554
Sec. 64-172. Rules for computing number of parking spaces.
In computing the number of parking spaces required for each of the above uses the following rules shall
govern:
(A) “Floor Area” shall mean the total floor area of the specific use and “Site Area” shall mean the
entire property to be accessed by customers or utilized for said use.
(B) Should fractional spaces result in the calculation, then the parking spaces required would be
rounded up to the next larger number.
(C) The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same
as the required for a use similar in nature.
(D) For the purpose of this section, requirements shall be based on gross area, but shall not
include enclosed or covered areas used for off-street parking or loading.
(E) Whenever in any building there is a change of use, or an increase in floor area or in number of
employees or other unit of measurement hereinafter specified for the determination of require[d] offstreet
parking spaces, additional off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the basis of the
increased requirements of the new use or other unit measurement, provided, however, that in case
such change in use creates a need for an increase in off-street parking spaces of less than ten (10)
percent of parking facilities or of less than five (5) spaces, whichever number is greater, no
additional parking facilities shall be required.
(F) In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the
requirements of the various uses computed separately.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-173. Supplemental off-street parking requirements.
(A) Location of Off-Street Parking: All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with
the building or use served. Exceptions may be made for the following:
(1) Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use,
the required spaces may be located not to exceed three hundred (300) feet from an institutional
building served and not to exceed five hundred (500) feet from any other non-residential building
served; as long as such additional off-site parking is located in the same zoning district as the main
use or in any other district which permits a commercial parking lot or garage.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent collective provisions of off-street parking
facilities for two (2) or more buildings or uses, provided that the total of such off-street parking
spaces supplied collectively shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various uses
computed separately; provided also that the requirements set forth in Section 64-173(A)(1) as to
maximum distance between parking areas and establishments served shall apply to each
establishment participating in the collective provisions of parking.
(3) Buildings or uses not normally open, used, or operated during the principal operating hours of
theaters, churches, or other of the aforesaid establishments are defined as banks, business offices,
retail stores, personal service shops, household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe
repair or service shops, manufacturing buildings or similar uses. In any case where the required
parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such
spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their
retention for such purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned,
approved as to form by the City Attorney and shall be filed with the application for a Certificate of
Occupancy.
(4) The required parking spaces for all newly constructed single-family and two-family uses shall
be located behind the front building line and shall not be located within the required side yard.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 540/554
(5) Required parking spaces shall be located in such a manner so as to permit space for entering
and exiting without backing onto a public street. Parking spaces on the perimeter of the parking lot
and abutting a property line shall have a wheel stop or curb as a barrier two (2) feet from the end of
the parking space.
(B) Use of Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces. Required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be
used for these respective purposes only and shall not be used for the sale, storage, display, repair or servicing
of boats, trailers, campers, motor vehicles, or other goods, materials or products.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-174. Minimum dimensions for off-street parking.
(A) Ninety (90) Degree Angle Parking. Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide nor less
than eighteen (18) feet in length. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less
than twenty-four (24) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line.
(B) Sixty (60) Degree Angle Parking. Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide
perpendicular to the parking angle or less then [than] seventeen (17) feet in length when measured at right
angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not
less than twenty (20) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. The first parking space shall be placed a
minimum of ten (10) feet from the property line or sidewalk, whichever is greater.
(C) Forty-five (45) Degree Angle Parking. Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide
perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than sixteen (16) feet in length when measured at right angles to the
building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than
eighteen (18) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. The first parking space shall be placed a
minimum of six and one-half (6 1/2) feet from the property line or sidewalk, whichever is greater.
(D) Use of Alleys. When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width of said
alley may be assumed to be a portion of the maneuvering space requirement.
(E) Excess Facilities. Where off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of the minimum amounts
herein specified, or where off-street parking facilities are provided but not required by this chapter, said offstreet
parking facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements for parking and maneuvering space herein
specified.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-175. Off-street loading space.
Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail business, service, manufacturing, storage,
warehousing, hotel, mortuary, or any other similar use involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of
materials or merchandise, shall provide and maintain on the same premises loading space in accordance with
the following requirements:
(A) For normal retail, commercial sales, service or wholesale establishment, industrial, or
manufacturing use, or similar uses, off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with
the following schedule:
Gross Floor Area - Square Feet Loading Spaces Required
1 to 15,000 1
15,000 to 40,000 2
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 541/554
40,000 to 65,000 3
65,000 to 100,000 4
100,000 to 150,000 5
Each additional 50,000 or portion
thereof
1 additional
(B) For hotels, office building, banks, auditoriums, sports, arenas, restaurants, or similar uses, offstreet
loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
Gross Floor Area - Square Feet Loading Spaces Required
1 to 50,000 1
50,000 to 100,000 2
100,000 to 150,000 3
150,000 to 250,000 4
Each additional 100,000 or portion
thereof
1 additional
(C) Each required loading space shall be a size not less than twelve (12) feet by thirty (30) feet,
with a clearance height of fourteen (14) feet.
(D) Schools, day schools, day care centers and similar child training and care establishments
shall provide loading and unloading space on a private drive, off-street, to accommodate one motor
vehicle for each ten (10) students or children to be enrolled in or cared for by the establishment at
design capacity.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-176. Handicapped parking.
Handicapped parking shall be governed, by State Law; contact Building Official. (Ordinance 2016-03-001
adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-177. Development standards for parking, loading, and drive areas.
(A) Paving and Drainage. All access drives, loading areas, off-street parking areas, and vehicular storage or
display areas shall be of a dust-free, all weather hard surface paved with not less than five (5) inches of
reinforced concrete pavement over compacted subgrade or not less than two (2) inches of hot mix asphalt
concrete over at least six (6) inches of crushed stone base or not less than four (4) inches lime treated
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 542/554
subgrade, or an equivalent pavement. Parking areas shall be graded and drained in such a manner that run-off
shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, water course, ponding area, or other appropriate facility.
(B) Pavement Marking. All parking, loading and handicapped spaces shall be legibly marked and striped on
pavement.
(C) Curbs, Wheelstops, and Islands. All parking, loading spaces, and vehicular storage and sales areas shall
be provided with curbs, wheelstops, or raised islands so located as to prevent overhang of parked vehicle into
landscaped areas, public right-of-way or sidewalk areas.
(D) Lighting. Any light used to illuminate or identify a parking or loading area shall be placed so as to reflect
the light away from any residential use.
(E) Drive and Access Ways:
(1) Entrances and/or exits on a public street shall not be located less than one hundred (100) feet
from the nearest point of intersection of two (2) street right-of-way lines unless the tract is not of
sufficient size to accommodate this restriction. In such case, the driveway shall be located as far as
possible from said intersection.
(2) Driveway widths shall be no less than twelve (12) feet and no greater than fifty percent (50%)
of the lot width where it fronts on said public street and in no case shall entrance be more than forty
(40) feet in width. Driveways for single-family residential uses shall have an approach radius of no
less than ten (10) feet. All other driveways shall maintain a minimum approach radius of fifteen (15)
feet.
(3) Only one (1) driveway approach shall be permitted on lots having lineal frontage on a public
street of one hundred (100) feet or less. Additional openings for such lots may be permitted if, after
reviewing submitted proof of necessity and convenience, the Zoning Administrator deems it
necessary.
(4) There shall be no less than twenty (20) feet between any two (2) adjacent entrances and/or
exits on local and collector streets and not less than fifty (50) feet between any two (2) adjacent
entrances and/or exits on arterials and major thoroughfares.
(F) Construction Standards. Construction of all drives, access ways, parking and storage facilities shall
comply with the guidelines set forth and on file with the Department of Public Works.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-178. Maintenance.
To ensure that all requirements set forth in this section are carried forward, it will be the responsibility of the
owner of the parking area to maintain the facility. Such facilities shall be kept free of trash, debris, vehicle repair
operation or display and advertising uses. At no time after initial approval of the parking area layout can
changes be made in the location and/or number of spaces or access ways without approval of the Zoning
Administrator. (Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-179. Design approval.
A site plan, clearly designating the requirements set forth herein, shall be submitted at the time of application
for Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy. The Zoning Administrator shall grant approval of all off-street
parking area layouts and designs, and shall determine that the spaces provided are usable and facilitate an
adequate circulation pattern. (Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-180. Exceptions and adjustments.
(A) The Zoning Administrator may adjust the application of these requirements, in part or in whole, if in his
judgment, such an adjustment is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter.
(B) Appeals of the Zoning Administrator' decision or interpretation of this chapter, or any variance or special
exception requested due to undue hardship, shall be directed to and acted on by the Board of Zoning
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 543/554
Adjustment.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-181–64-200. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
Sec. 64-201. Specific use permit.
(A) General Provisions. The uses listed in each district as “Specific Use Permit Required”, and shown as “S”
in the table of permitted uses, are prohibited in the district unless and until a Specific Use Permit (SUP) is
granted for such use by the City Council in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth in this
Section.
(B) Intent. The intent of a SUP is to authorize and regulate a use not normally allowable in a zoning district,
but if controlled as to the number, area, location, duration, or relation to the neighborhood, and if made subject
to adequate development standards and safeguards established for such use during the review of a SUP
application, would promote the health, safety, and welfare of the neighborhood and the community. These
permits are issued based on the decision that the use is in general conformance with the Comprehensive Plan
and contingent on such requirements and safeguards as necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare of the adjacent landowners and the city at large.
(C) Hearing and Procedure:
(1) A person have [having] a proprietary interest in property may request the issuance or renewal
of a SUP for the property. A Specific Use Permit may only be granted following public hearings
before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council in accordance with the same
notice, hearing, and voting requirements as required for zoning changes in Article 17 [XVII] of this
code.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection a[(1)], if a Specific Use Permit is issued for a
definite term, it may be renewed in accordance with this subsection.
(a) To prevent expiration of a SUP before the renewal process can be completed, the
applicant should apply for renewal at least ninety (90) days before the date of expiration.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall place an item on the Planning and Zoning Commission
agenda for consideration, following the same notice and hearing procedures as for the original
application.
(c) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend renewal or denial to the City
Council and it shall be placed on the next City Council meeting agenda that allows sufficient
time for notice. Before consideration at a City Council meeting, the item shall be advertised as
required for the original application, and the City Council shall hold a public hearing before
making a decision on the matter. The same notice, hearing, and voting procedures as required
for the original application shall apply.
(D) General Requirements:
(1) Any Specific Use Permit, which is approved, shall meet the minimum requirements provided in
the zoning district in which it is located.
(2) A SUP shall be approved on a properly platted lot. Should property not be platted, then SUP
may be approved on the condition that said property shall be platted before construction or
operations commence.
(3) A Specific Use Permit shall automatically expire if:
(a) A building permit is not issued and construction begun within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the granting of the SUP.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 544/554
(b) The use has not begun operation (if no construction is required) within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the granting of the SUP.
(c) The use is abandoned (a use which is discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty
(180) days is presumed to be abandoned).
(d) The term for which the SUP was issued has expired and it has not been renewed.
(E) Development Plan: An approved development plan shall be a prerequisite to the approval of a Specific
Use Permit. A preliminary development plan shall be submitted for review and comment by the city staff prior to
submitting the final development plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council for
approval. The preliminary development plan shall include all of the elements of the final development plan. The
development plan shall include the following items:
(1) A site plan showing the location of each structure and the minimum distance between
structures, and between structures and the property line, street line, and/or alley line shall be
submitted. For structures more than one (1) story in height, except single-family and two-family
residences, elevations and/or perspective drawings shall be required in order that the relationship for
the structures to adjacent property, open spaces and to other features of the development plan may
be determined. Such drawings shall indicate the height, number of floors, and exposures for access,
light, and air.
(2) A drawing to scale indicating proposed streets, drives, alleys, structure sites or structure lots,
and areas proposed for dedication or reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility and garbage
collection easements, school sites, street widening, street changes, points of ingress and egress
from existing public streets on an accurate survey of the boundary of tract and topography with a
contour interval of not less than two (2) feet. This drawing shall also show existing structures
adjacent to the site and within twenty-five (25) feet of all property lines.
(3) Where multiple types of land use are proposed, a land use plan delineating the specific areas
to be devoted to various uses shall be required.
(4) A plan indicating the provision, arrangements, and dimensions of off-street parking and offstreet
loading shall be required. Any special traffic regulation facilities proposed or required to
assure the safe function of the circulation plan and off-site parking shall also be shown.
(5) A designation of the maximum structure coverage of the site shall be indicated on the site
plan.
(6) When screening and/or landscaping is required, the plan shall include any screening walls,
ornamental planting, recreational areas, wooded areas to be retained, and lawns and gardens.
(7) Any or all of the required features may be incorporated on [a] single drawing if such drawing is
clear and capable of evaluation.
(8) A graphic rendering of the existing site conditions, which depicts all significant natural,
topographical, and physical features of the subject property, including contours, location and extent
of tree cover, location and extent of water courses, marshes and flood plains on the subject property,
and existing drainage patterns.
(9) Two (2) blue line copies of all conceptual or graphic representations required herein, in a size
sufficient to clearly show all information required, a copy reduced to 11" X 17", an electronic version
(pdf), and one (1) copy of written documents.
(F) Concept Plan: Whenever a development plan is required, a concept plan shall be submitted for
discussion purposes. Said concept plan shall contain the following information:
(1) Street address of property, legal description, and a plat certified by a registered land surveyor,
showing date, scale, north point, property boundary lines, dimensions, and easements.
(2) Applicant's name and address and their legal interest in the subject property.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 545/554
(3) Owner's name and address, if different from applicant, with owner's signed consent to the filing
of the application.
(4) Zoning classification and present use of the subject property.
(5) Land us [use] designation as contained in the Comprehensive Plan.
(6) Conceptual representation of proposed use.
(7) Conceptual representation of vehicular circulation within the subject site.
(8) Conceptual representation of points of connection to the public right-of-way.
(9) Computation of proposed number of dwelling units and the total acreage for residential use
and the approximate square footage of building, by type for non-residential use.
(10) Conceptual landscaping and buffer plan.
(11) Description of how essential public services, including water, sewer, drainage, and solid
waste will be provided.
(12) Description of proposed grading, re-grading, or fill that is proposed on the subject site.
(13) Maximum number of parking spaces.
(14) Vicinity map indicating the area in which the property is located.
(15) Other information the applicant and/or owner deems necessary.
(G) Additional Information Requests: The Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, in
reviewing an application for a SUP, may require that the applicant supply additional plans, special information,
expert evaluations, or other information deemed reasonable concerning the location, function, and
characteristics of any building or use proposed. The City Council may, in the interest of public welfare and to
ensure compliance with this chapter, establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement, and type and
manner of construction of any SUP. In authorizing the location of any SUP, the City Council may impose such
development standards and safeguards which it deems advisable to protect adjacent properties or the health,
safety, morals, or welfare of the community.
(H) Factors to be Considered: In granting or denying an application for a Specific Use Permit, the City
Council shall take into consideration the following factors:
(1) Safety of the motoring public and of pedestrians using the facility and the area immediately
surrounding the site.
(2) Safety from fire hazard and measures of fire control.
(3) Protection of adjacent property from flood or water damage.
(4) Noise producing elements and glare of vehicular and stationary lights and effects of such lights
on established character of the neighborhood.
(5) Location, lighting, type of signs, and relation to traffic control and adverse effect on adjacent
properties.
(6) Street size and adequacy of pavement width for traffic reasonably expected to be generated
by the proposed use around the site in the immediate neighborhood.
(7) Adequacy of parking, as determined by requirements of this Section, for off-street parking
facilities for similar uses, location of ingress and egress points for parking and off-street loading
spaces, and protection of the public health by all-weather surfacing on all parking areas to control
dust.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 546/554
(8) Compatibility of the proposed use with surrounding and adjacent properties and whether such
use will adversely affect the use and enjoyment of the surrounding and adjacent properties.
(9) Such other measures as will secure and protect the public health, safety, morals, and general
welfare.
(I) Mapping of Specific Use Permits: All Specific Use Permits approved in accordance with provisions of this
chapter shall be referenced on a map in the Planning Department designated for Specific Use Permits.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-202–64-220. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS
Sec. 64-221. Nonconforming uses.
(A) Generally. Within the zoning districts established by this chapter as amended, there may exist lots,
structures or uses of land which were lawful before this chapter was enacted or amended, but which would be
prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. Such nonconforming
uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the various zoning districts. It is the
intent of this chapter to permit such nonconforming use to continue, under regulations herein contained, until
the same are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
(B) Nonconforming Lots. In any zoning district, structures may be erected on any single lot, provided there is
access to such structures from a street and the lot was legally platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance
from which this chapter derives. This provision shall apply even though the lot fails to meet the minimum
requirements for area, width, or depth for the zoning district in which it is located; however, all other
requirements shall still apply. All structures constructed on nonconforming lots shall meet all development
regulations in the zoning district unless proper variances are granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustments.
(C) Nonconforming Structures. A structure that was lawful when constructed, but which no longer conforms
to the requirements of this chapter for development regulations shall be considered nonconforming. Repairs
and alterations may be made to an undamaged nonconforming structure, provided that no structural alterations
shall be made except those required by law or ordinance to preserve the building in a structurally sound
condition, unless the structure is brought into conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A nonconforming
structure shall not be enlarged, changed, expanded, extended, or the footprint of the building changed except
to be brought into compliance with the currently adopted ordinance.
(D) Nonconforming Use of Property or Structures.
(1) A nonconforming use, when discontinued or abandoned, shall not be resumed.
Discontinuance or abandonment is presumed to occur when:
(a) The legal nonconforming use ceases operation for a period of one (1) month.
(b) The building used for a nonconforming use ceases to be used for that purpose for a
period of six (6) months.
(c) Abandonment of a nonconforming use when contested shall be determined by the intent
of the uses or owner to discontinue a nonconforming operation and the actual act of
discontinuance, as the facts are found to be by the Zoning Board of Adjustments.
(2) A nonconforming use may not be changed to another nonconforming use.
(E) Destruction of Nonconforming Use or Structure:
(1) Any structure declared nonconforming by the adoption of this chapter, which is destroyed by
fire or natural disaster, may be rebuilt to its previous specifications and footprint, provided that the
construction complies with all current building codes and is commenced within ninety (90) days of
the date of destruction. The failure of the owner to start such reconstruction shall forfeit the owner's
right to restore or reconstruct the dwelling except in conformance with this chapter.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 547/554
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection a [(1)], a structure occupied by a nonconforming use that is
destroyed by fire or natural disaster, may not be reconstructed or rebuilt except to conform with the
provisions of this chapter unless the destruction amounts to less than fifty percent (50%) of its fair
market value at the time of the destruction. Should the destruction be greater than fifty percent
(50%) and less than total, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may, after a public hearing, authorize
repair, taking into consideration the property owner's circumstances and the effect on surrounding
properties.
(3) Should the owner of a nonconforming use fail to begin reconstruction of the destroyed
structure (when permitted to do so by the terms of this chapter) within ninety (90) days of the date of
destruction or approval by the City Council, the nonconforming structure or use shall be deemed to
be discontinued or abandoned as provided by this chapter.
(F) Additional Provisions for Nonconforming Uses and Structures:
(1) A nonconforming use or structure, if changed to a conforming use or structure, may not be
changed back to a nonconforming use or structure.
(2) No nonconforming accessory use or structure shall continue after the principal use or structure
shall have ceased or terminated unless the accessory use or structure shall thereafter conform to
the provisions of this chapter and the district in which it is located.
(3) Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction, or
designated use of a structure or land development project for which a building permit was lawfully
issued prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, provided, that such construction shall
have been started at the time such use became nonconforming and shall have been diligently
prosecuted to completion.
(4) Any use as a Specific Use Permit granted by the City Council shall, upon its establishment, be
considered a conforming use in that zoning district, provided that this regulation shall not be so
interpreted as to waive any conditions place[d] on the Specific Use Permit.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-222–64-240. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. ENFORCEMENT AND APPLICATION
Sec. 64-241. Administration and enforcement.
The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce this chapter. He may be provided with the assistance of
such other persons as the City Manager may direct. He shall be designated the Zoning Administrator.
If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall notify
in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violations, indicating the nature
of the violation [sic] and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use
of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations, or structural
changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this
chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall erect or alter any building or who shall commence to erect or alter any
building in violation or [of] any detailed statements plan submitted or approved thereunder, shall for each and
every violation or noncompliance be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than two
thousand dollars ($2,000) and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall be construed to
constitute a separate offense. The owner of that building, premises, or use or part thereof where anything in
violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or
corporation employed in connection therewith who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation
shall each be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties herein provided.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 548/554
Sec. 64-242. Building permits required.
(A) Building Permits. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered
without a permit therefor, issued by the Permits Department. No building permit shall be issued except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, except after written order from the Board of Adjustment.
(B) Application for Building Permit.
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing
the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of the
buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration.
The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the Building Official
including existing or proposed building or alteration, existing or proposed uses of the building and land,
the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate,
conditions existing on the lot, and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance
with, and provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Building Official after he shall have marked
such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. The
second copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Building Official.
(C) Expiration of Building Permit. If actual construction of the work described in any building permit has not
begun within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance, thereof, said permit shall expire and
shall be cancelled by the Building Official. Written notice thereof shall be given to the original applicant at the
address given in said application. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction
materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner, except that where demolition or removal
of an existing structure has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, provided that work shall be
diligently carried on until completion of the structure involved.
(D) Construction and Use to be as provided in Applications, Plans, Permits. Building permits issued on the
basis of plans and applications approved by the Zoning Administrator authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction
shall be permitted. Use, arrangement or construction of that not authorized shall be deemed violation of this
chapter, and punishable as provided by this chapter.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-243. Complaints regarding violations.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint with the Zoning Administrator, such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof. The Zoning
Administrator shall properly record such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as
provided by this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall have the right to enter upon any premises in the city at
reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out the
enforcement of this chapter. (Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-244–64-260. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Sec. 64-261. Organization.
(A) Creation. There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Adjustment to be composed of five (5) regular
members and four (4) alternate members who shall be qualified electors of the City and be appointed by City
Council. It is the declared policy of the City Council that it will consider and appoint only those persons who
have demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment, and
availability to prepare for and attend meetings.
(B) Terms of Office. The members shall serve for a period of two (2) years or until their successors are duly
appointed and qualified. The regular members of the Board shall be identified by place numbers one (1)
through nine (9). The members and alternate members of the Board in the even-numbered places shall be
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 549/554
appointed to serve terms in the even-numbered years and the members in the odd-numbered places shall be
appointed to serve terms in the odd-numbered years. Members may be appointed to succeed themselves.
(C) Vacancy. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms. A vacancy in a term of office shall occur whenever
the Council finds that a member has resigned or has not maintained the qualifications required for appointment.
(D) Officers/Procedures. The Board shall elect a chairman from among its members to preside at meetings.
Such chairman, or in his absence the vice-chairman elected from among the members, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Board shall designate the time and place of its meetings. The
Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings in accordance with state law
and these regulations. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular meeting after their
appointment.
(E) Meetings and Quorum. Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of
business. The members of the Board shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the Board and shall
serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized expenses attendant to the performance
of their duties. All meetings shall be open to the public. Minutes shall be kept showing the vote of each member
on each question or the absence or failure of each member to vote. Such minutes shall be a public record and
shall be retained for at least five (5) years.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-262. Duties and powers.
(A) Authority. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the powers and exercise the duties of a Board in
Accordance with Article 1011g, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas. Board members are representatives of the City
and shall have the right to inspect premises where required in the discharge of their responsibilities under the
laws of the State of Texas and the ordinances of this City. The Board's jurisdiction shall extend to and include
the hearing and deciding of the following types of appeals and applications and to that end shall have the
necessary authority to ensure continuing compliance with its decision.
(B) Interpretation. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render an interpretation of the Zoning regulations or
the manner of their application where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, or determination
made by the Zoning Administrator in the administration of such provisions. In reaching its decision, the Board
shall establish firm guidelines for future administrative actions on like manners.
(C) Variance. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will
not be contrary to the public interest. Such variances shall not be authorized unless the Board makes an
affirmative finding to all the following requirements:
(1) That literal enforcement of the controls will create an unnecessary hardship or practical
difficulty in the development of the affected property;
(2) That the situation causing the hardship or difficulty is neither self-imposed nor generally
affecting all or most properties in the same zoning district;
(3) That the relief sought will not injure the permitted use of adjacent conforming property;
(4) That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of these
regulations.
No variance shall be granted except on the concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board.
(D) Actions of the board.
In exercising its powers, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of the statutes of the State of
Texas, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative
official whose decision is under appeal. The Board shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions
to be complied with by the applicant or time limitations on the appeal or variance.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 550/554
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative official, or to
decide in favor of the application for variance.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-263. Appeals to the board.
(A) Interpretation Request, Variance Appeal. A request for interpretation of regulations or an appeal for
variance may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, or Board of the City affected by a
decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days' time after the decision
has been rendered, by filing with the Zoning Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
(B) Stay of Proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from unless the Zoning
Administrator after the notice of appeal has been filed with him certifies to the Board that, by reason of facts
stated in his certificates, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court
of record.
(C) Denial of Request. No application for variance or appeal to the Board on the same piece of property shall
be considered within six (6) months from the previous ruling of the Board on any appeal to such body unless,
within said time frame, any action by the Board or City Council on other property in the immediate vicinity has
altered the facts and conditions on which the previous Board action was based. Such change of circumstances
shall permit the rehearing of an appeal by the Board prior to the expiration of the six (6) months period, but
such change of circumstances shall in no way have any force in law to compel the Board, after the rehearing, to
grant the appeal. At the rehearing, the appeal shall be considered entirely on its merits and the peculiar and
specific conditions related to the property on which the appeal is brought.
(D) Appeals of Board Decision. Any person or person, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the
Board, any taxpayer or any officer, department, or Board of the municipality may submit to a Court of Record
(District Court) a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying
the grounds of illegality. Such petition shall be presented to said court within ten (10) calendar days after the
decision of the Board and not thereafter.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 64-264. Public hearing requirements.
(A) Public Hearing Required. The Board shall hold a public hearing on all appeals and variance requests
made to it.
(B) Form of Appeal or Application. The appeal or application shall be in such form and shall contain such
information as the Board may require. It shall be accompanied by the required fee. An incomplete appeal or
application shall be deemed only to give notice of intent to appeal or apply to the Board and shall not be
reviewed or scheduled for hearings until brought to completion.
(C) Notice of Hearing. Official written notice of public hearing on every application for a variance or for an
interpretation of regulations applying solely to an individual property shall be sent to all owners of property, or
the person rendering the same for taxes, affected by such application, located within two hundred (200) feet of
any property affected thereby, at least ten (10) days before such hearing is held. Such notice shall be served by
using the last known address as listed on the City tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United
States Mail. Notice of hearings shall also be given by causing publication of the time and place of such hearing
in the official newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior thereto, together with a brief description of the subject
matter of the hearing.
(D) Public Hearing.
(1) Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by attorney or agent. Evidence
supporting the grant or denial of an appeal shall be submitted only through the Zoning Administrator
or to the Board in public meeting.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 551/554
(2) Any appeal or application may be withdrawn upon written notice to the Zoning Administrator
but no appeal shall be withdrawn after posting of hearing notice and prior to Board action thereon
without formal consent of the Board.
(E) Decision and Voting.
(1) Every decision of the Board shall be based upon findings of facts that every finding of fact
shall be supported in the record of proceedings. The enumerated conditions required to exist on any
matter upon which the Board is authorized to pass under these regulations shall be construed as
limitations on the power of the Board to act.
(2) Nothing herein contained shall be construed to empower the Board to change the terms of
these regulations, or to effect changes in the zoning districts. The powers of the Board shall be so
applied that the terms of these regulations will be strictly enforced.
(3) The concurring vote for four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse, on
appeal, any order requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator, or to approve
any application upon which it is required to pass under these regulations or to effect any variances in
said regulations.
(a) A member shall disqualify himself from voting whenever he has a personal or monetary
interest in the property under appeal, or will be directly affected by the decision of the Board.
(b) A member may disqualify himself from voting whenever any applicant, or his agent, has
sought to influence the member's vote on the appeal, other than in the public hearing.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-265–64-280. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV. CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
Sec. 64-281. Certificates of occupancy.
(A) Certificates of Occupancy shall be required for any of the following:
(1) Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered.
(2) Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification.
(3) Change in owner of use of structure, even should use remain the same.
(4) Occupancy and use of vacant land, except agricultural use.
(5) Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification.
Use or occupancy, or allowing the use or occupancy, of such building without having obtained a Certificate of
Occupancy as required herein shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable by fine.
No single structure or property may be issued more than one (1) Certificate of Occupancy except where the
building or property is so situated as to allow for multiple tenants.
(B) Contents. Every Certificate of Occupancy shall state that the buildings or the proposed use of a building
of [or] land complies with all provisions of law. A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept in [on] file
in the office of the Building Inspector or his agent and copies shall be furnished on request to any person
having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
(C) Temporary Certificate. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary Certificate of Occupancy
may be issued by the Building Inspector for a period not exceeding three (3) months, during the completion of
alterations for [or] during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such temporary certificates
shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties or obligations of the owners or of the
City relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any other matter covered by this chapter.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 552/554
(D) Certificates for Nonconforming Uses. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for all lawful
nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by adoption of this chapter. Application for such Certificate of
Occupancy for a nonconforming use shall be filed with the Building Inspector, by the owner, or lessee of the
building or land occupied by such nonconforming use within one (1) year of the effective date of the ordinance
from which this chapter derives. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to issue a Certificate of Occupancy
for a lawful nonconforming use, but failure to apply for such Certificate of Occupancy for a nonconforming use
shall be evidence that said nonconforming use was either illegal or did not lawfully exist at the effective date of
the ordinance from which this chapter derives.
(E) Certificate of Zoning Compliance for Nonconforming Uses.
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its uses or
structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefor by the Zoning Administrator
stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
No nonconforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed, changed, or extended until a certificate of
zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator. The certificate of zoning compliance
shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use differs from the provisions of this chapter, provided that
upon enactment or amendment of this chapter, owners or occupants of nonconforming uses or structures shall
have three (3) months to apply for certificate of zoning compliance. Failure to make such application within
three (3) months shall be presumptive evidence that the property was in conforming use at the time of
enactment or amendment of this chapter.
No permit for erection, alteration, moving, or repair of any building shall be issued until an application has been
made for a certificate of zoning compliance, and the certificate shall be issued in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter upon completion of the work.
A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for a period not
exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completions, provided
that such temporary certificate may require such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the
occupants and the public.
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning compliance, and copies shall be
furnished upon request to any person.
Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of this chapter and punishable by fine.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-282–64-300. Reserved.
ARTICLE XV. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
Sec. 64-301. Compliance required.
All land, buildings, structures, or appurtenances located within the city which are occupied, used, erected,
maintained, altered, relocated, demolished, or converted shall be so done in conformance with the zoning
regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land, building, structure, or appurtenance is located
as provided in this chapter, unless:
(A) Approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in the form of a variance or waiver, or
(B) Property is exempted from compliance due to special provisions defined in the Nonconforming
Uses and Structures section of this chapter.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-302–64-320. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVI. FEES
Sec. 64-321. Fees.
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 553/554
Every application for a zone change, Specific Use Permit, or appeal to the Board shall be accompanied by a
filing fee in an amount sufficient to defray the actual cost of processing the application. Such application fee
shall be based upon average current cost to the City and shall be established and amended by ordinance of the
City following recommendation of the Commission. (Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)
Secs. 64-322–64-340. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVII. AMENDMENTS
Sec. 64-341. Amendments.
The zoning regulations, restrictions and boundaries may from time to time be amended, supplemented,
changed, modified or repealed. Such amendments, supplements, changes, modifications or repeals, shall be
deemed to amend, supplement, change, modify, or appeal the Comprehensive Plan of the City and shall
become part of such Comprehensive Plan.
(A) Amendment Initiation. An amendment to this chapter may be initiated by.[:]
(1) City Council on its own motion;
(2) Planning and Zoning Commission; or
(3) Request by the owner or agent of the owner of property to be changed.
(B) Procedure. The City Council may supplement, change, or amend by ordinance, the
boundaries of the zoning districts or the regulations herein established as provided by the statutes of
the State of Texas. Before taking action on any proposed supplement change or amendment, the
City Council shall receive a recommendation and report from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(C) Commission Public Hearing and Notice. Prior to making its report to the City Council, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon. Written notice of all
such public hearings on proposed change and district boundaries shall be sent not less than ten (10)
days before such hearing is held to all owners of property who have rendered their said property for
city taxes, which is located either within the area proposed to be changed, or within two hundred
(200) feet of such property. Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on
the city tax rolls and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United States mail.
(D) Commission Report.
The Planning and Zoning Commission, after the public hearing is closed, shall vote on its
recommendations on the proposed change to be sent in a report to the City Council. Such report
may recommend for or against such proposed change and may, but need not, include reasons for
such decisions. The Commission may defer its report for not more than sixty (60) days until it has
had opportunity to consider other proposed changes which may have a direct bearing thereon. If the
Commission fails to report after sixty (60) days, it shall be deemed to have recommended negatively
to the proposal.
Every proposal receiving a final report by the Commission shall be forwarded to the City Council for
setting and holding of public hearing thereon. No change, however, shall become effective until after
the adoption of an ordinance for same and publication as required by law.
(E) Withdrawal. Any proposal or application may be withdrawn orally, followed by a written request
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission Secretary, by the proponent after the
Commission makes its final report, and such proposal or application shall not be subject to the
provisions hereof that a period of time must pass before a new application is considered. If such
proposal is withdrawn, the Council will not consider it.
(F) Council Public Hearing and Notice. The City Council may, from time to time, amend,
supplement, or change by ordinance the boundaries of the districts or regulations herein
established. A public hearing on such amendment, supplement or change shall be held by the
Council. Notice of Council hearing shall be given by publication one time in the official newspaper of
the City, setting the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15)
9/6/2020 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 554/554
days from the date of publication. No such amendment, supplement, or change shall be considered
unless and until the Commission makes its final report thereon.
(G) Council Action on Application.
If a proposed amendment is protested in accordance with this subsection, the proposed change
must receive the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council in
order to take effect. The protest must be written, signed, and acknowledge by the owners of at least
twenty percent (20%) of either the area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change or the
area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and
extending two hundred (200) feet from that area.
In order to overrule a recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission for an amendment
an affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the City Council shall be
required.
(H) Delay Penalty on Reapplication. No application for amendments shall be considered within six
(6) months of denial of a request for the same classification on the same property.
(Ordinance 2016-03-001 adopted 3/15/16)