CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted: November 4, 2002 
____________ 
Published in 2002 by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS 
____________ 
Steve Dixon 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jim Pierson, Councilmember Place 1 
Sandeep Sharma, Councilmember Place 2, Mayor Pro Tem 
Ben Bumgarner, Councilmember Place 3 
Jim Engel, Councilmember Place 4 
Claudio Forest, Councilmember Place 5, Deputy Mayor Pro Tem 
Town Council 
____________ 
Jimmy Stathatos 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Bryn Meredith 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Theresa Scott 
Town Secretary 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1989 Code, as supplemented through June 1997, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1989 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Senior Code Attorney, and Robert D. MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Paula Lawrence, Town Secretary, Terrence S. Welch, Town Attorney, and the other members of the town staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 2002. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS 
ORDINANCE NO. 72-02 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE FOR SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE. 
WHEREAS, the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, hereinafter referred to as the "Town," had heretofore duly enacted a code of ordinances, pursuant to its authority under Chapter 53 of the Texas Local Government Code; and 
WHEREAS, the code of ordinances so adopted was known and designated as "Code of Ordinances, Town of Flower Mound, Texas"; and 
WHEREAS, the Town Council has determined the necessity for a new code of ordinances to be enacted and codified pursuant to its authority under Chapter 53 of the Texas Local Government Code; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS: 
SECTION 1 
All of the above premises are hereby found to be true and correct legislative and factual findings of the Town of Flower Mound and they are hereby approved and incorporated into the body of this Ordinance as if copied in their entirety. 
SECTION 2 
The Code entitled and designated "Code of Ordinances, Town of Flower Mound, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 98, each inclusive, is adopted. 
SECTION 3 
Reserved. 
SECTION 4 
The repeal provided for in Section 3 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance. 
SECTION 5 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the Town or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or department of the Town under authority duly vested in such officer or department any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance, rule, regulation or order that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping or refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. The violation of any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, unless specifically stated otherwise in this Code. If the maximum penalty provided by this Code for any offense is greater than the maximum penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the State of Texas, the maximum penalty for such violation provided for violation provided by the state statute shall be the maximum penalty under this Code; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the State of Texas. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this Section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses or permits. 
SECTION 6 
Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the town Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
SECTION 7 
Ordinances adopted after April 1, 2002, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
SECTION 8 
Any and all ordinances, orders, resolutions, rules, regulations, policies or provisions in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance and of the Code are hereby repealed and rescinded to the extent of any conflict herewith. 
SECTION 9 
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or provision of this Ordinance and of the Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall to any extent be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, void or unconstitutional, the remaining sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or provisions of this Ordinance and of the Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall remain in full force and effect and shall in no way be affected, impaired or invalidated. 
SECTION 10 
This Ordinance and the Code shall take effect and be in full force from and after the date of passage of this Ordinance. 
DULY PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS, BY A VOTE OF 5 TO 0, ON THIS THE 4TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2002. 
_____
Lori L. DeLuca, MAYOR 
ATTEST: 
_____
Paula J. Lawrence, CMC, TOWN SECRETARY 
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY: 
_____
Terrence S. Welch, TOWN ATTORNEY 
(Ord. No. 57-05, § 2, 8-1-2005)  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, as adopted by referendum on Nov. 3, 1981, and as amended April 6, 1985; May 6, 1989; May 15, 2004; May 21, 2007; and Nov. 8, 2016. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.     [1] State Law reference— Home rule municipality, Tx. Const., art. Xi, § 5; V.C.T.A., Local Government Code, § 5.004. 
 
ARTICLE I. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 
 
§ 1.01. - Corporate Name. 
The inhabitants of the Town of Flower Mound, County of Denton, Texas, within the corporate limits hereafter set forth, will continue to be incorporated under the name "Town of Flower Mound."  
§ 1.02. - Form of Government. 
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "council-manager government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the Texas Constitution, the laws of the State of Texas and by this Charter, all powers of the Town shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as "the Council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the Town Manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the Town. All powers of the Town shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Home rule form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.001 et seq.  
§ 1.03. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the Town shall be as they have been established previously and now exist; and which are on file with the Town Secretary.  
§ 1.04. - Extension of Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the Town of Flower Mound may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory by the manner herein set forth: 
(a)  The Council shall have the power by ordinance to set the boundary limits of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, to provide for the alteration and extension of the boundary limits, and to annex additional territory lying adjacent to it whether said territory be inhabited or uninhabited. Should the territory be inhabited, the Council may also, upon a petition signed by a majority of the registered voters in such territory, consider such petition for annexation. The Council shall not consider any petition or act to annex any inhabited territory unless, in the opinion of the Council, the Town of Flower Mound can provide fire and police protection to the territory at the time of annexation. Services not mentioned therein shall be provided at such time as designated by the Town Council. 
(b)  No annexation ordinance shall be passed unless a public hearing has been held. 
(c)  The Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, shall provide for such notices and publication of such notices as is required by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(d)  When any additional territory has been annexed, it shall be a part of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. The property within the annexed area shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the Town. The inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all rights and privileges of other citizens of said Town and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the Town. 
(e)  All powers of annexation of the Town Council are subject to the provisions of the Municipal Annexation Act of the State of Texas, as it may be amended. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq.  
§ 1.05. - Contraction of Boundaries. 
(a)  Whenever in the opinion of the Town Council, there exists within the corporate limits of the Town of Flower Mound any territory, either inhabited or uninhabited, not suitable or necessary for Town purposes, or upon a petition signed by a majority of the qualified voters residing in said inhabited territory, the Town Council may, upon a public hearing and by ordinance duly passed, discontinue said territory as part of the Town of Flower Mound. 
(b)  Any petition and/or ordinance as described above shall specify accurately the metes and bounds of the territory sought to be eliminated from the Town and shall contain a plat designating such territory so that it may be definitely ascertained. When said ordinance has been duly passed, it shall be entered upon the minutes and records of the Town of Flower Mound and from and after the entry of the ordinance, the territory shall cease to be a part of the Town. However, the territory shall still be liable for its pro rata share of any debts incurred while the area was a part of the Town and the Town shall continue to levy, assess and collect taxes on the property within the territory to pay the indebtedness incurred while the area was a part of the Town as though the area had not been excluded from the boundaries of the Town. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
ARTICLE II. - POWERS OF THE TOWN[[2]] 

Footnotes: 
--- ([2]) --- 
[2] State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers, Texas Const., art XI, § 5; V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 26.001 et seq., 51.001, 51.071 et seq. 
 
§ 2.01. - Enumerated Powers Not Exclusive. 
The Town shall have the powers which are herein expressly provided as well as all powers that are now or which hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the Constitution or laws of the State of Texas, together with all the implied powers necessary to execute such granted powers. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 2.02. - General Powers Adopted. 
The enumeration of the particular powers of this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated.  
§ 2.03. - Eminent Domain. 
The Town shall have full right, power and authority to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter, or by the Constitution or laws of the State of Texas. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the Town to take the fee and easement in the lands so condemned, and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public and private property for such purposes. The Town shall have and possess this power of condemnation of property within or without the corporate limits for any municipal or public purposes, even though not specifically enumerated herein or in this Charter. 
State Law reference— Eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 251.001 et seq.  
§ 2.04. - Power to Acquire Property for Public Purposes. 
The Town of Flower Mound shall have the power to acquire by condemnation either private or public property located inside or outside the corporate limits for public purposes; for the extension, improvement and enlargement of its water system, including riparian rights, water supply reservoirs, standpipes, water sheds, dams, the laying, building, maintenance and construction of water mains and any necessary appurtenances or facilities which will furnish to the inhabitants of the Town an abundant supply of wholesome water; for sewerage plants and systems; rights-of-way for water and sewer lines; parks, playgrounds and schools, hospitals, fire stations, police stations, burial grounds and cemeteries, incinerators or other garbage disposal plants; streets, boulevards and alleys or other public ways; town jails, town halls and other municipal buildings; any right-of-way needed in connection with any property used for any purpose hereinabove named; for the straightening or improving of the channel of any stream, branch or drain and for any other municipal purpose. The procedure to be followed in any condemnation proceeding authorized herein shall be in accordance with the provision of the State law with reference to eminent domain. The provisions of V.T.C.A. Property Code, Chapter 21, shall apply to such proceedings, or such proceeding may be under any other State law now in existence or that hereafter may be passed governing or relating to the condemnation of land for public purposes by the Town. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
ARTICLE III. - THE TOWN COUNCIL 
 
§ 3.01. - Number, Selection, Term. 
The Council shall consist of six members, a Mayor and five (5) Councilpersons, elected from the Town at large, by place or position, in the manner provided in Article V, for a term established below or until their successors have been elected and take office as provided in Article V. 
Upon expiration of the terms of the current Mayor and Councilpersons, their successors shall be elected for terms as follows: 
The Mayor and Place 4 shall be elected for a term of three (3) years at the 2018 general election and for three (3) year terms thereafter. Place 2 shall be elected for a term of two (2) years at the 2018 general election and for three (3) year terms thereafter. 
Place 5 shall be elected for a term of three (3) years at the 2017 general election, and for three (3) year terms thereafter. Place 1 and Place 3 shall be elected for a term of two (2) years at the 2017 general election, and for three (3) year terms thereafter. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 1, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016)  
§ 3.02. - Term Limits. 
(a)  Except as provided in § 3.02(b) of this Charter, beginning with the Town Council election to be conducted on the second Saturday in May, 2013, neither the Mayor nor any member of the Town Council elected from and after said date shall be elected for more than two (2) full consecutive terms for any place or position on the Town Council. 
(b)  A person who has served two (2) full consecutive terms as a Councilperson shall be eligible to be elected to the office of Mayor for two (2) full consecutive terms. 
(Ord. No. 15-12, (Prop. 1, approved at referendum 5-12-2012), adopted 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 1, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016)  
§ 3.02.1. - Qualifications. 
Each member of the Council shall be a qualified voter of the Town, shall be twenty-one (21) years of age or older on the first day of the term to be filled at the election or on the date of appointment, as applicable, have been a resident of the Town for at least one (1) year prior to election date, shall not be employed by the Town, and shall hold no other public office except that of Notary Public or a member of the National Guard, military reserve or Coast Guard reserve. An employee of the Town who is elected to a place on Town Council shall immediately forfeit employment with the Town upon taking office in accordance with Article V of this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 33-07, (Prop. 1, approved at referendum 5-12-2007), adopted 5-21-2007, deleted § 3.02, which pertained to qualifications and derived from Amend. of 5-15-2004. Similar provisions have been enacted as § 3.02.1; Ord. No. 15-12, (Prop. 2, approved at referendum 5-12-2012), adopted 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 2, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016) 
State Law reference— Qualifications generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 141.001 et seq.  
§ 3.02.2. - Forfeiture of Office. 
A councilperson shall forfeit his office if he: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications for the office prescribed by this Charter or by Texas law; or 
(2)  Is convicted in any court of (1) a felony, or (2) a Class A or Class B misdemeanor, or (3) a crime involving moral turpitude, or 
(3)  Fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the Council without first being excused by the Council; or 
(4)  Willfully violates any express prohibition of this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 33-07, (Prop. 2, approved at referendum 5-12-2007), adopted 5-21-2007)  
§ 3.02.3. - Procedure for Expulsion or Forfeiture of Office. 
The Town Council shall employ the following procedure when there is an allegation that a member of Council has forfeited his or her office or is subject to expulsion from office pursuant to the terms of this Charter. The procedure set forth herein shall not be required when a member of Council is convicted in any court of (1) a felony, or (2) a Class A or Class B misdemeanor. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  A written sworn complaint must be filed by a member of Council and presented to the Mayor. If the complaint is made against the Mayor, the complaint shall be submitted to the Mayor Pro Tem or Deputy Mayor Pro Tem. A copy of the complaint shall be presented to the charged member of Council. 
(2)  The complaint shall be brought forward at the next regular Council meeting so that the Council may decide if the complaint should be placed on a future agenda in accordance with Council rules of procedure. The Mayor Pro Tem or Deputy Mayor Pro Tem shall serve as the presiding officer if the Mayor is charged by complaint. 
(3)  With the support of a majority of the members of the Council, the complaint shall be placed on a future agenda and the Council shall hold a public hearing related to the complaint. The individual charged by complaint shall be notified of the date set for public hearing related to the complaint. 
(4)  After closing the public hearing, an affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (¾) of all members of the Town Council shall be required to find the charged Councilperson or Mayor guilty of the allegations as charged in the complaint and to find that the Councilperson or Mayor has forfeited his or her office or is expelled from his or her office in accordance with the terms of this Charter. 
(5)  If the charged Councilperson or Mayor is found not guilty, the presiding officer shall enter judgment accordingly. 
(6)  If a Councilperson or Mayor forfeits his or her office or is expelled from his or her office, the Councilperson or Mayor shall not be eligible for reelection to any Town office for two (2) years after the date of forfeiture or expulsion. 
( Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 3, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016)  
§ 3.03. - Council to be Judge of Election, Qualifications. 
The Town Council shall be judge of the election and qualification of its own members and other elected officials of the Town.  
§ 3.03.1. - Vacancies. 
(a)  In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor or Councilperson, the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Except as provided herein, a vacancy on the Town Council for an office with a three-year term must be filled by a special election held in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Constitution. In the event a vacancy occurs on the Council for an unexpired term of twelve (12) months or less the Council may call a special election to fill the vacancy, or by majority vote of the Council, appoint a replacement to fill the vacancy. 
(c)  The office of Mayor or Councilperson shall become vacant upon death, resignation or removal from office in any manner authorized by law or by this Charter. 
(d)  The following shall apply to Town Council offices with two-year terms: 
(1)  If a member of the Council shall announce candidacy or become a candidate for election to any public office other than the specific office then held when the unexpired term of the office then held exceeds one (1) year, he shall forfeit his office or place on the Council as of the date of the next regular municipal election. 
(2)  A single vacancy in the Council shall be filled within thirty (30) days of the occurrence of the vacancy by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council by selection of a person qualified for the position as described in this Charter. This appointee shall serve until the position can be filled at the next regular Town election. 
(3)  When more than one vacancy shall develop at any one time, a special election shall be called by the Council for the next date available under the Texas Election Code to fill the vacancies in the same manner as described herein for regular elections. However, if the vacancies occur within ninety (90) days of a regular election, then no special election shall be called and remaining Councilpersons shall appoint qualified persons to fill the vacancies until the regular election. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter to the contrary, if at any time the membership of the Council is reduced to less than four (4), the remaining members may by majority action appoint additional members to raise the membership to four (4). These appointees shall serve until the positions can be filled at the next regular or special Town election. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 1, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016)  
§ 3.04. - Compensation. 
Effective June 1, 2020, the Mayor shall receive a monthly stipend of $300 and members of the Town Council shall each receive a monthly stipend of $200. In addition, they shall be entitled to reimbursement of any necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties, when approved by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 01-19 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-4-2019; Ord. No. 18-19 , 5-14-2019)  
§ 3.05. - Mayor. 
The Mayor shall preside over the meetings of the Council and perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be imposed by this Charter and by ordinances and resolutions passed in pursuance thereof. The Mayor may participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the Council and shall have a casting vote in case of a tie vote. The Mayor shall sign, after authorization by the Council, all contracts, conveyances made or entered into by the Town and all bonds, warrants and any other obligations issued under the provisions of this Charter, in the manner prescribed in the ordinance authorizing the signing of any such obligation. The Mayor may delegate to the Town Manager the authority to sign all contracts not to exceed Fifteen Thousand Dollars ($15,000.00), or any such lesser amount as may be approved by the Town Council. The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the Town by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process, by the Governor for the purpose of enforcing military law, and for all ceremonial purposes. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 3.06. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
The Town Council, at its first meeting after election of Councilpersons, shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tem, and this person shall perform all the duties of the Mayor in the absence or disability of the Mayor. The Council shall also elect one of its members as Deputy Mayor Pro Tem, and this person shall perform all the duties of the Mayor in the absences or disabilities of the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 3.07. - Powers of the Council. 
All powers of the Town and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the Town Council. Without limitation of the foregoing and among the other powers that may be exercised by the Town Council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
(a)  Appoint and remove a Town Manager as hereinafter provided; 
(b)  Establish, create, consolidate, or abolish administrative departments and distribute the work of divisions; 
(c)  Adopt the budget of the Town; 
(d)  Authorize the issuance and sale of bonds by a bond ordinance; 
(e)  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the Town and make investigations as to municipal affairs; 
(f)  Provide for such additional boards and commissions, not otherwise provided for in this Charter, as may be deemed necessary, and appoint the members of all such boards and commissions. Such boards and commissions shall have all powers and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this Charter, by Town ordinance, or by State law; 
(g)  Adopt and modify the zoning plan, and a building code, including electrical and plumbing codes, of and for the Town; and to require building permits; 
(h)  Adopt and modify the official map of the Town. (The official map is and shall be maintained by the Town Secretary, in the Town Hall in the Town of Flower Mound, Texas); 
(i)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the Town Planning and Zoning Commission for the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of blighted areas; 
(j)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the Town Planning and Zoning Commission for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster; 
(k)  Regulate, license and set the charges or fares made by any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on the public streets and alleys of the Town; 
(l)  Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits, and prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein; and provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within said limits; and provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings, or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard, and prescribe the manner of their removal or destruction, within said limits; 
(m)  Determine the salaries and compensation of the Town officers and employees and set up qualifications, rules and standards of and for employees for the Town; 
(n)  Provide for a sanitary sewer and water system, and require property owners to connect their premises with sewer system and provide the penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections; 
(o)  Provide for sanitary garbage disposal, and set fees and charges therefor, and provide penalties for failure to pay such fees and charges. To define nuisances and to prohibit same, and provide penalties for violations; 
(p)  Provide for all necessary public utilities and set fees and charges therefor and provide penalties for misuses of same; 
(q)  Exercise exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction (including the right to close and abandon streets and alleys) in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, highways, boulevards and public grounds of the Town; and provide for the improvement of same as provided in V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, Chapter 313, as now or hereafter amended; 
(r)  Address and settle any and all claims, demands, and lawsuits, of every kind and character, in favor of, or against, the Town of Flower Mound; 
(s)  To require bonds, both special and general, of all contractors and others constructing or building for the Town, and set up standards, rules and regulations therefor; 
(t)  To pass ordinances defining and prohibiting misdemeanors and vagrancy and provide penalties for violations; 
(u)  To provide and/or arrange for any and all civil defense measures and public shelter measures for the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, and for the citizens thereof, deemed necessary for the public welfare; 
(v)  To exercise, or delegate to the Mayor, extraordinary and total executive powers on a temporary basis during the existence and duration of any major public disaster, for the public welfare; 
(w)  To name and designate an Official Newspaper for the Town of Flower Mound, Texas and to cause only the caption of duly enacted ordinances to be published except as provided otherwise by law. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Home rule powers generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.071 et seq.  
§ 3.08. - Meetings of the Council. 
The Council shall hold at least two (2) regular meetings a month for at least seven (7) months and a minimum of one meeting during each of the other five (5) months at a time to be set by it for such regular meetings and may hold as many other meetings as may be necessary for the transaction of the business of the Town. All regular meetings shall be held at the Town Hall or at such other places within town limits as will permit the attendance of the general public. All meetings will be held in accordance with the Open Meetings Act of the State of Texas. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Open meetings act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq.  
§ 3.08.1. - Special Meetings. 
The Mayor or any three (3) members of the Council may call special meetings by giving notice to the Town Secretary who shall notify each member of the Council of the time of such meeting and purpose thereof. Only matters mentioned in the call shall be considered.  
§ 3.08.2. - Rules of the Council. 
The Council shall determine its own rules of procedure. It shall cause and require the Town Secretary to keep a permanent record or journal of the minutes of these meetings.  
§ 3.08.3. - Quorum. 
A majority of the Council, not including the Mayor, shall constitute a quorum to do business. A number less than a quorum may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members. If the Council is reduced to less than three (3) members on account of vacancies, the remaining members shall constitute a quorum for the sole purpose of calling an election. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "Ayes" and "Nays" and entered upon the minutes. Every ordinance and resolution upon its final passage shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the Town Secretary. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 3.08.4. - Nepotism. 
No person related within the second degree by affinity or third degree by consanguinity to the Mayor or any member of the Council or the Town Manager shall be appointed to any paid office, position, clerkship or other service of the Town. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Nepotism, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 573.001 et seq.  
§ 3.09. - Council Not to Interfere in Town Manager Appointments and Removals. 
Neither the Town Council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment or removal of any person from office by the Town Manager or by any of his subordinates. However, the Council may consult and advise with the Town Manager, make inquiry regarding the appointments or removals, and may express their opinion in regard thereto. In regard to administrative and executive duties under the Town Manager, the Council and its members shall deal solely through the Town Manager, either publicly or privately. Willful violation of the foregoing provisions of this Charter by any member of the Council shall constitute misconduct and shall authorize the Council to expel such offending member of the Council in accordance with the procedure set forth in § 3.02.3. of this Charter and thereby create a vacancy in the place held by such member. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 3, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016)  
§ 3.10. - Rules of Procedure. 
The Council shall by ordinance determine its own rules and order of business. The rules shall provide that citizens of the Town shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any meeting. The Council shall provide for the minutes to be taken and a record made of all meetings by the Town Secretary. Such minutes shall be a public record. Three (3) Councilmembers shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transaction of business and no action of the Council shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of three (3) or more members of the Council. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 3.10.1. - Effect on Ordinances, Resolutions. 
All ordinances and resolutions of the Town now in existence and not inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter shall remain in full force and effect until altered, amended or repealed. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 3.11. - Bonds for Employees. 
The Town Manager and the Town Secretary, and such other Town officers and employees as the Town Council may require, shall before entering upon the duties of their office, enter into a good and sufficient fidelity bond in a sum to be determined by the Town Council payable to the Town of Flower Mound. The fidelity bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of such persons and upon the faithful accounting for all monies, credits and things of value coming into the hands of such persons and such bonds shall be signed as surety by a company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of Texas. The premium of such bonds shall be paid by the Town of Flower Mound and such bonds must be acceptable to the Town Council. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 3.12. - Investigative Powers of the Council. 
The Council shall have the power to inquire into or investigate the official conduct of any department, agency, officer or employee of the Town and for that purpose shall have the power to, subpoena witnesses, compel the production of books, papers, records or other evidence, and as it shall provide by ordinance, to punish and set penalties for contempt for failure or refusal to obey any such subpoena or to produce any such books, papers, records or other evidence. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 3.13. - Audit and Examination of Town Books and Accounts. 
The Town Council shall cause an independent annual audit to be made of the books and accounts of each and every department of the Town and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such audit shall be made by a Certified Public Accountant or firm of accountants, who shall be selected by the Town Council and who shall have no interest, direct or indirect, in the financial affairs of the Town government or in any of its officers. The accountant shall not maintain or keep any of the Town's accounts or records. The Council may designate such accountant or firm annually or for a period not exceeding two (2) years, provided that the designation for any particular year shall be made at least ninety (90) days prior to the end of such fiscal year. Nothing herein shall prevent the Town Council from redesignating the same accountant or firm which has previously been designated to prepare an audit. If the State of Texas makes such an audit, the Council may accept it in satisfaction of the requirement of this section. Such audit shall include a recapitulation of all internal audits made during the course of each fiscal year. All audit reports shall be filed with the Town Council, shall be available for public inspection and shall be made a part of the archives of the Town. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 33-07, (Prop. 4, approved at referendum 5-12-2007), adopted 5-21-2007) 
State Law reference— Annual audit required, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 103.001 et seq.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES[[3]] 

Footnotes: 
--- ([3]) --- 
[3] State Law reference— Creation of municipal officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.041. 
 
§ 4.01. - Administrative Departments. 
There shall be such administrative departments as are established by this Charter and may be established by ordinance and, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, these administrative departments shall be under the direction of the Town Manager. 
The Council shall have the power by ordinance to establish administrative departments or offices not provided by this Charter. The Council may discontinue, redesignate, or combine any of the departments and/or administrative offices. 
The head of each department shall be a director or superintendent who shall be appointed by the Town Manager and such director or superintendent shall have supervision and control over his department. Excluding the Fire Department and Police Department, two (2) or more departments may be headed by the same individual and the Town Manager may head one (1) or more departments. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 4.02. - Town Manager—Appointment and Qualifications. 
The Council by majority vote shall appoint a Town Manager. The method of selection shall be left to the discretion of the Council so long as the method ensures orderly, nonpartisan action toward securing a competent and qualified person to fill the position. The Town Manager shall be chosen solely upon the basis of the person's executive and administrative training, experience and ability. The Town Manager need not be a resident of Flower Mound when appointed, but within a reasonable time after such appointment, not to exceed six (6) months, reside within Flower Mound during the balance of the tenure of his or her appointment. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 15-12, (Prop. 3, approved at referendum May 12, 2012), and adopted May 21, 2012)  
§ 4.02.1. - Compensation of Town Manager. 
The Town Manager shall receive compensation as may be determined by the Council according to the person's experience, education and training. The compensation should be agreed upon before appointment with the understanding that the Council may change the compensation at its discretion. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 4.02.2. - Term and Removal. 
The Town Manager shall not be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the discretion of the Council, by vote of the majority of the Council. The action of the Council in suspending or removing the Town Manager shall be final. It is the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and place all responsibilities of such suspension or removal with the Council. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 4.02.3. - Powers and Duties. 
The Town Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the Town and to that end shall have the power and be required to: 
(1)  See that all State laws and Town ordinances are effectively enforced; 
(2)  Appoint, suspend and/or remove all or any one of the directors of departments; 
(3)  Attend all meetings of the Council except when excused by the Council; 
(4)  Prepare a proposed budget annually and submit it to the Council on or before July 31st of each year and be responsible for its administration after its adoption; 
(5)  Prepare and submit to the Council at the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the Town for the preceding year; 
(6)  Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the Town and make such recommendations as may seem advisable; 
(7)  Prepare personnel rules subject to the approval of the Council; 
(8)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required by the Council, as consistent with this Charter. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 4.02.4. - Acting Town Manager. 
The Town Manager, within thirty (30) days after taking office, shall designate by letter filed with the Town Secretary, a qualified administrative officer of the Town to perform the duties of the Town Manager in his absence or disability. No member of the Council shall serve as Acting Town Manager. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 4.03. - Town Secretary. 
The Council shall appoint a Town Secretary who shall act as the Secretary to the Council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 4.03.1. - Duties of the Town Secretary. 
The duties of the Town Secretary shall be as follows: 
(1)  Record the minutes of all official meetings of the Council; provided, however, only the captions of duly enacted ordinances and resolutions shall be recorded in the minutes; 
(2)  Be the custodian of all municipal records and provide for the safety and security thereof; and maintain the Town seal and affix to all instruments requiring the seal.  
§ 4.03.2. - Compensation of Town Secretary. 
The Council shall set the compensation of the Town Secretary according to the person's experience, education, and training. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 4.04. - Municipal Court of Record. 
There shall be established and maintained a court designated as the Municipal Court of Record for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all such powers and duties as are now or may hereafter be prescribed by laws of the State of Texas relative to municipal courts of record. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code Chapter 30, Subchapter TT.  
§ 4.04.1. - Judge of Court. 
The Judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by the Town Council, shall serve at the discretion of the Council and may be removed after notice and an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing. The Judge shall be an attorney currently licensed to practice in the State of Texas, and shall receive such salary as may be determined by the Council. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 5, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016) 
State Law reference— Municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code Chapter 30..  
§ 4.04.2. - Court Administrator. 
There shall be a clerk of the municipal court appointed by the Town Manager to be designated as the Court Administrator. The Court Administrator and any deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary performed by clerks and deputies of courts. The Council shall require the Court Administrator before entering upon the duties of the office, to execute a good and sufficient surety company bond, in such amount as the Council may demand, payable to the Town and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of the office. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the Town. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001 et seq.  
§ 4.04.3. - Absence of Judge. 
In case of the disability or absence of the Judge of the Municipal Court, the Council shall appoint a qualified person as provided in § 4.04.1 above to act in his place. 
State Law reference— Municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001 et seq.  
§ 4.04.4. - Fines. 
All costs and fines imposed by the Municipal Court shall be paid to the Town treasury for the use and benefit of the Town. 
State Law reference— Municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001 et seq.  
§ 4.05. - Town Attorney. 
The Town Council shall appoint a competent, duly qualified and licensed attorney practicing law in the State of Texas to be an attorney for the Town, hereinafter referred to as the "Town Attorney." The Town Attorney shall serve at the discretion of the Council and shall receive the compensation as may be determined by the Town Council. The Town Attorney shall be the legal adviser and attorney for all of the offices and departments of the Town, and shall represent the Town in all litigation and legal proceedings; provided, that the Council may retain special counsel at any time they deem same appropriate and necessary. The Town Attorney shall review and concur or dissent upon all documents, contracts and legal instruments in which the Town may have an interest. The Town Attorney shall perform other duties prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance or as directed by the Council. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 4.06. - Police Department. 
There shall be established and maintained a Police Department, to preserve order within the Town, and to secure the residents of said Town from violence, and the property therein, from injury or loss. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 4.06.1. - Police Chief. 
The Police Chief shall be the chief administrative officer of the Police Department. The Chief shall, with the approval of the Town Manager, appoint and remove the employees of the department and shall perform such duties as may be required by the Town Manager. The Police Chief shall be appointed by the Town Manager for an indefinite term. The Police Chief shall be fully responsible to the Town Manager for the administration of the department, and for the carrying out and enforcement of the resolutions and ordinances of the Town. The Police Chief may be removed from office by the Town Manager. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 4.06.2. - Special Police. 
No person, except as authorized by general law, by this Charter, or by the ordinances passed pursuant hereto, shall act as special police or special detective.  
§ 4.07. - Fire Department. 
There shall be established and maintained a Fire Department to provide means for protection against fires. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 4.07.1. - Fire Chief. 
The Fire Chief shall be the chief administrative officer of the Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall, with the approval of the Town Manager, appoint and remove the employees of the department and shall perform such duties as may be required by the Town Manager. The Fire Chief shall be fully responsible to the Town Manager for the administration of the department, and for the carrying out and enforcement of the resolutions and ordinances of the Town. The Fire Chief may be removed from office by the Town Manager. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
ARTICLE V. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS[[4]] 

Footnotes: 
--- ([4]) --- 
[4] State Law reference— Municipal elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 1.001 et seq. 
 
§ 5.01. - Elections. 
The regular Town election shall be held annually on a date in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Uniform election dates, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 41.001.  
§ 5.02. - Regulation of Elections. 
All general and special elections shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas regulating the holding of municipal elections and in accordance with this Charter and ordinances or resolutions adopted by the Council for the conduct of elections. The Council shall appoint the election judges and other election officials and shall provide for the compensation of all election officials in the Town elections and for all other expenses in holding said elections.  
§ 5.03. - Special Elections. 
The Council, by ordinance or resolution, may call such special elections as are authorized by the State of Texas law or this Charter, set the time and place of holding same and provide all means for holding such special elections, provided that every special election shall be called and held as nearly as practical, according to the provisions governing regular elections. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 5.04. - Filing for Office. 
Each candidate for an elective office shall meet the qualifications set forth in § 3.02.1 of this Charter. If a member of any board appointed by the Council shall announce candidacy or becomes a candidate for election to any Town elected office, he may continue to serve on that board until elected. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 33-07, (Prop. 3, approved at referendum 5-12-2007), adopted 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 2, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016)  
§ 5.05. - The Official Ballot. 
The names of all candidates for office, except such as may withdraw, die or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party designations, in the order determined in a drawing of lots, conducted by the Town Secretary. All official ballots shall be printed prior to the beginning of Early Voting. Early voting shall be governed by the Texas Election Code. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 5.06. - Election by Majority. 
At any regular or special election, the candidates in each place or office who shall have received the majority of votes cast in such election shall be declared elected. Should any candidate fail to receive the majority of votes for the office or place for which he is a candidate, the Council shall immediately order a runoff election to be held on a date in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas and as set by ordinance of the Town. At this special election, only the names of the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes at the regular election, for the office or place for which they are candidates, shall be printed on the ballot and submitted to the qualified voters for election. The candidate receiving the majority of votes in the special election for the place or office for which he was a candidate shall be declared duly elected. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 5.07. - Conducting and Canvassing Elections. 
Returns of every municipal election shall be delivered forthwith by the election judges to the proper authority in compliance with the laws of the State of Texas. The Town Council shall canvass the returns, and declare the official results of the election in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas. The returns of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the Council. The qualified person receiving the majority of votes cast for any office shall thereupon be declared elected by the Council. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 5.08. - Oath of Office. 
(a)  All elected or appointed officers, before taking the Oath or Affirmation of office as prescribed by the Constitution and entering the duties of office, shall subscribe to the following statement: 
"I solemnly swear (or affirm), that I have not directly or indirectly paid, offered, or promised to pay, contributed, nor promised any public office or employment as a reward for the giving or withholding a vote at the election at which I was elected, or if the office is one of appointment, to secure my appointment, So help me God." 
(b)  All elected or appointed officers, before they enter upon the duties of the office, shall take the following oath or affirmation or such other oath or affirmation as shall be required by the Texas Constitution: 
"I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office of ___________, of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States and of this State and the Charter and Ordinances of this Town." 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
ARTICLE VI. - RECALL 
 
§ 6.01. - Scope of Recall. 
Any elected Town official, whether elected to office by the qualified voters of the Town or appointed by the Council to fill a vacancy, shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the qualified voters of the Town on grounds of incompetence, misconduct, malfeasance in office or who willfully violates any provision of the Charter.  
§ 6.02. - Petition for Recall. 
Before the question of recall of such officer shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the Town, a petition demanding such question to be so submitted shall first be filed with the person performing the duties of the Town Secretary; which said petition shall be signed by a number equal to at least fifty percent (50%) plus one (1) of the number of the total votes cast for that member of Council and all of his or her opponents in the last preceding contested general municipal election in which he or she was a candidate, as determined from the official records maintained by the Voter Registrar of Denton and Tarrant County. In the event that the question of recall of an officer that was appointed to an office should arise, a petition shall be signed by a number equal to at least fifty percent (50%) plus one (1) of the number of the votes cast for all candidates seeking that officer's seat in the last preceding contested general municipal election in which that officer's seat was elected, as determined from the official records maintained by the Voter Registrar of Denton and Tarrant County. The name of each signer of the recall petition shall be legibly printed and each signer shall personally sign his name thereto in ink or indelible pencil. The signer's information shall include after his name, his place of residence, giving the name of the street and number, the signer's voter registration certificate number or date of birth, and shall also include the day, the month and the year his signature was affixed. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 15-12, (Prop. 4, approved at referendum 5/12/2012), and adopted 5/21/2012; Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 6, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016)  
§ 6.03. - Form of Recall and Oath. 
The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the Council of the Town of Flower Mound, must distinctly and specifically point out the ground or grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there be more than one ground, such as for incompetence, misconduct or malfeasance in office, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to be removed notice of the matters and things with which he is charged. The signature shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
STATE OF TEXAS 	)( 
COUNTY OF DENTON 	)( 
 
I, ___________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
	_____
 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this _____ day of _____, 20___. 
	_____
Notary Public, Denton County, Texas 
  
§ 6.04. - Certification of Petition. 
Within ten (10) days after the filing of such petition, the Town Secretary shall examine the petition and from the list of qualified voters ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified voters. If necessary, the Council shall allow the Town Secretary extra help for that purpose and she shall attach to the petition a certification showing the result of each examination. No signature to such petition shall be valid if dated more than forty-five (45) days prior to submittal to the Town Secretary for certification. The petition shall become the property of the Town upon filing and one amendment to the petition shall be allowed once the petition has been filed. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 6.05. - Petition Found Sufficient. 
If the petition is found sufficient, the Town Secretary shall immediately notify, in writing, the officer so sought to be removed, by mailing such notice to his mailing address. The Town Secretary shall submit the petition to the Council without delay. In the event the Councilperson fails to resign, the Council shall order and set a date for holding the recall election, provided that if an election is to be held within the Town for any other purpose within sixty (60) days from the date of the notification, then the recall election shall be held on the same day. If the Councilperson in question resigns, no election shall be necessary and the vacancy shall be filled by the Council as in other cases or vacancies. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 6.06. - Public Notice. 
The Council shall make or cause to be made publication or notice and provide for holding a recall election for the successor Councilperson. The election shall be conducted and the result thereof declared in all respects as other Town elections. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 6.07. - Official Ballot. 
Any officer so elected shall hold office only during the unexpired term of his predecessor. Any person sought to be removed may be a candidate to succeed himself and, unless he requests otherwise in writing, the Town Secretary shall place his name on the official ballot without nomination. The names of other candidates for such position shall be placed on the official ballot in the same manner as provided in Article V of this Charter. At such election, the candidate receiving a majority of all votes cast for such office, according to the rules regulating the election of Councilpersons as set forth in this Charter, shall be declared elected. At such election, if some other person than the incumbent receives a majority of all votes cast for such office, the incumbent shall thereupon be deemed removed from the office upon the qualification of his successor. In case the party who receives a majority of all votes cast at said election should fail to qualify within the [ten] (10) days after receiving notification of his election, the office shall then become vacant. If the incumbent receives a majority of all votes cast at such election, he shall continue in office and shall not be subject to any other recall for any grounds existing prior to said election. In the event that a runoff election is required, the procedure set forth shall be followed.  
§ 6.08. - Recall Petition Prohibited. 
No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the Town of Flower Mound within three (3) months after his election, nor within three (3) months after an election for such officer's recall. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 6.09. - Refusal of Recall Petition. 
In case all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the Town Council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed upon said Town Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then the Council may be mandamused to act by a court of law. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
ARTICLE VII. - LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 
 
§ 7.01. - General Powers. 
The qualified voters of the Town of Flower Mound, in addition to the method of legislation hereinbefore provided, shall have the power to direct legislation by initiative and referendum. In exercising such power, legislation may not be proposed for: 
(1)  Ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes; 
(2)  Ordinances repealing ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes; 
(3)  Ordinances granting franchises; 
(4)  Ordinances determining salaries; 
(5)  Ordinances that would be inconsistent with this Charter or law. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 7.02. - Petition Requesting Submission for Ordinance by Initiative. 
Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the governing body of the Town of Flower Mound by a petition signed by the qualified voters of the Town equal in number to the percentage hereinafter required. The signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one paper, but the name of each signer of the petition shall be legibly printed and each signer shall personally sign his name in ink or indelible pencil. The signer's information shall include after his name, his place of residence, giving the name of the street and number, the signer's voter registration certificate number or date of birth, and shall also include thereon the day, month and the year his signature was affixed to the petition. The initiative petition must be addressed to the Council of the Town of Flower Mound. The signatures shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
STATE OF TEXAS 	)( 
COUNTY OF DENTON 	)( 
 
I, ___________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the name is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
	_____
 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this _____ day of _____, 20___. 
	_____
Notary Public, Denton County, Texas 
 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 15-12, (Prop. 5, approved at referendum 5/12/2012), and adopted 5/21/2012)  
§ 7.03. - Town Secretary to Examine Petition. 
Within ten (10) days after the filing of a petition, the Town Secretary shall examine the petition and from the list of qualified voters ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified voters. If necessary, the Council shall allow the Town Secretary extra help for that purpose and she shall attach to the petition a certification showing the result of each examination. No signature to such petition shall be valid if dated more than forty-five (45) days prior to submittal to the Town Secretary for certification. The petition shall become the property of the Town upon filing and one amendment to the petition shall be allowed once the petition has been filed. If the petition is found sufficient, the Town Secretary shall immediately (not later than seven (7) working days) submit the petition to the Town Council. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 7.04. - Council Either to Pass Ordinance or Call Election. 
If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance is signed by qualified voters equal in number to five percent (5%) of the qualified voters of the Town or three hundred (300) of the qualified voters of the Town, whichever is greater, the governing body of the Town shall either: 
(1)  Pass said ordinance without alteration within forty-five (45) days after the attachment of the Town Secretary's certificate of sufficiency to the accompanying petition (subject to referendum vote under the provisions of this Charter); or 
(2)  The governing body of the Town shall submit the ordinance to a vote of the people at the next uniform election date that allows for sufficient time to comply with the law regarding the calling of an election. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 6, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016)  
§ 7.05. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 6, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016, repealed § 7.05, which pertained to submitted at general election when only 5% sign, and derived from Amend. of 5-15-2004.  
§ 7.06. - Form of Ballot; Provision for Repeal. 
The ballots used when voting upon the ordinance shall contain the words "For" and "Against" (stating the nature of the proposed ordinance). If a majority of the qualified electors voting on said proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of the Town. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 7.07. - Voluntary Submission or Legislation by the Council. 
The Town Council may upon its own motion and by a majority vote of its members, submit to popular vote at any election, for adoption or rejection, any proposed ordinance, resolution or measure, or may submit for repeal any existing ordinance, resolution or measure, in the same manner and with the same force and effect as provided in this Article for "submission on petition," and may at its discretion call a special election for this purpose, in accordance with the Texas Election Code. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 7.08. - Publication of Proposed and Referred Ordinances. 
The Town Secretary shall publish at least once in the official newspaper of the Town the proposed or referred ordinance or resolution within fifteen (15) days before the date of the election, and shall give such other notices and do such other things relative to such election as required in general municipal elections or by the ordinance or resolution calling the election.  
§ 7.09. - Adoption of Ordinances. 
If a majority of the qualified voters vote in favor of any proposed ordinance, resolution or measure, it shall thereupon, or at any time stated therein, become effective as a law or as a mandatory order of the Town Council. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 7.10. - Inconsistent Ordinances. 
If the provisions of two (2) or more proposed ordinances or resolutions approved at the same election are inconsistent, the ordinance or resolution receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail.  
§ 7.11. - Ordinances Passed by Petition, Popular Vote; Repeal or Amendment. 
Any ordinances or resolutions which may have been passed by the Town Council upon a petition or adopted by popular vote under the provisions of this Article shall be repealed or amended only by the Town Council, in response to a referendum petition, or by submission, as provided herein. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 7.12. - Further Regulations by Town Council. 
The Town Council may pass ordinances or resolutions providing other and further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this Article, consistent with this Charter.  
§ 7.13. - Franchise Ordinances. 
Nothing contained in the Article shall be construed to be in conflict with any of the provisions of Article X of this Charter pertaining to ordinances granting franchises, when valuable rights shall be actually accrued thereunder. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 7.14. - Petition for Referendum Not Allowed. 
No petition for referendum shall be submitted for: 
(a)  Ordinances required by the general laws of the State of Texas or by the provisions of this Charter; 
(b)  Ordinances passed for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety under emergency conditions as specified in this Charter; 
(c)  Ordinances prohibited from initiative process by § 7.01 of this Charter. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 7.15. - Referendum Petition Requirements. 
A petition for referendum may be submitted to the governing body of the Town when signed by five percent (5%) of the qualified voters of the Town or by three hundred (300) of the qualified voters of the Town, whichever is greater. The procedures for submission, examination and amendments of the petition shall be in accordance with § 7.02 and § 7.03 of this Charter. 
( Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 6, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016)  
§ 7.16. - Election Required for Municipal Utility or Public Improvement Districts. 
Should any person, persons or corporation request that the Town Council approve the implementation of a Municipal Utility District or a Public Improvement District, the following shall be accomplished before the Municipal Utility District or Public Improvement District may be authorized to operate within the corporate limits of the Town of Flower Mound: 
(a)  The request shall be made to the Town Council at a regular meeting. The Town Council, following discussion and debate of the issue, may approve the implementation of a Municipal Utility District or a Public Improvement District by vote of the Council members; 
(b)  Following vote of the Council to approve such Municipal Utility or Public Improvement District, the Council shall call a special election to allow the qualified voters of the Town to consider the question of allowing the District to be placed in the Town of Flower Mound; 
(c)  The election shall be held on the next uniform election date allowed by the laws of the State of Texas which provides sufficient time to prepare for such election in compliance with the laws of the State of Texas; 
(d)  The ballot used when voting upon said question shall contain the words "For", and "Against" (stating the nature of the district). If a majority of the qualified voters voting on the proposed district shall vote in favor thereof, such district shall thereupon become permitted within the Town of Flower Mound. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 7.17. - Election Required for Certain Public-Private Partnerships. 
Prior to the commitment of any Town funds in a public-private partnership for an economic development project, other than for the construction or maintenance of public improvements, in which the Town has either a joint ownership interest or enters into a lease of Town property in excess of one (1) year, and which public-private partnership provides an economic benefit to a private party, the Town Council, following debate and discussion of the public-private partnership, may approve said partnership. Following vote of the Town Council to approve said partnership, the Town Council shall call a special election to allow the qualified voters of the Town to approve or reject said commitment of Town funds. The ballot used when voting upon said partnership shall contain the words "For" and "Against" (stating the nature of the public-private partnership). If a majority of the qualified voters voting on the proposed partnership shall vote in favor thereof, such public-private partnership shall be approved. 
(Ord. No. 15-12, (Prop 9, approved at referendum 5-12-2012), adopted 5-21-2012)  
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL PLANNING AND ZONING[[5]] 

Footnotes: 
--- ([5]) --- 
[5] State Law reference— Planning and zoning, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq. 
 
§ 8.01. - Platting of Property. 
(a)  Hereafter, every owner of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, who may divide the same in two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision or any addition to the Town, shall comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Regulations or ordinances of the Town, and V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Chapter 212, as is now existing and may be hereafter amended is adopted and incorporated herein for all purposes. 
(b)  The provisions of § 8.01(a) above shall apply similarly to the owner of any tract of land situated within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town of Flower Mound, if not in an incorporated city or town. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 8.02. - Development of Property. 
The Town Council shall cooperate with persons interested in the development of property within or beyond the town limits. No expenditure of public funds, however, shall be authorized for the development of privately owned subdivisions, situated within or beyond the corporate limits of the Town. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 8.03. - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The Town Council shall have the power and authority to appoint a Town Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the General Laws of the State of Texas, as provided for in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq., as now or hereafter amended. The Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound shall have all of the rights, privileges, powers and authority; given, permitted and granted under the laws of the State of Texas relative to planning and zoning in, for and of municipalities and their environs. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 8.04. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 64-16 , (Prop. 7, approved at referendum 11-8-2016), adopted 11-21-2016, repealed § 8.04, which pertained to Parks, Arts, and Library Services Board, and derived from Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 15-12, (Prop. 10, approved at referendum 5-12-2012), adopted 5-21-2012.  
§ 8.05. - Amendments to the Master Plan and SMARTGrowth Program. 
Any amendment to the Master Plan of the Town of Flower Mound or any amendment of the SMARTGrowth Program requires the approval of three-fourths (¾) of the membership of the Council. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 8.06. - Amendments to Oil and Natural Gas Well Drilling and Operations Ordinance. 
Any amendment to the Oil and Natural Gas Well Drilling and Operations Ordinance, contained in Article VII of Chapter 34 of the Town's Code of Ordinances, as amended, requires a public hearing and the approval of three-fourths (3/4) of the membership of the Town Council. 
(Ord. No. 15-12, (Prop. 11, approved at referendum 5/12/2012), and adopted 5/21/2012)  
ARTICLE IX. - MUNICIPAL FINANCE[[6]] 

Footnotes: 
--- ([6]) --- 
[6] State Law reference— Financial matters, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.001. 
 
§ 9.01. - Fiscal Year. 
The fiscal year of the Town of Flower Mound shall begin on the first (1st) day of October and end on the last day of September of each calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. 
State Law reference— Fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.022.  
§ 9.02. - Preparation and Submission of Budget. 
The Town Manager shall submit a proposed budget to the Council between sixty (60) and ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year and shall contain, but not be limited to the following: 
(a)  A budget message that shall consist of an outline explaining the proposed financial policies of the Town for the upcoming fiscal year, and that shall set forth the reasons for changes from the previous year in expenditures and revenue items, and that shall explain any major changes in financial policy. 
(b)  A consolidated statement of anticipated receipts and proposed expenditures of all funds. 
(c)  An analysis of property valuations. 
(d)  An analysis of the tax rate. 
(e)  Tax levies and tax collections by years for at least five (5) years. 
(f)  General fund resources in detail. 
(g)  Special revenue fund resources in detail. 
(h)  Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department and activity. 
(i)  Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support the summary in (h) above. 
(j)  A revenue and expense statement for all service funds. 
(k)  A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount authorized, amount issued and amount outstanding. 
(l)  A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest of each issue of bonds. 
(m)  The appropriation ordinance. 
(n)  The tax levying ordinance. 
(o)  A comparative schedule showing the amount of bonded debt at the beginning of the fiscal year and projected at the end of the fiscal year based on the approved capital budget. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 33-07, (Props. 5, 6, approved at referendum 5-12-2007), adopted 5-21-2007) 
State Law reference— Budgets, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.001 et seq.  
§ 9.03. - Anticipated Revenues Compared with Other Years in Budget. 
The Town Manager in the preparation of the budget shall place in parallel columns opposite the various items of revenue: the actual amount of each item of revenue for the last completed fiscal year; the estimated amount for the current fiscal year; and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 9.04. - Proposed Expenditures Compared with Other Years. 
The Town Manager in the preparation of the budget shall place in parallel columns opposite the various items of expenditures: the actual amount of each expenditure for the last completed fiscal year; the estimated amount for the current fiscal year; and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 9.05. - Budget a Public Record. 
The budget and all supporting schedules shall be filed with the Town Secretary, submitted to the Town Council and shall be a public record. A copy of the budget shall be made available to any person upon request. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 9.06. - Notice of Public Hearing on Budget. 
At the meeting of the Town Council at which the budget is submitted, the Town Council shall determine the time and place of a public hearing on the budget. The Council shall cause a notice of the hearing, setting forth the time, place and date, to be published in the official newspaper of the Town of Flower Mound as required by law. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 9.07. - Public Hearing on Budget. 
At the time and place set forth in the notice required by § 9.06, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget submitted and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against any item or the amount of any item therein contained.  
§ 9.08. - Vote Required for Adoption. 
The budget shall be adopted by the favorable vote of three (3) of the members of the Town Council.  
§ 9.09. - Failure to Adopt. 
If the Town Council fails to adopt the budget by the thirtieth (30th) day of September, the amounts appropriated for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis with all items in it prorated accordingly until such time as the Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The levy of property tax will be set in accordance with the laws and Constitution of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 33-07, Prop. 7, approved at referendum 5-12-2007, adopted 5-21-2007)  
§ 9.10. - Effective Date of Budget; Certification of Copies; Copies Made Available. 
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the fiscal year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the Town Secretary, the County Clerk of Denton County, and the State Comptroller of Public Accounts at Austin. The final budget shall be printed or otherwise reproduced and copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies and for the use of interested persons and organizations. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 9.11. - Budget Establishes Appropriations. 
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be appropriated to the purposes therein named. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 9.12. - Budget Establishes Amount to be Raised by Property Tax. 
From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute the amount of the levy necessary for the purposes of the Town in the corresponding tax year; provided, however, that in no event shall such levy exceed the legal limit provided by the laws and Constitution of the State of Texas. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 9.13. - Reserve. 
Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a reserve in an amount not less than ten percent (10%) of the budgeted amount in the General Fund and Utility Fund, to be used in case of unforeseen items of expenditure. Such reserve shall be under the control of the Town Manager and distributed by him after approval of the Town Council. 
(Ord. No. 33-07, (Prop. 8, approved at referendum 5-12-2007), adopted 5-21-2007)  
§ 9.14. - Transfer of Appropriations. 
During the fiscal year, the Town Council shall have the power to transfer funds allocated by the budget from one department to another department, and to re-estimate revenues and expenditures. If the Town Council determines it is in the best interest of the Town to apply for and accept a private, county, state or federal grant of funds for a particular purpose, the Council's action in accepting the award of said grant and any corresponding expenditures shall constitute a budget appropriation in the amount of said grant funds. 
(Ord. No. 33-07, (Prop. 9, approved at referendum 5-12-2007), adopted 5-21-2007)  
§ 9.15. - Power to Tax. 
The Town Council shall have the power under the provisions of the State law to levy, assess and collect an annual tax upon real and personal property within the Town to the maximum amount provided by the Constitution and general laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Authority, Texas Const., art. 11, §§ 4, 5; local taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.001 et seq.  
§ 9.16. - Property Subject to Tax. 
All real and personal property within the Town of Flower Mound on the first day of January, shall be subject to ad valorem taxation unless otherwise expressly exempted by law. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 9.17. - Board of Directors of Appraisal District. 
Participation in the selection of members to serve on the Board of Directors of the Denton Central Appraisal District shall be in accordance with the Texas Property Tax Code. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 9.17.1. - Appraisal of Property. 
All taxable property located or situated within the corporate limits of the Town shall be appraised in accordance with the Texas Property Tax Code.  
§ 9.17.2. - Certifications and Adoption. 
The Board shall be required to keep an accurate record of all its proceedings which shall be available for public inspection. Immediately upon completion of its work, the Board shall certify its approval of the assessment rolls which shall be returned to the Town Council. The Council shall in turn approve the rolls as returned to it and shall thereupon certify and adopt the same as the assessment rolls to be used for the collection of taxes for the current year. The Town shall thereafter cause tax statements to be mailed to each person, firm or corporation named upon the tax rolls. Compliance with this section shall be in accordance with the Texas Property Tax Code. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 9.18. - Taxes, When Due and Payable. 
(a)  All taxes due the Town shall be payable at the office of the Town or any office designated by the Town to for the collection and payment of taxes and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which shall not be later than October 1st. Taxes shall be paid before February 1st of each year succeeding the year for which the taxes are levied, and all such taxes not paid prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to such penalty and interest as the Town Council may provide by ordinance. Failure to levy and assess taxes through omission in preparation of the approved tax roll shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation so omitted from the obligation to pay such current or past due taxes shown to be payable by recheck of the rolls and receipts for the years in question, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the Town Council shall have the power to provide by ordinance such rules, regulations and mode of procedure to enforce the collection by and payment to the Town of all taxes due the Town as it may deem expedient, and may provide such penalties for the failure to pay such taxes as it may deem expedient.  
§ 9.19. - Tax Liens. 
A lien is hereby created on all property, personal and real, in favor of the Town of Flower Mound, for all taxes, ad valorem, or otherwise. Said lien shall exist from January 1st in each year until the taxes are paid. A tax lien shall be prior to all other claims; and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ of any kind, can ever defeat such lien; but the Town may pursue such property, and whenever found out, may seize and sell enough thereof to satisfy such taxes. All persons or corporations owning or holding personal property or real estate in the Town of Flower Mound on the first (1st) day of January of each year shall be liable for all municipal taxes levied thereon for such year. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 9.20. - Issuance of Bonds. 
In keeping with the Constitution of the State of Texas and not contrary thereto, the Town of Flower Mound shall have the right, authority and power to borrow money on the credit of the Town for any public purpose not now or hereafter prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The Town shall have the right to issue all tax bonds, revenue bonds, funding and refunding bonds, time warrants and other evidences of indebtedness as now authorized, or as may hereafter be authorized, to be issued by cities and towns by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 9.21. - Chief Financial Officer. 
The Town Manager shall appoint a competent person as Chief Financial Officer and such assistants as the Town Council shall deem advisable. The Chief Financial Officer shall perform the duties delegated to him by the Town Manager and those which may be imposed upon him by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
ARTICLE X. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 
 
§ 10.01. - Powers of the Town. 
In addition to the Town's power, right and authority, to buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public utilities, and to manufacture, distribute and sell the output of such utilities' operations, the Town shall have all further rights, authorities, and powers as may now, or hereafter, be granted under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
State Law reference— Authority, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175.  
§ 10.02. - Franchise: Powers of Town Council. 
The Town Council shall have power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the Town of Flower Mound. All ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or extending franchises for public utilities shall be read at two (2) separate regular meetings of the Town Council and shall not be effective until thirty (30) days after its passage; and pending such time, the full text of such ordinance shall be published once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the Town of Flower Mound, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise. No public utility franchise shall be granted for a term of more than 20 years; nor shall same be transferable, except with the approval of the Town Council expressed by ordinance. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 10.03. - Franchise Value Not to be Allowed. 
In setting reasonable rates and charges for utility service within the Town and in determining the just compensation to be paid by the Town for the public utility property which the Town may acquire by condemnation or otherwise, nothing shall be included as the value of any franchise granted by the Town under this Charter. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 10.04. - Right of Regulation. 
All grants, removals, extensions, or amendments of public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to right and power of the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound: 
(a)  To repeal the franchise ordinance at any time upon the failure of the grantee to comply with any provision of the franchise ordinance, the Charter of the Town of Flower Mound, an applicable statute of the State of Texas, or the rules of any applicable governing body; 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  At any time, to examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility, and to require annual, and other reports, including reports on operations within the Town of Flower Mound; 
(e)  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public; 
(f)  To require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas.  
§ 10.05. - Grant Not to be Exclusive. 
Any grant, contract, or franchise, to construct, maintain, or operate a public utility, for or in Flower Mound, Texas, and any renewal or extension of such grant, contract, or franchise, shall not be exclusive.  
§ 10.06. - Consent of Property Owners. 
The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility. However, nothing in this Charter or in any franchise granted hereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 10.07. - Extensions. 
All extensions of public utilities within the town limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any franchise grant made to such public utility. The right to use and maintain any extensions shall terminate with the termination of the original franchise grant, and shall be terminable as provided in § 10.04 of this Charter. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant.  
§ 10.08. - Other Conditions. 
All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the Town of Flower Mound and the grantee. The contractual rights as contained in any such franchise shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that the power of the Town of Flower Mound to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of utility property is in all things reserved, and except the general power of the Town to regulate the rates and services of a grantee, which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this article whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this Charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the Town Council in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise granted. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 10.09. - Accounts of Municipally Owned Utilities. 
Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the Town, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such ownership and operation, including all assets and all liabilities, appropriately subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation interest payments, rental and other disposition of annual income. The accounts shall show actual capital cost to the Town of each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements and the source of funds expended for such capital purposes. They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service to or rendered by any such utility to any Town department. The Town Council shall cause an annual report to be made by a Certified Public Accountant and shall publish such report, showing the financial results of such Town ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section and such other data as the Town Council shall deem expedient.  
§ 10.10. - Sales of Electricity, Water and Sewer Service. 
(a)  The Town Council shall have the right, power and authority to sell and distribute electricity and water, and to sell and provide for sewer services, and any other utilities, to any person, firm or corporation outside the limits of the Town of Flower Mound, and to permit them to connect with said system under contract with the Town, under such terms and conditions as may appear to be for the best interest of the Town. 
(b)  The Town Council shall have the right, power and authority to prescribe the kind of materials used within or beyond the limits of the Town of Flower Mound in the construction of electric, water and sewer utilities, where it furnishes the service, and to inspect the same and require them to keep in good order and condition at all times and to make such rules and regulations as shall be necessary and proper, and prescribe penalties for noncompliance with same.  
§ 10.11. - Regulation of Rates and Service. 
The Town Council shall have the absolute right, authority and power after due notice and hearing to regulate by ordinance, the rates and services of every public utility operating in the Town of Flower Mound; and shall have the power to employ, at the expense of the grantee, expert assistance and advice in determining a reasonable rate and equitable profit to the grantee. The Town Council shall also have the right, authority, and power to require at any time or times, detailed reports and financial statements on the operations of any such public utility, which reports and statements shall be in such form, and contain such information, as the Council shall prescribe. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
ARTICLE XI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
§ 11.01. - Construction of Charter. 
Any word or phrase in the Charter which would appear to be gender specific, including, but not limited to, words such as "he," "his," "him," "she," and "her," shall be read and construed as gender-neutral terms, Each Charter provision using such a term shall be equally applicable to both males and females. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.02. - Publicity of Records. 
All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the Town shall be open to inspection by any citizen or by any representative of the press at all reasonable times and under such reasonable regulations as may be established by the Public Information Act, the Town Council or the Mayor, other than those records and documents excepted from public disclosure by law. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Public records act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq.  
§ 11.03. - Personal Interest. 
No officer or employee of the Town of Flower Mound shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the Town, or be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the Town of any land, material, supplies or services, except on behalf of the Town as an officer or employee. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee guilty thereof shall forfeit his office or position. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Voting conflicts, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq.  
§ 11.04. - Provisions Relating to Assignment, Execution and Garnishments. 
The real and personal property belonging to the Town shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the Town in the hands of any person, firm or corporation shall not be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the Town nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The Town shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Garnishment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 51.076(b), 101.023.  
§ 11.05. - Town Not Required to Give Security or Execute Bond. 
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the Town of Flower Mound is a party, for any bond, undertaking or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of the Town in any of the State courts, but all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings, shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.06. - Special Provisions Covering Damage Suits, Etc. 
(a)  The Town of Flower Mound, Texas shall never be liable for any personal injury, whether resulting in death or not, unless the person injured, or someone in his behalf, or, in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall file a notice in writing with Town Manager or the Town Secretary within six months after the occurrence of such injury. The notice shall state specifically when, where and how the exact injury occurred and the full extent thereof, together with the amount of damage claimed or asserted. The Town of Flower Mound shall never be liable for any claim for damage or injury to personal property unless the person whose personal property has been injured or damaged, or someone in his behalf, shall file a claim in writing with the Town Manager or the Town Secretary within six months after said damage or injury has occurred, stating specifically when, where and how the injury or damage occurred and the full extent thereof, and the amount of damage sustained. 
(b)  The Town of Flower Mound, Texas, shall never be liable for any claim for damage or injury to real property caused by the negligent act or omission of its officers, servants, agents or employees, unless the person whose real property has been injured or damaged, or someone in his behalf, shall file a claim in writing with the Town Manager or the Town Secretary within six months after said damage or injury has occurred, stating specifically when, where and how the injury or damage occurred, and the amount of damage claimed. The Town of Flower Mound shall never be liable on account of any damage or injury to a person or to personal property arising from or occasioned by any defect in any public street, highway, alley, grounds or public work of the Town of Flower Mound, unless the specific defect causing the damage or injury shall have been actually known to the Town Manager at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage, or unless the attention of the Town Manager or the Town Secretary shall have been called thereto by a notice thereof in writing at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage, and proper diligence has not been exercised to rectify the defect. The notice herein required to be given to the Town Manager or the Town Secretary of the specific defect causing the damage or injury shall apply where the defect arose from any omission of the Town itself, through its agents, servants, or employees, or acts or third parties. 
(c)  No provision of this section shall ever be so construed as to expand the ordinary liability of the Town; and it is expressly provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to mean that the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, waives any rights, privileges, defenses or immunities in tort actions which are provided under the common law, the Constitution, and general laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Tort claims, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.101 et seq.  
§ 11.07. - Rearrangement and Renumbering. 
The Town Council shall have the power by ordinance to renumber and rearrange all articles, sections and paragraphs of this Charter, or any amendments thereto, as it shall deem appropriate, without changing the meaning of effect of any part hereof. Upon the passage of any such ordinance, a copy, certified by the Town Secretary, shall be forwarded to the Secretary of State of the State of Texas for filing. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.08. - Judicial Notice. 
This Charter shall be deemed a public act and shall have the force and effect of a general law. It may be read in evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts and places, without further proof. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.09. - Construction of Charter. 
This Charter shall not be construed as a mere grant of enumerated powers, but shall be construed as a general grant of power, and as a limitation of power on the government of the Town of Flower Mound, in the same manner as the Constitution of Texas is construed as limitation of the powers of the Legislature. Except where expressly prohibited by this Charter, each and every power under Article XI, Section 5, of the Constitution of Texas, which it would be competent for the people of the Town of Flower Mound to grant expressly to the Town, shall be construed to be granted to the Town by this Charter. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.10. - Accepting Gifts, Favors or Privileges. 
No officer or employee of the Town of Flower Mound shall ever accept, directly or indirectly, any gift, favor or privilege, from any public utility corporation, or other corporation, person or persons, enjoying a grant, contract, franchise, privilege or easement from or with said Town, during the term of office of such officer, or during such employment of such employee; except as may be authorized by law, resolution or ordinance. Any officer or employee of the Town who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be punished by any fine that may be prescribed by ordinance for this offense; and shall forthwith, be removed from office. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.11. - Powers to Remit Penalties. 
The governing body shall have the right to remit, in whole or in part, any fine or penalty belonging to the Town which may be imposed under any ordinance or resolution passed pursuant to this Charter. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.12. - Property Not Exempt from Special Assessments. 
No property of any kind, by whomsoever owned or held or by whatsoever institution, agency, political subdivision or organization, owned or held, whether in trust or by nonprofit organization, or corporation, or by "foundation," or otherwise, (except property of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas), shall be exempt in any way from any of the special taxes, charges, levies and assessments, authorized or permitted by this Charter for local improvement for the public welfare. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.13. - No Lien on Public Property; Contractors, Etc. 
No lien of any kind or character may be created, and none shall ever exist or be established on or against the public buildings, property, public halls, parks, or public works of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. All subcontractors, materialmen, mechanics, artisans, and laborers upon any public works or projects of the Town of Flower Mound are hereby required to notify the Town in writing of all claims against it that they may have on account of such work. When such notice has been timely, duly and properly given, the Town shall retain an amount from any funds due the Contractor sufficient to satisfy all claims; provided that such notice may be given at any time after such indebtedness becomes due and before final settlement; and provided further, that no contractor or subcontractor shall issue any "time checks" on or on account of any public works of said Town. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.14. - Severability Clause. 
If any section or part of this Charter shall be held invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter, nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that any entire section, or part of section, may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect, with the section or part of the section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.15. - Retirement System and Social Security; Group Insurance. 
The Town Council shall have the power to provide for coverage of its appointed officers and employees under the Worker's Compensation, Retirement and Social Security systems provided or permitted by laws of the State of Texas for such officers and employees of the Town; and for "group insurance coverage" of such officers and employees; the Town Council having the power to provide for the payment of all or any part of the cost thereof. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.16. - Special Powers Under Local Government Code. 
The Town Council and the Town of Flower Mound shall specially have all rights, powers and authority given and granted by and under V.T.C.A. Local Government Code and all amendments thereof and thereto. The Town shall have all authority under Local Government Code Sec. 217.042, as it may be amended, relative to nuisances within and outside of the town limits and the prohibition thereof. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.17. - Town Depository. 
The provisions of the general laws of the State of Texas governing the selection and designation of a Town depository are hereby adopted as the law governing the selection and designation of a depository of and for the Town of Flower Mound. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004) 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Chapter 105.  
§ 11.18. - Amending the Charter. 
Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the Town in the manner provided by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Chapter 9 as now or hereafter amended; but not more often than once every two (2) years, as provided by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.19. - Charter Review Commission. 
The Town Council may appoint a Charter Review Commission, composed of at least five qualified voters of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004)  
§ 11.20. - Review of the Charter. 
A regular review of this Charter shall be held at least every five years, beginning in 2011. 
(Amend. of 5-15-2004; Ord. No. 33-07, (Prop. 10, approved at referendum 5-12-2007), adopted 5-21-2007)  
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Town of Flower Mound, Texas," and may be cited as the Flower Mound Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 1.01) 
State Law reference— Authority to codify ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the town council, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the town council: 
Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, printed in Part I of this volume. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Town of Flower Mound, Texas, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference— Computation of time for state procedures, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.014. 
County. The term "county" shall mean Denton County, Texas. 
Delegation of authority. The term "delegation of authority" means a provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates, where applicable. 
Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females, firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
State Law reference— Gender, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.012, 312.003. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
State Law reference— May, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.016. 
Number. Terms in the singular include the plural. Terms in the plural include the singular. 
State Law reference— Number, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.012, 312.003. 
Oath. A solemn affirmation is the equivalent to an oath and a person shall be deemed to have sworn if such person makes such an affirmation. In such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference— Oath, swear, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.005, 312.011. 
Officers, departments, boards, committees, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officers, departments, boards, commissioners or employees, etc., it shall mean and refer to those of the Town of Flower Mound. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. Whenever the term "person" or its plural form is used in this Code, it shall mean any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons, owner, agent or occupant. 
State Law reference— Person defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(2). 
Public place. Whenever the term "public place" is used, unless otherwise specifically defined, it shall mean any public road, street, alley, park, square, building, or other property of the town, or any other places to which people commonly resort for the purpose of business, recreation or amusements. 
State. The term "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, road, street, avenue, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the town, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
State Law reference— Tense, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.012, 312.003(a). 
Tenant or occupant. As applied to premises, the terms "tenant" and "occupant" include any person, holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others. 
Town. The term "town" shall mean the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, County of Denton, State of Texas. 
Town council. Whenever the term "town council" is used it shall mean the Town Council of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." shall mean the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
State Law reference— Statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.008. 
V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." shall mean and refer to the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas Code Annotated. 
State Law reference— Statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.008. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 1.03)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section or subsection and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or subsections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 1.02) 
State Law reference— Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.024.  
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
All references to chapters of sections are to the chapters or sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 1.05)  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history or source notes appearing in parenthesis after sections in this Code have no legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the legislative history of that section.  
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
Editor's notes, Charter references, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect.  
Sec. 1-7. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same legislation previously adopted by the town relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
State Law reference— Effect of repeal of a repealing statute, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.030, 312.007.  
Sec. 1-9. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the town. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street or public way. 
(6)  The ordinance adopting the budget or any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(8)  Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones. 
(9)  Any land use, development, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map. 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street. 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessments for such improvements. 
(12)  Any ordinance regarding plats or subdivisions. 
(13)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the town. 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, establishing pensions or employee benefits, setting salaries of town officers and employees or any personnel regulations or indemnifications policies, or otherwise related to employees. 
(15)  Any ordinance on investment and other financial policies. 
(16)  Any ordinance calling an election. 
(17)  Any ordinance authorizing street maintenance agreements. 
(18)  Any ordinance relating to the acquisition of lands by the town by condemnation proceedings. 
(19)  Any ordinance levying a fee, rate, deposit or charge. 
(20)  Any ordinance adopting by reference any section of this Code and not included herein. 
(21)  Any temporary or special ordinance. 
(b)  All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in the Code. All ordinances are on file in the town secretary's office.  
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code, which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, or subsection, or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the town council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specified reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That chapter _____ or section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Flower Mound, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows…" The provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event of a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That chapter _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Flower Mound, Texas, is hereby amended by adding section _____ which said section reads as follows…" The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If it is desired to delete a section from the Code of Ordinances, the following language shall be used: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Flower Mound, Texas, is hereby deleted from the Code of Ordinances." 
(e)  It is hereby provided, however, that any subsequent ordinance which fails to amend this Code in the manner provided for in this section, shall not be deemed invalid as a result of such failure to follow the procedure outlined in this section. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 1.04)  
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code of Ordinances shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the town council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the town council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed, shall be excluded from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(b)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency, or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this section," "this subsection," etc., as the case may be; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 1.05)  
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared the intention of the town council that the sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, subsections and sections of the Code, since the same would have been enacted by the town council without the incorporation in this Code of any unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection or section. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 1.07)  
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the town or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the town under authority duly vested in such officer or agency any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance, rule, regulation or order that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping or refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. The violation of any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 unless specifically stated otherwise in this Code. If the maximum penalty provided by this Code for any offense is greater than the maximum penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state, the maximum penalty for such violation provided for violation provided by the state statute shall be the maximum penalty under this Code; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the town for such purposes. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 1.06) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; jurisdiction of municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of town council to establish, create, consolidate or abolish administrative departments, §§ 3.07(a), 4.01; authority of town council to inquire into conduct of any office, department or agency of the town and make investigations, §§ 3.07(e), 3.12; authority of town council to create and appoint boards and commissions, § 3.07(f); authority of town council to fix salaries and determine qualifications for employees, § 3.07(m); nepotism, § 3.08.4; town council not to interfere with appointments and removal of employees by the town manager, § 3.09; authority of town council to require bonds, § 3.11; authority of town council to appoint town manager, § 4.02; authority to appoint town secretary, § 4.03; mayor to appoint municipal court judge, § 4.04.1; mayor to appoint town attorney, § 4.05. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the town saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(2); any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(3); the ordinance adopting the budget or any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(6); any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, establishing pensions or employee benefits, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations or indemnifications policies, or otherwise related to employees saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(14); administration of records managements administration, § 2-471 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 22; administration of emergency management regulations, § 22-51 et seq.; court, ch. 26; administration of noise control, § 34-151 et seq.; library, ch. 46; taxation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 70; administration and enforcement of sanitary sewer service regulations, § 70-131 et seq.; administration of land development regulations, ch. 78. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TOWN COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Town council, § 3.01 et seq. 
State Law reference— Home rule form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-31—2-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Meetings, §§ 3.08, 3.08.2. 
State Law reference— Open meetings act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Regular and special. 
(a)  The town council shall normally meet the first and third Monday of each month at 6:00 p.m. in accordance with the Town Charter and state law. 
(b)  Special meetings may be called as provided in Charter § 3.08.1 and state law. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 2.02(b); Ord. No. 29-07, § 1, 5-7-2007)  
Sec. 2-52. - Executive session. 
The town council may meet in executive session as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.071 et seq. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 2.02(b)(3)) 
State Law reference— Exceptions to requirement that meetings be open, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.071 et seq.  
Sec. 2-53. - Parliamentary procedure. 
(a)  Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall serve as a guide on all questions of procedure not addressed by provisions of the Town Charter and/or the rules of procedure contained in this division. In the event of conflict between the Charter or Code of Ordinances and Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, the Charter and/or Code of Ordinances shall prevail. 
(b)  The rules of procedure adopted in this section shall be followed by all persons in the council chambers including the town council, staff, citizens, other visitors and the news media. 
(c)  All voting shall be by roll call. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 2.02(a), (b)(5), (b)(6); Ord. No. 65-15 , § 2, 10-19-2015)  
Sec. 2-54. - Duties of mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall assign councilmembers' seats. 
(b)  The mayor shall preserve order and decorum. He shall confine both discussion and debate. He may enforce rules through the town manager and staff. 
(c)  The mayor shall state the agenda item presented for consideration, request the roll call vote and announce the results. 
(d)  The mayor may call a recess at regular intervals. 
(e)  If both the mayor and mayor pro tem are absent, a councilmember shall be elected to act as the presiding officer. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 2.02(c)) 
Charter reference— Mayor or mayor pro tem shall preside at meetings, § 3.05.  
Sec. 2-55. - Councilmembers. 
(a)  Councilmembers shall be recognized by the mayor before speaking. Councilmembers speaking shall not be interrupted. 
(b)  Councilmembers shall maintain order and decorum. They shall confine discussions and debate to the agenda item considered. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 2.02(d)) 
Charter reference— Voting by roll call, § 3.08.2. 
State Law reference— Voting conflicts, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq.  
Sec. 2-56. - Citizens, visitors and the news media. 
(a)  Attendance. Citizens, visitors and the news media are encouraged to attend town council meetings. They shall be permitted to enter the council chamber until the room capacity has been met. 
(b)  Preservation of order. Citizens, visitors and the news media shall maintain order as well as decorum. They shall be removed for disruptive behavior, and aggravated cases may be prosecuted. 
(c)  Exhibits. Any visual aid required to support a formal presentation to the town council shall be permitted. 
(d)  Food and beverages. Food and beverages shall be prohibited in the council chambers during meetings. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 2.02(e))  
Sec. 2-57. - Town council agenda setting policy. 
(a)  The town manager and town secretary shall develop the agenda for council meetings in consultation with the mayor. 
(b)  Members of the council may submit items for inclusion on a future agenda by orally making the request under the future agenda items topic during a council meeting. With the support of a majority of the members of the council, the requested item will be placed on a future meeting agenda in accordance with the direction of the council. 
(c)  Past agenda items that were the subject of a final vote may be placed on a future agenda to be reconsidered by the council at the written request of a councilmember who voted on the prevailing side. The council's ability to reconsider an item shall be subject to procedures mandated by state law and this Code, which procedures shall prevail in the event of a conflict with this section. 
( Ord. No. 65-15 , § 1, 10-19-2015)  
Secs. 2-58—2-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions, § 78-31 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 78-51 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 78-81 et seq.; smartgrowth commission, § 98-51 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Reasonable accommodations. 
The town shall make reasonable accommodations to ensure that any individual with a disability will have equal opportunity to participate on a board, commission, or committee. 
(Ord. No. 17-18 , § 1, 5-21-2018)  
Secs. 2-92—2-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARKS BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 66-16 , § 1, adopted Dec. 19, 2016, changed the title of Div. 2 from "Parks, Arts, and Library Services (PALS) Board" to "Parks Board."   Additionally, § 2 of said ordinance provides that any references in the Town's Code of Ordinances to the "Parks, Arts, and Library Services Board" or "PALS Board" shall be replaced with "Parks Board". 
 
Sec. 2-111. - Created. 
There is hereby created an advisory board known as the parks board. 
(Ord. No. 106-07, § 2, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 1, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 2-112. - Organization. 
(a)  The parks board shall consist of seven regular members and three alternates appointed by a majority vote of the town council in accordance with established procedures. 
(b)  Each member of the board shall be a resident citizen and qualified voter of the town, at the time of his appointment. A member who ceases to reside in the town during his term of office shall immediately forfeit his office. 
(c)  Members shall be designated as places number one through ten, with places eight, nine, and ten designated as alternates. 
(d)  The term of office of members of the board shall be for two years. Places one, three, five, seven, and nine shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30 in odd-numbered years. Places two, four, six, eight, and ten shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30 in even-numbered years. Members of the board may be removed before their terms of office expire. 
(e)  Other qualifications for membership shall be a genuine interest in parks, programs for seniors, preservation of the town's history, the community, the ability to work with the public, and time to devote to this service. 
(f)  Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 106-07, § 2, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 12-09, § 2, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 39-09, § 2, 10-5-2009; Ord. No. 48-14 , § 2, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 1, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 2-113. - Officers and procedures. 
(a)  At the first scheduled board meeting in October of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the first item of business shall be the selection of the board's chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the membership of the board. 
(b)  The chairperson shall preside over meetings and shall vote only in case of a tie. In the event a question over procedures arises, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall serve as a guide. 
(c)  The vice-chairperson shall assist the chairperson in directing the affairs of the parks board. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall assume the duties of the chairperson. The vice-chairperson, when acting as chairperson, shall retain the right to vote. 
(d)  In the event of the absence of both the chairperson and vice-chairperson, any member of the board may be selected as acting chairperson for that particular meeting by majority vote of the members present. Any board member acting as chairperson shall retain the right to vote. No member shall be required to act as chairperson if the member so declines. 
(e)  The recording of minutes of all board meetings shall be the responsibility of town staff. 
(f)  A majority of the board, four members, shall constitute a quorum to do business and the affirmative vote of the majority of those attending shall be necessary to pass any motion. 
(g)  The board shall establish rules and procedures that govern its operation. 
(h)  All voting shall be by roll call. 
(Ord. No. 106-07, § 2, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 48-14 , § 3, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 1, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 2-114. - Powers and duties. 
The parks board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Advise the town council and staff in policy matters regarding parks and recreation: goals, objectives and programs. 
(b)  Assist the town council and staff in the planning process: parks and recreation programs. 
(c)  Promote parks and recreation participation. 
(d)  Assist the town council and staff in the recruitment of volunteers. 
(e)  Advise the town council and staff regarding policies, services and programs provided or sponsored by the community services department. This includes, but is not limited to: parks and recreation programming, senior citizen activities, and fees for community services programs and activities. 
(f)  Advise the town council and staff regarding revenues and expenditures from dedicated funding sources including the special activities fund, park development funds and any similar fund created to support the community services department. 
(g)  Promote the benefits of community services facilities, programs and activities, and when necessary, solicit public volunteer assistance. 
(h)  Oversee and advise the town council and staff regarding any issues or updates to the recorded history of Flower Mound in the book Sweet Flower Mound Land. 
(i)  Consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming before the board within the scope of its duties and responsibilities or referred to it by the town council or town manager. 
(Ord. No. 106-07, § 2, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 1, 12-19-2016)  
Secs. 2-115—2-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 106-07, § 2, adopted Dec. 17, 2007, repealed div. 3, 2hich pertained to park board and derived from Code 1989, ch. 8, §§ 4.01—4.05; Ord. No. 32-03, §§ 4, 5, adopted June 2, 2003; and Ord. No. 16-05, § 3, adopted Feb. 21, 2005. 
 
Secs. 2-141—2-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION COMMISSION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 51-11, § 2, adopted Sept. 19, 2011, repealed the former Div. 4, §§ 2-171—2-174, and enacted a new Div. 4 as set out herein. The former Div. 4 pertained to the environmental conservation commission and derived from Ord. No. 46-05, § 2, adopted 6-6-2005. 
 
Sec. 2-171. - Created. 
There is hereby created an advisory board known as the Flower Mound Environmental Conservation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 51-11, § 2, 9-19-2011)  
Sec. 2-172. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the environmental conservation commission is to advise the town council on matters pertaining to the conservation of natural resources and building an environmentally sustainable community. 
(Ord. No. 51-11, § 2, 9-19-2011)  
Sec. 2-173. - Organization. 
(a)  The environmental conservation commission shall consist of seven regular members appointed by a majority vote of the town council in accordance with established procedures. 
(b)  In addition to the seven regular members of the environmental conservation commission, three alternate members of the environmental conservation commission, who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members, shall be appointed by a majority vote of the town council in accordance with established procedures. In determining which of the three alternate members shall serve in the absence of a regular member, the alternate member with the longest tenure shall so serve. If for any reason the alternate member with the longest tenure is unable to serve, the second alternate member shall so serve. If for any reason the alternate member with the second longest tenure is unable to serve, the third alternate member shall so serve. 
(c)  Regular members shall be designated as places number one through seven and alternate members shall be designated as alternate place number eight, alternate place number nine and alternate place number ten. 
(d)  The terms of office for regular members and alternate members of the environmental conservation commission shall be for two years. Places one, three, five, seven and alternate place number nine shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30 in odd numbered years. Places two, four, six and alternate place numbers eight and ten shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30 in even numbered years. Members and alternate members of the commission may be removed before their terms of office expire. 
(e)  Members and alternate members of the environmental conservation commission shall serve without compensation. 
(f)  Other qualifications for regular or alternate membership shall be a genuine interest in the preservation and protection of the town's environmental resources, including open spaces, urban forests, unique habitats, water quality, and the community in general, and the ability to work with the public and the time to devote to this service. 
(g)  Each member or alternate member of the commission shall be a resident citizen and qualified voter of the town, at the time of his appointment. A member or alternate member who ceases to reside in the town during his term of office shall immediately forfeit his office. 
(Ord. No. 51-11, § 2, 9-19-2011)  
Sec. 2-174. - Officers and procedures. 
(a)  At the first scheduled commission meeting in October of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the first item of business shall be the selection of the commission's chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the membership of the commission. The alternate members of the commission are not eligible to serve as the chairperson or vice-chairperson or to participate in the selection of said chairperson or vice-chairperson. 
(b)  The chairperson shall preside over meetings and shall vote only in case of a tie. In the event a question over procedures arises, Robert's Rules of Order, newly revised, shall prevail. 
(c)  The vice-chairperson shall assist the chairperson in directing the affairs of the environmental conservation commission. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall assume the duties of the chairperson. The vice-chairperson, when acting as chairperson, shall retain the right to vote. 
(d)  In the event of the absence of both the chairperson and vice-chairperson, any member of the commission may be selected as the acting chairperson for that particular meeting by majority vote of the members present. Any commission member acting as chairperson shall retain the right to vote. No member shall be required to act as chairperson if the member declines. 
(e)  The recording of minutes of all commission meetings shall be the responsibility of the town staff. 
(f)  The chairperson shall distribute to each member and alternate member, once a year at the first regular meeting following appointment of officers, a copy of the town's tree ordinance (article II of chapter 94 of this Code), open space plan, stormwater management program, green building program, water conservation program, and a copy of this division. 
(g)  A majority, four members, shall constitute a quorum to do business, and the affirmative vote of the majority of those attending shall be necessary to pass any motion or recommendation. 
(h)  The commission shall establish rules and procedures that govern its operation. 
(i)  All voting shall be by roll call. 
(Ord. No. 51-11, § 2, 9-19-2011)  
Sec. 2-175. - Powers and duties. 
The environmental conservation commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Open space. Promote the town's open space plan and its components and facilitate relations between landowners and land trusts. Develop and implement appropriate land protection techniques and tools for preserving open, productive agricultural, natural and scenic lands, while creating compatible recreational resources where appropriate. 
(2)  Conservation projects. Review, evaluate and/or propose conservation projects in relation to objectives expressed in the open space plan and advise town council on appropriateness of conservation incentives. 
(3)  Water quality and conservation. Advise the town council relative to water conservation and the future character and health of the town's bodies of water, stormwater, ground water, and surface water to include reviewing water quality and conservation program activities, prioritizing actions and plans, and public education. 
(4)  Tree preservation. Oversee and advise the town council and staff in policy matters relative to tree preservation. Promote tree care, planting, and the proper management of urban forests. 
(5)  Special matters. Consider, investigate, report and/or recommend upon any special matter or question coming before the commission within the scope of its duties and responsibilities or referred to it by the town council or town manager. 
(6)  Outdoor learning area. Assist in the enhancement, promotion, and preservation of the town's tree farm and outdoor learning area. 
(7)  Recruitment and funding. Assist and advise the town council and staff in recruitment of volunteers, facilitating grant applications, and seeking contributions to support environmental initiatives. 
(8)  Public engagement. Promote public awareness and community outreach programs related to environmental initiatives. 
(9)  Advisory resources. The commission may form subcommittees, recruit unpaid advisors, hold public hearings, encourage the interest of other organizations in its objectives, and engage in similar activities which in its judgment may assist it in making recommendations and promoting environmental conservation. 
(10)  Regulations. The commission may propose adoption, amendment, or repealment of regulations to town council as deemed necessary or desirable in order to carry out its powers and duties. 
(11)  Reporting. The commission shall submit to the town council, not less than every 12 months, a report of its progress and recommendations. 
(12)  Sustainability. The commission shall develop, oversee, and promote the town's sustainability plan and its components. 
(Ord. No. 51-11, § 2, 9-19-2011)  
Secs. 2-176—2-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - TAX INCREMENT FINANCING REINVESTMENT ZONE NUMBER ONE BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-05 , § 4, adopted Sept. 19, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Div. 5, § 2-186, was at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 2-186. - Board of directors established. 
There is hereby established a board of directors for the Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number One (TIRZ #1), Town of Flower Mound, Texas, that shall consist of seven members. The board of directors shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)  Three members shall be appointed by the town council, and two members shall be appointed by the commissioner's court of Denton County, and the Flower Mound Mayor and the Flower Mound Town Manager shall serve as ex officio non-voting members of the board. The initial board of directors shall be appointed by resolution of the town council and the commissioner's court within 60 days of the passage of this division or within a reasonable time thereafter. All members appointed to the board shall meet the eligibility requirements set forth in the Act [Tax Increment Financing Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 311]. The governing bodies of other taxing units that levy taxes on real property in Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number One have chosen not to pay any of their taxes into the tax increment fund and have waived their right to appoint board members. 
(2)  The terms of the board members, save and except the ex official non-voting members, shall be two-year terms. Ex official members shall serve only so long as they hold and retain their respective offices. The town council shall designate a voting member of the board to serve as chairman of the board of directors for a term of one year that begins on January 1 of the following year, and the board shall elect from its members a vice chairman and other officers as it sees fit. 
(3)  Board members shall serve at the will and pleasure of the entity by which they are appointed. If, for any reason, a board member does not complete his or her term of office the vacancy in that board member's position shall be filled by the entity which originally appointed the vacating board member. Such appointments shall be for the remainder of the vacating board member's two-year term of office. If the vacating board member has been designated as the chairman of the board of directors, the town council shall designate a new chairman for the remainder of the vacating chairman's one-year term. 
(4)  The board of directors shall make recommendations to the town council concerning the administration of the zone. It shall prepare and adopt a project plan and reinvestment zone financing plan for the zone and must submit such plans to the town council for its approval. Subject to any restrictions and limitations contained in the Act the board of directors shall possess all powers necessary to prepare, implement and monitor such project plan and financing plan for the reinvestment zone as the town council considers advisable, including the submission of an annual report on the status of the zone. 
(5)  All meetings of the board of directors shall be open to the public and posted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, as amended, and action shall only be taken by the board of directors after a public hearing on any proposed action. Any action by the town council on any recommendation by the board of directors shall be after a public hearing by the town council. 
( Ord. No. 78-05 , § 4, 9-19-2005)  
Secs. 2-187—2-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ANIMALS SERVICES BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Created. 
There is hereby created an advisory board known as the animal services board. 
(Ord. No. 46-01, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 07-02, § 2, 1-22-2002)  
Sec. 2-202. - Organization of the animal services board. 
(a)  The board shall consist of seven members and two alternates appointed by a majority vote of the town council in accordance with established procedures. 
(b)  The board shall be composed of at least one licensed veterinarian, one county or municipal official, one person whose duties include the daily operation of the animal shelter, one representative from an animal welfare organization, and three citizen at-large position. Two citizen at-large alternate positions shall be appointed. 
(c)  Members shall be designated as places number one through seven and alternates shall be designated as alternate place eight and alternate place nine. 
(d)  The term of office of members and alternates of the board shall be for two years. Places one, three, five and seven and alternate nine shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30 in odd-numbered years. Places two, four and six and alternate eight shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30 in even-numbered years. The town council may remove members of the board and alternates before their terms of office expire. 
(e)  Members and alternates shall be resident citizens, town employees or business owners in the town. A member or alternate who ceases to reside in the town, be employed by the town, or own a business in the town, during his term of office, shall immediately forfeit his office. 
(f)  Members and alternates shall serve without compensation. 
(g)  Alternates shall serve primarily in an advisory capacity, except that an alternate may vote when sitting in place of an absent member at a board meeting. In determining which of the two alternate members shall serve in the absence of a member, the alternate member with the longest tenure, or in the event of equal tenures, the alternate member with the lowest alternate position number shall so serve. If for any reason, the alternate member with the longest tenure is unavailable to serve, the next longest-tenured alternate shall so serve. 
(Ord. No. 46-01, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 07-02, § 2, 1-22-2002; Ord. No. 32-03, § 2, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 16-05, § 5, 2-21-2005; Ord. No. 90-07, § 2, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 43-11, § 2, 8-15-2011)  
Sec. 2-203. - Meetings. 
(a)  The animal services board shall meet a minimum of three times per year. 
(b)  A quorum of the board shall consist of the majority of the members and alternates sitting in place of members, excluding any vacancies. The presence of a quorum of the board shall be required prior to a board meeting being called to order. 
(c)  Approval of all items before the board shall require a majority vote of those in attendance. 
(d)  The board may adopt rules, subject to town council approval, for the conduct of its meetings. 
(Ord. No. 46-01, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 07-02, § 2, 1-22-2002; Ord. No. 90-07, § 2, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 43-11, § 3, 8-15-2011)  
Sec. 2-204. - Officers and procedures. 
At the first scheduled board meeting in October of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the first item of business shall be the selection of the board's chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the membership of the board. Town employees and the alternates are not eligible to serve as the board chairperson or vice-chairperson or to participate in the selection of said chairperson or vice-chairperson. 
(1)  The chairperson shall preside over meetings and shall vote only in case of a tie. In the event a question over procedures arises, Robert's Rules of Order shall prevail. 
(2)  The vice-chairperson shall assist the chairperson in directing the affairs of the animal services board. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall assume the duties of the chairperson. The vice-chairperson, when acting as chairperson, shall retain the right to vote. 
(3)  In the event of the absence of both the chairperson and vice-chairperson, any member of the board may be selected as the acting chairperson for that particular meeting by majority vote of the members present. Any board member acting as chairperson shall retain the right to vote. No member shall be required to act as chairperson if the member so declines. 
(4)  The recording of minutes of all board meetings shall be the responsibility of the town staff. 
(5)  The board shall establish rules and procedures that govern its operation. 
(6)  All voting shall be by roll call. 
(Ord. No. 46-01, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 07-02, § 2, 1-22-2002; Ord. No. 32-03, § 3, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 90-07, § 2, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 43-11, § 4, 8-15-2011)  
Sec. 2-205. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board will serve in an advisory capacity to the town council in matters pertaining to the animal shelter and/or animal control issues. The board may provide recommendations to the town council regarding its compliance with the Texas Rabies Control Act of 1981, as amended, and may recommend improvements to the efficiency and cost effectiveness of the town's animal control program. 
(b)  The board shall assist the animal shelter in complying with the requirements of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 823, as amended. 
(c)  The board shall perform such other duties as prescribed by the town council by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 46-01, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 07-02, § 2, 1-22-2002; Ord. No. 90-07, § 2, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 43-11, § 5, 8-15-2011)  
Sec. 2-206. - Staff liaison. 
The manager of the animal shelter, or such other person designated by the town manager, shall act as the town staff support and liaison to the board. 
(Ord. No. 43-11, § 6, 8-15-2011)  
DIVISION 7. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-08, § 2, adopted Jan. 17, 2008, repealed div. 7, which pertained to Keep Flower Mound Beautiful Board and derived from Ord. No. 82-03, § 2, adopted Dec. 1, 2003; Ord. No. 88-04, § 2, adopted Nov. 1, 2004; and Ord. No. 16-05, § 6, adopted Feb. 21, 2005. 
 
Secs. 2-207—2-224. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-225. - Created. 
There is hereby created a board known as the Flower Mound Transportation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 83-07, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 2-226. - Organization. 
(a)  The transportation commission shall consist of seven regular members appointed by a majority vote of the town council in accordance with established procedures. 
(b)  In addition to the seven regular members of the transportation commission, two alternate members of the transportation commission, who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members, shall be appointed by a majority vote of the town council in accordance with established procedures. In determining which of the two alternate members shall serve in the absence of a regular member, the alternate member with the longest tenure shall so serve. If for any reason the alternate member with the longest tenure is unable to serve, the second alternate member shall so serve. 
(c)  Regular members shall be designated as places number one through seven and alternate members shall be designated as alternate place number eight and alternate place number nine. 
(d)  The terms of office for members of the transportation commission shall be for two years. Places one, three, five, seven and alternate place nine shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30 in odd-numbered years. Places two, four, six and alternate place eight shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30 in even-numbered years. Members of the commission serve at the will and pleasure of the town council and may be removed from the commission before their terms expire. 
(e)  Members and alternate members of the transportation commission shall serve without compensation. 
(f)  Other qualifications for membership shall be a genuine interest in the short-term and long-term transportation needs of the town, the ability to work with the public to listen to unique citizen concerns relative to transportation, and the time to devote to this service. 
(g)  Each member of the commission shall be a resident citizen and qualified voter of the town at the time of his appointment. A member who ceases to reside in the town during his term of office shall immediately forfeit his office. 
(Ord. No. 83-07, § 2, 10-15-2007; Ord. No. 40-09, § 2, 10-5-2009)  
Sec. 2-227. - Officers and procedures. 
(a)  At the first scheduled commission meeting in October of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the first item of business shall be the selection of the commission's chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the membership of the commission. The alternate members of the commission are not eligible to serve as the chairperson or vice-chairperson or to participate in the selection of said chairperson or vice-chairperson. 
(b)  The chairperson shall preside over meetings and shall vote only in case of a tie. In the event a question over procedures arises, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall prevail. 
(c)  The vice-chairperson shall assist the chairperson in directing the affairs of the transportation commission. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall assume the duties of the chairperson. The vice-chairperson, when acting as chairperson, shall retain the right to vote. 
(d)  In the event of the absence of both the chairperson and vice-chairperson, any member of the commission may be selected as the acting chairperson for that particular meeting by majority vote of the members present. Any commission member acting as chairperson shall retain the right to vote. No member shall be required to act as chairperson if the member declines. 
(e)  The recording of minutes of all commission meetings shall be the responsibility of the town staff. 
(f)  The commission shall meet a minimum of four times per year. 
(g)  A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum (four members) to do business, and the affirmative vote of the majority of those attending shall be necessary to pass any motion or recommendation. 
(h)  Meetings of the commission shall be open to the public and shall be posted as necessary in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(i)  The commission shall establish rules and procedures that govern its operation 
(j)  All voting shall be by roll call. 
(Ord. No. 83-07, § 2, 10-15-2007; Ord. No. 40-09, § 3, 10-5-2009)  
Sec. 2-228. - Powers and duties. 
The transportation commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Provide recommendations to the town council and staff regarding the short-term and long-term transportation needs of the town. 
(2)  Advise the town council and staff regarding the implementation of the neighborhood traffic management policy. 
(3)  Advise the town council and staff regarding changes to regulatory traffic control, prioritization of transportation improvements, changes to the thoroughfare plan, and implementation of the reduced neighborhood speed limit policy., 
(4)  Listen to unique citizen concerns relative to transportation. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as the town council may prescribe by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 83-07, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICES, DEPARTMENTS AND EMPLOYEES[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency management director, § 22-52; municipal judge, § 26-51 et seq.; clerk of the court and other personnel, § 26-81 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-229, 2-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TOWN MANAGER[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference— Appointment and qualifications of town manager, § 4.02; compensation for town manager, § 4.02.1; term of office for town manager and removal from office, § 4.02.2; powers and duties of town manager, § 4.02.3; acting town manager, § 4.02.4. 
State Law reference— City manager form, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 25.021 et seq., 25.029. 
 
Sec. 2-231. - Duty to appoint officers and employees. 
The town manager shall appoint and, when necessary for the good of the town, suspend or remove all department heads, officers and employees of the town except as otherwise provided by the ordinances and laws of the town or the state. The town manager may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove any subordinate within such department or office. 
(Code 1989, ch. 8, § 7.04) 
Charter reference— Duty of the town manager regarding directors of departments, § 4.02.3(2).  
Sec. 2-232. - Duty to recommend pay rates. 
The town manager shall recommend to the town council a standard schedule of pay for each appointive office and position in the town service. Such schedule shall include minimum and maximum pay rates for each such office and position. 
(Code 1989, ch. 8, § 7.05)  
Sec. 2-233. - Authority to consolidate offices, positions or departments. 
The town manager may consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his jurisdiction, subject to the approval of the town council. The town manager may be the head of one or more departments, without additional compensation. 
(Code 1989, ch. 8, § 7.06) 
Charter reference— Power of the town council to create, abolish, consolidate town departments, § 3.07(b).  
Sec. 2-234. - Purchasing authority. 
The town manager shall have general authority relative to public improvements or purchases subject to the competitive sealed bidding and competitive sealed proposal requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 252.001 et seq., to approve change orders involving an increase or decrease in the amount of $15,000.00 or less, without approval of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 22-00, § 1, 3-6-2000; Ord. No. 08-07, § 2, 2-19-2007)  
Sec. 2-235. - Authority to sign contracts. 
From and after the effective date of this section, the town manager shall have authority to sign all contracts not to exceed $15,000.00 without first obtaining town council approval of each such contract to the extent only that funds have previously been allocated in the town's annual budget and are available for the purpose of said contract, and further provided that town council approval of said contract is not otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. 37-06, § 1, 7-17-2006)  
Sec. 2-236. - Authority to sign interlocal agreements. 
From and after the effective date of this section, the town manager shall have the authority to sign any and all interlocal agreements between the town and any governmental entity authorized to enter into such interlocal agreements, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code, Ch. 791, without first obtaining town council approval of such interlocal agreement. The town manager's authority to sign such interlocal agreements is limited to those interlocal agreements that do not require an expenditure in excess of $15,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 2, 3-7-2011)  
Secs. 2-237—2-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LOCAL HEALTH UNIT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to create, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.004. 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Created. 
There is hereby created a local unit known as the environmental health services division of the community development department. The division shall have all powers as prescribed by the state department of health and as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.004. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 3.01)  
Secs. 2-262—2-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LEGAL DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION FOR TOWN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 2-291. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means all employees of the town and: 
(1)  Any member of the town council; or 
(2)  A member of a town board, commission or committee created by the town; or 
(3)  A volunteer as approved by the operating department and the personnel department that is working under the direction of an employee of the town. 
Officer means any elected or appointed official of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 8, § 10.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-292. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Any officer or employee who is found and finally adjudged to be liable for the payment of any claim for damages arising out of the course and scope of employment with the town shall be entitled to be indemnified for such damages to the extent permitted by law, together with any reasonable and necessary legal expenses incurred by such officer or employee in defending such claim, provided that the acts or omissions resulting in such liability were done in good faith and without malicious or felonious intent. For the purpose of this article, the term "arising out of the course and scope of employment" shall not include any action which occurs during a period of time in which the officer or employee is engaged in outside employment or is rendering contractual services to someone other than the town. Whether the acts were done in good faith, without malicious or felonious intent, and within the course and scope of employment shall be determined by the town council, and such determination shall be final for the purposes of the representation and indemnity of this article; provided, however, that if such representation and indemnity have been denied by the town, upon a trial on the merits it is determined that the officer or employee was acting in good faith, without malicious or felonious intent and within the scope of employment, the indemnification under this section shall be granted and reasonable legal expenses incurred in the defense of the claim reimbursed. This indemnity shall in no event apply to or cover punitive or exemplary damages where such damages are not recoverable in law or against the town. Further, the town shall not be liable for any settlement of any such claim or suit effected without its consent, and the town reserves the right to assert any defense and make any settlement of any claim or suit that it deems expedient. 
(b)  If the claim for damages arises out of the course and scope of employment, the indemnification shall continue even though such person entitled to indemnification is no longer employed by the town, or is no longer serving as an elected or appointed official of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 8, § 10.02)  
Sec. 2-293. - Representation in actions. 
The town shall have the right and duty to provide legal representation through the town attorney, or in its discretion through the selection of outside legal counsel, to any officer or employee sued in connection with any claim for damages, other civil action, or alleged violation of civil rights, with criminal sanctions, against such person arising out of the course and scope of employment, provided that such officer or employee may be entitled to indemnification as set forth in this article. Such legal representation shall be provided at no cost to the officer or employee, and any officer or employee may have his own counsel assist in the defense at the sole expense of the officer or employee. The officer or employee shall cooperate fully with the town in preparation and presentation of the case, and the failure to cooperate shall waive such officer's or employee's right to representation and indemnity under this article. To be entitled to coverage under this article, an officer or employee must not, except upon advice of the town attorney or when questioned by a police officer at the scene of an accident, give any oral or written statement or enter into any stipulation or agreement concerning a claim or lawsuit. Additionally, one must not, except at his own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation, or incur any expense with respect to a claim or lawsuit without the consent of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 8, § 10.03)  
Sec. 2-294. - Town's defense; limits. 
(a)  The town will defend any suit against an officer or employee who is covered under this article even if the suit is groundless or fraudulent. Additionally, the town may investigate, negotiate, and settle any claim or suit as it determines necessary. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as waiving the town's defense of governmental immunity to it or its employees or officers in any action brought against the town or such officer or employee. For any suit or claim arising under the Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice & Remedies Code § 101.101 et seq., the indemnity provided by this article shall be limited to the statutory limits applicable to the town provided in such Act, as amended. 
(Code 1989, ch. 8, § 10.04)  
Sec. 2-295. - Notice. 
The provisions of this article shall apply only where the town has been given notice of the action brought against any town officer or employee as soon as practicable, but no later than five days of service of process upon the officer or employee. 
(Code 1989, ch. 8, § 10.05)  
Sec. 2-296. - Disciplinary actions. 
Nothing in this article shall prevent the town from taking disciplinary action against any officer or employee for conduct defended or indemnified by the town under this article, either before or after conclusion of the civil suit. 
(Code 1989, ch. 8, § 10.06)  
Sec. 2-297. - Suits on behalf of the town. 
Nothing in this article shall require the town to indemnify any officer or employee for recoveries made against him in suits by or on behalf of the town. The town council may, however, authorize the town attorney to represent any officer or employee in a suit brought by a taxpayer in behalf of the town against the officer or employee. 
(Code 1989, ch. 8, § 10.07)  
Sec. 2-298. - Exclusions. 
Coverage under this plan does not apply to a claim or lawsuit that is brought against an officer or employee: 
(1)  By the town; 
(2)  Arising out of the intentional or knowing violation of a penal statute or ordinance committed by or with the knowledge or consent of the officer or employee, or any claim arising out of acts of fraud committed by or at the direction of the officer or employee, with intent to deceive or defraud; 
(3)  Arising either while the officer or employee is operating a town vehicle with no authority to operate the vehicle, or while the officer or employee is operating a town vehicle in the course of personal or private business; 
(4)  For liability assumed by the officer or employee under a contract, unless the contract is entered into at the request of the town; 
(5)  If the officer or employee joins or attempts to join with the suit against the town for benefits under this plan; 
(6)  If the officer or employee fails to comply with any section of this article; 
(7)  For punitive damages, where such damages are not recoverable in law or against the town; or 
(8)  For damages expressly excluded under V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 102.002 (c) and (d). 
(Code 1989, ch. 8, § 10.08)  
Secs. 2-299—2-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TOWN PROPERTY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-331—2-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SMOKING IN TOWN FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 2-351. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
Smoking or to smoke means the possession of a burning tobacco, weed or other plant product or the use of an "electronic vaping device" as such term is defined in section 18-530 of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 4.01; Ord. No. 05-14, § 3, 2-3-2014) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-352. - Prohibited in certain areas. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he smokes inside the town hall facility located at 2121 Cross Timbers Road. 
(b)  Effective October 1, 1993, a person commits an offense if he smokes in any building, facility or enclosed public area that is owned or operated by the town. 
(c)  The town shall post conspicuous signs at all entrances of all buildings, facilities and enclosed public areas referenced in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. Such signs shall read: "No Smoking, Town of Flower Mound Ordinance No. 30-93." 
(d)  The town shall provide for the extinguishment of smoking materials within 20 feet of any public entrance to all such buildings, facilities and enclosed public areas. 
(e)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this division that the location at which the offense occurs does not have displayed a sign referenced in subsection (c) of this section, that smoking is prohibited. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 4.02)  
Sec. 2-353. - Penalty upon failure to comply with division provisions. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirements of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 4.03)  
Secs. 2-354—2-380. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, § 5.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-381. - Dates. 
The regular town election shall be held on the first Saturday in May in accordance with V.T.C.A., Election Code § 41.001. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 5.02) 
State Law reference— Municipal election date, V.T.C.A., Municipal Election Code § 41.001.  
Secs. 2-382—2-410. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CODE OF ETHICS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-411. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Compensation means any economic benefit received in return for services, property or investment. 
Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
Economic benefit means any money, real or personal property, purchase, sale, lease, contract, option, credit, loan, discount, service or other tangible or intangible thing of value, whether similar or dissimilar to those enumerated. 
Employee means any person employed by the town, including those individuals employed on a part-time or seasonal basis, but such term shall not be extended to apply to any independent contractor. 
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
Gift means a favor, hospitality or economic benefit, other than compensation. 
Officer or official means any member of the town council and any appointive member of a board, commission, authority or committee set up by ordinance, the Charter, state law or otherwise on a temporary or permanent basis, but not members of a board, commission, authority or committee which functions only in an advisory or study capacity and which has no discretionary, governmental, quasijudicial or administrative authority. 
Relative means any person related to an officer, official or employee within the first degree by consanguinity or affinity and shall include a spouse, father, mother, son, daughter, brother or sister. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including an official, who or which would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a councilmember in the property tax rate, general town fees, town utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or other similar decision is a remote interest to the extent that the councilmember is affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest in another person or an entity if: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of ten percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
(2)  Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equalled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $20,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or ten percent of the person's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity, other than a corporate entity owned or created by the town council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
Substantial interest in partnerships, professional corporations and other entities means if a town officer, official or employee is a member of a partnership or professional corporation, or conducts business through another entity, a substantial interest of the partnership, professional corporation or entity shall be deemed to be a substantial interest of the town officer, official or employee if: 
(1)  The partnership or professional corporation has fewer than 20 partners or shareholders; 
(2)  Regardless of the number of partners or shareholders, the officer, official or employee has an equity interest, share of draw equal to or greater than five percent of the capital or revenues of the partnership, professional corporation or other entity; or 
(3)  With regard to the partnership, professional corporation or other entity's substantial interest in a particular client, the officer, official or employee has personally acted within the preceding 24 months in a professional or fiduciary capacity for that client. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 13.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-412. - Adoption of state statute. 
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq., the statute which regulates conflicts of interest of officers of municipalities, is hereby adopted and made a part of this code of ethics for all purposes, with the proviso that in case of a conflict between the provisions of this code of ethics and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq., the more restrictive provision shall govern. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 13.06)  
Sec. 2-413. - Cumulative legal effect. 
In its legal effect, this article is cumulative of all provisions of the town Charter, this Code or federal and state statutes, law or regulations defining and prohibiting conflicts of interest. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 13.07)  
Sec. 2-414. - Policy and purpose of article. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town that the proper operation of democratic government requires that: 
(1)  Town officers, officials and employees are independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of the town. 
(2)  Governmental decisions and policies are made using the proper procedures of the governmental structure. 
(3)  No town officer, official or employee shall have any interest, direct or indirect, nor engage in any business transaction or professional activity nor incur any obligation of any nature which is in conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest. 
(4)  Public office shall not be used for personal gain. 
(5)  The town council shall be maintained as a nonpartisan body. 
(6)  Town officers, officials and employees shall fully comply with any federal and state statutes, laws and regulations, as amended, concerning conflicts of interest. 
(b)  In furtherance of this policy, the town council has hereby determined that it is advisable to enact this code of ethics for all town officers, officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, advisory or administrative, to serve not only as a guide for official conduct of the town's public servants, but also as a basis for discipline for those who refuse to abide by its terms and provisions. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 13.02)  
Sec. 2-415. - Unethical activity. 
No officer, official or employee of the town shall: 
(1)  Accept any gift or economic benefit of more than $20.00 in value from any person or entity which gift or economic benefit might reasonably tend to influence such officer, official or employee in the discharge of official duties, or grant in the discharge of official duties any improper gift, economic benefit, service or thing of value; however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any political contribution made pursuant to the Texas Election Code. 
(2)  Use his official position to solicit or secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others. 
(3)  Directly or indirectly disclose or use any information gained solely by reason of his official position or employment for his own personal gain or benefit or for the private interest of others. 
(4)  Transact any business on behalf of the town in his official capacity with any business entity of which he is an officer, agent or member or in which he owns a substantial interest. If such a circumstance should arise, then in the case of an officer or official, he shall make known such interest and abstain from voting on the matter, or in the case of an employee, he shall turn the matter over to his supervisor for reassignment, state the reasons for doing so and have nothing further to do with the matter involved. 
(5)  Engage in any outside activities which will conflict with his assigned duties in the employment of the town, or which his employment with the town will give him an advantage over others engaged in a similar business, vocation or activity. 
(6)  Accept other employment or engage in outside activities incompatible with the full and proper discharge of his duties and responsibilities with the town, or which might impair his independent judgment in the performance of his public duties. 
(7)  Receive any fee or compensation for his services as an officer, official or employee of the town from any source other than the town, except as may otherwise be provided by law. This shall not prohibit an officer, official or employee from performing the same or other services that he performs for the town for a private organization if there is no conflict with his town duties and responsibilities. 
(8)  Represent, directly or indirectly, or appear on behalf of the private interests of others before any agency, board, commission, authority or committee of the town, or accept any retainer or compensation that is contingent upon a specific action being taken by the town or any of its agencies, boards, commissions, authorities or committees, unless such officer, official or employee of the town has made full disclosure of such representation, retainer or compensation. For purposes of this subsection, the term "full disclosure" shall mean: 
a.  The filing of an affidavit with the town secretary describing such representation, retainer or compensation; 
b.  Disclosure, either orally or in writing, to the other members of the town agency, board, commission, authority or committee; 
c.  Refraining from any other discussion of the matter with other members of the town agency, board, commission, authority or committee; and 
d.  Refraining from voting on or participating in the consideration of such matter by the town agency, board, commission, authority or committee. 
(9)  Use the prestige of his position on behalf of any political party or engage in any political activity which does not maintain the nonpartisan policy of the town; provided, however, that all employees are encouraged to register and vote as they may choose in all local, state and national elections. 
(10)  Knowingly perform or refuse to perform any act in order to deliberately hinder the execution and implementation of any town ordinances, rules or regulations or the achievement of official town programs; 
(11)  Have a substantial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the town or a substantial interest, direct or indirect, in the sale of the town of any land, or rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies or service; 
(12)  Participate in a vote or decision on any matter in which the officer, official or employee has a direct or indirect substantial interest or in which a relative of the officer, official or employee has a direct or indirect substantial interest; 
(13)  Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any individual, business organization or group beyond that which is normally available to every other individual, business organization or group. This shall not prevent the granting of fringe benefits to town employees as an element of their employment or as an added incentive to the securing or retention of employees; 
(14)  Knowingly disclose information deemed confidential by law; or 
(15)  Participate in any vote or decision relative to any amendment to the town's comprehensive master plan or any change in the zoning classification of property if the officer, official, employee or a relative of the officer, official or employee has any interest in any property within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the amendment to the town's comprehensive master plan or on which the change in zoning classification is proposed. Further, any officer, official or employee who has any such interest in property shall be legally disqualified from participating in any vote or decision relative to the comprehensive master plan amendment or change in zoning classification. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 13.03; Ord. No. 51-98, § 1, 9-14-1998)  
Sec. 2-416. - Disclosure of interest. 
Any officer or employee of the town who has a prohibited or substantial interest in any matter pending before the town, shall disclose such interest to other members of the town council, committee, commission or board of which he is a member or, in the case of an employee, to a supervisor, and shall refrain from further discussion of the matter; shall not be physically present when the subject is discussed in open or executive session; and shall not vote on or participate further in any such matter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 13.04)  
Sec. 2-417. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any town officer, official or employee knowingly violating any provision of this code of ethics shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(b)  The penalty prescribed in this section shall not limit the power of the town council to discipline its members pursuant to applicable provisions of the town Charter, this Code, state statutes or other laws defining and prohibiting conflicts of interest. 
(c)  The penalty prescribed in this section shall not limit the power of the town manager to discipline those employees under the town manager's supervision, pursuant to applicable provisions of the town Charter, this Code, the adopted personnel policies of the town, state statutes or other laws defining and prohibiting conflicts of interest. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 13.05)  
Secs. 2-418—2-450. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC RECORDS[15] 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Charter reference— Town records open to press and citizens, § 11.01. 
State Law reference— Public records, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq.; microfilming of town records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq.; photographic duplication of town records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-451. - State law adopted. 
The public records management and preservation requirements in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq. and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq., that are applicable to the town, are hereby adopted by reference.  
Secs. 2-452—2-470. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RECORDS MANAGEMENTS ADMINISTRATION[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 2-471. - Designation of records management officer. 
The town secretary shall serve as the records management officer. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 3.19)  
Sec. 2-472. - Records management program established. 
A records management program is hereby established in compliance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq., to be administered by the records management officer. The current policies and procedures of the town records program shall remain in full force and effect, except where inconsistent with this division and the laws of the state. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 3.20)  
Sec. 2-473. - Responsibilities of records liaison. 
The records liaison in each office and department is responsible for providing coordination between the records management officer and personnel in his office to ensure that provisions of this section are complied with. This responsibility shall include overseeing the application of records schedules within the office or department. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 3.17)  
Sec. 2-474. - Responsibilities of town department heads. 
All town office and department heads are responsible for the implementation and operation of effective files operations, records transfers and dispositions, and other activities in accordance with the provisions of this division within their areas of responsibility. They shall designate a records liaison within their offices and provide the records management officer the names of such designees and of all file stations and file clerks under their supervision. Persons designated as records liaisons shall report directly to the head of their department on matters relating to the records management program and should have full access to all files in their department. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 3.16)  
Sec. 2-475. - Cost of noncertified photographic reproductions. 
The state purchasing and general services commission guidelines on the actual cost of reproductions of public records are hereby adopted by the town in determining charges to be made pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 3.39)  
Secs. 2-476—2-510. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT AND PRESERVATION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 2-511. - Terms defined. 
The terms "custodian of records," "records manager" and "disaster team manager" shall mean the town secretary. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 4.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-512. - Procedures for the preparation of records. 
(a)  A nonerasable bond paper of a minimum 75 percent cotton fiber shall be used for the record copy of certain documents, specifically ordinances, resolutions, minutes and deeds or other permanent record or vital records which are typed or printed and maintained in paper form permanently. 
(b)  Contracts, whether prepared by employees of the town or by the company with whom the town is contracting, shall have duplicate originals, with original signatures on each. One original shall be retained by the town secretary, and one shall be forwarded to the company who is awarded the contract. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 4.02)  
Sec. 2-513. - Town secretary to be notified of damages. 
Upon discovery that the records of the town have suffered damage by any means, the town secretary shall be immediately notified. Following an assessment of the damage to the records, full disaster recovery operations may be called for. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 4.03)  
Sec. 2-514. - Records disaster recovery team. 
(a)  Established. There shall be established a disaster recovery team, consisting of employees of the town and volunteers, as needed and available. 
(b)  Leader. The records disaster recovery team shall have a team leader, and the town secretary shall serve in this capacity. The team leader may designate an alternate team leader to carry out the functions of the team leader should there be a need. 
(c)  Responsibilities. Members of the disaster recovery team shall be the records liaison of each department as appointed in compliance with article II of this chapter and shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  The members of the disaster recovery team shall respond to a call from the team leader or alternate team leader at any time that a disaster occurs. 
(2)  The members of the disaster recovery team shall meet at a designated site to secure specific assignments from the team leader or alternate team leader. 
(3)  The members of the disaster recovery team shall move records in compliance with the disaster recovery plan. 
(4)  Where volunteers are utilized, assignment of volunteers shall be made to each member of the disaster recovery team, and the member of the disaster recovery team shall see that records are handled by volunteers in the manner prescribed by the disaster recovery plan. 
(5)  Should the disaster be the result of fire, the members of the disaster recovery team shall not enter a building or place where records are stored, until an official of the fire department has declared such entry safe. 
(6)  Should the disaster be the result of fire, the members of the disaster recovery team shall work with a firefighter in opening cabinets and files and shall take all precautions necessary to ensure that the members of the team are not injured. 
(7)  Should the disaster be the result of water, all precautions will be taken by members of the disaster recovery team to ensure that no injury to any member of the team occurs in the lifting or moving of wet records. 
(8)  The recovery of damaged records shall proceed in order that vital records and permanent records are given the highest priority and that all additional records are recovered as possible within the time limits available. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, §§ 4.04, 4.05, 4.07)  
Sec. 2-515. - Disaster recovery plan; review. 
There shall be established a disaster recovery plan for records, and a copy of the plan shall be distributed to each member of the disaster recovery team. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 4.06)  
Secs. 2-516—2-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - FAIR HOUSING[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, adopted Mar. 19, 2012, enacted provisions designated as Art. X, §§ 6-601—6-612. Said provisions have been redesignated as Art. X, §§ 2-601—2-612. 
 
Sec. 2-601. - Short title. 
This article may be cited as the Flower Mound Fair Housing Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 3-19-2012)  
Sec. 2-602. - Declaration of policy. 
It is the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the town by ensuring the opportunity for every person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, religion, handicap, sex, familial status, or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 3-19-2012)  
Sec. 2-603. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggrieved person includes any person who: (i) claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or (ii) believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur. 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 6-604 or section 6-612 of this article. 
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
Fair Housing Act refers to the federal Fair Housing Act of 1968, as amended, and found at 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq. 
Fair housing officer means the director budget and grants manager or his/her designated representative authorized to administer the provisions of this article. 
Familial status means one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being domiciled with: 
(1)  A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; 
(2)  The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person; or 
(3)  Pregnant. 
Family includes a single individual. 
Handicap means with respect to a person: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; 
(2)  A record of having such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. § 802). 
Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character. 
Secretary means the federal Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 
To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 3-19-2012)  
Sec. 2-604. - Discrimination prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, handicap, sex, familial status, or national origin. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, handicap, sex, familial status, or national origin. 
(3)  To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, handicap, sex, familial status, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representative regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, handicap, sex, familial status, or national origin. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color, religion, handicap, sex, familial status, or national origin. As used in this section, the term "residential real estate-related transaction" means: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling or secured by residential real estate; or 
(2)  The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against him/her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of race, color, religion, handicap, sex, familial status or national origin. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to build multi-family projects that do not comply with the accessible design, and other standards and guidelines promulgated under the Fair Housing Act. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 17-18 , § 2, 5-21-2018)  
Sec. 2-605. - Exemptions. 
Nothing in section 2-604 of this article, other than subsection (c) thereof, shall apply to the following: 
(a)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided: 
(1)  That such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; 
(2)  That in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; 
(3)  That such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in nor is there owned or reserved on his/her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; 
(4)  The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this section only if such house is sold or rented: 
a.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; and 
b.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection 2-604(a)(3) of this article; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(b)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his/her residence; 
(c)  Rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied by no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his/her residence and not more than four such rooms are offered. 
For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  The person has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
(2)  The person has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his/her own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  The person is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by five or more families. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 3-19-2012)  
Sec. 2-606. - Religious and private club exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted because of race, color, handicap, sex, familial status or national origin. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 3-19-2012)  
Sec. 2-607. - Elderly and other exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article limits the applicability of any other ordinance or state or federal law restricting the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling nor does any provision in this article regarding familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons. As used in this subsection, "housing for older persons" means housing: 
(1)  Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program; 
(2)  Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. 
(b)  Nothing in this article prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. § 802). 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which a room or rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same gender, when such housing accommodation contains a common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 3-19-2012)  
Sec. 2-608. - Appraisal exemption. 
Nothing in this article prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, handicap, sex, familial status, or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 3-19-2012)  
Sec. 2-609. - Fair housing officer. 
(a)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the town's fair housing officer (FHO) to implement the provisions of this chapter and to facilitate compliance with its provisions. The fair housing officer shall perform this duty in accordance with the policy directives of the town council; and may recommend rules and regulations to aid in the implementation and facilitation of the fair housing policy of the town, such rules and regulations being subject to the approval of the town council. 
(b)  Cooperation with state and federal agencies. 
(1)  The fair housing officer is encouraged to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the Attorney General of the United States in the enforcement of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, as amended, and may assist the Secretary or Attorney General in any way consistent with the policy of this chapter. 
(2)  The fair housing officer is encouraged to cooperate with the Texas Commission on Human Rights in the enforcement of the Texas Fair Housing Act, and may assist the Texas Commission on Human Rights in any way consistent with the policy of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 3-19-2012)  
Sec. 2-610. - Enforcement; complaints; criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he/she will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur, hereinafter referred to as the "aggrieved person," may request assistance from the fair housing officer to file a complaint with the Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Division of the Region VI office of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. The fair housing officer, if requested by the aggrieved person, may assist with preparation and submission of the complaint to the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(b)  Whenever the fair housing officer has reasonable cause to believe that any person or group of persons is engaged in a pattern or practice of resistance to the full enjoyment of any of the rights granted by this article or that any group of persons has been denied any of the rights granted by this article, the fair housing officer may prepare and file a complaint setting forth the facts in his/her own name, and such complaint shall be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by an aggrieved person. 
(c)  If, upon electing to initiate action on the complaint, the fair housing officer has been unable to secure voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article within 60 days after the complaint was filed, yet reasonably believes that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred, the fair housing officer may refer such alleged violation to the town attorney, or any other appropriate agency, for prosecution. 
(d)  The municipal court in which a proceeding is instituted under this article shall assign the case for hearing at the earliest practicable date and cause the case to be in every way expedited. 
(e)  The fair housing officer shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the Attorney General of the United States and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, as amended, and shall treat such complaints in the same manner as other complaints filed pursuant to this section. 
(f)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $500.00. Each day any violation or noncompliance continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 3-19-2012)  
Sec. 2-611. - Effect on other laws. 
This article does not affect any local, state or federal restriction (i) on the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling unit; or (ii) relating to health or safety standards. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 3-19-2012)  
Sec. 2-612. - Interference with exercise of rights. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or an account of his/her having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his/her having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this article, including the giving of testimony or provision of information in aid of investigation or discovery under this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 3-19-2012)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; control of animals at Grapevine Lake, § 54-168; A agricultural district and conservation development, § 98-271 et seq.; keeping animals, § 98-985; animal control fees, app. A. 
State Law reference— Animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon means to dump, desert, or leave any animal on public or private property with the intent of terminating any further responsibility for said animal; and shall also mean failing to properly redeem or properly release any animal impounded or quarantined by the town. 
Adequate/proper shelter means a structure for a dog that shall effectively protect the animal from any form of cold, overheating, inclement weather and direct effects of wind, rain, snow, ice or the sun. By way of example, and not limitation, a shelter may consist of a three-sided structure, with a roof and solid floor raised off the ground. The shelter shall be shaded during hot weather months and dry bedding shall be provided for insulation against freezing weather. 
Animal means any living creature classified as a member of the animal kingdom including, but not limited to, birds, fish, mammals and reptiles, but specifically excluding human beings. 
Animal control authority means the animal control department for the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Animal control facility means an establishment that is operated, controlled or contracted with by the town for the confinement, safekeeping, control and/or destruction of animals which come into the custody of the town. 
Animal control officer means the person designated by the town to represent and act for the town in the impoundment of animals, in the controlling of stray animals and all other matters as otherwise required by this chapter. 
At large means: 
(1)  Any animal not kept under restraint; 
(2)  On premises: Any animal that is not confined inside the owner's house or to the premises of the owner by a suitable building, cage, wall or fence of such sufficiency to prevent the animal from escaping therefrom, or secured on such premises by means of an invisible/electronic fence, or by a leash of sufficient strength to prevent the dog from escaping from the premises and so arranged that the dog will remain upon the premises when the leash is stretched to full length in any direction and is in accordance with the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Ch. 821, Subch. D; 
(3)  Off premises: Any animal, with the exception of cats, that is not restrained by means of being physically held and controlled by some person or by means of a standard leash or retractable leash of no longer than 16 feet and of sufficient strength and length to immediately control the actions of such animal; and 
(4)  Domestic cat: A domestic cat shall be considered at large when not located on the premises owned and controlled by its owner. 
Dangerous animal means an animal, other than a dog, that: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or another animal that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosures on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to a person or to another animal. 
Dangerous dog means a dog that: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or another animal that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosures on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to a person or to another animal. 
Domestic animal means any animal whose physiology has been determined or manipulated through selective breeding, and which does not occur naturally in the wild, and which may be vaccinated against rabies with an approved rabies vaccine, and which has an established rabies quarantine observation period. 
Exotic animal means any nondomesticated animal, other than livestock, that is native to a foreign country or of foreign origin or character, is not native to the United States, or was introduced from abroad. The term "exotic animal" specifically includes, but is not limited to, animals such as lions, tigers, jackals, dingoes, leopards, elephants, pandas, camels, antelope, anteaters, kangaroos, chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, water buffalo, and species of foreign domestic livestock requiring state or federal permits. 
Fowl means a bird of any kind including, but not limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, guineas, pigeons, emus, ostriches, rheas, turkeys and pheasants. 
Guard dog means a dog trained and used by law enforcement, private security, or in protective functions where the dog is responsive to control by its owner or handler and used only for protective functions. 
Guide dog means a dog that is trained to assist a disabled person. 
Inhumane or cruel treatment of animals means any treatment of an animal prohibited by V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code title 10, or by any other provision of law including federal, state and local laws, ordinances or rules. 
Invisible/electronic fence means the use of both training and technology using radio signal transmitters, receiver collars and boundary wires to effectively restrain an animal to a premise. 
Kennel means any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether operated separately or in connection with another business or establishment, that keeps, boards and/or trains dogs and/or cats for profit. Kennels must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning and land use regulations of the town. 
Livestock means any horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep or swine. 
Local rabies control authority means the officer designated by the town under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, § 826.017 or his or her designee. 
Municipal court means the Town of Flower Mound Municipal Court of Record. 
Owner means any person, partnership, corporation or association that harbors, shelters, keeps, controls, manages, possesses or has whole or part interest in any animal. The occupant, owner or head of a household of any premises where an animal remains for 24 hours or more shall be rebuttably presumed to be the owner of such animal for the purpose of this chapter. 
Pet means any animal normally kept for pleasure rather than utility, excluding livestock. 
Pet store means any business or establishment, other than a veterinary hospital, whether operated separately or in connection with another business or establishment, that buys and sells dogs, cats, and/or other species of pets for profit. Pet stores or shops must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning and land use regulations of the town. 
Poultry means chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys and other domesticated birds raised for eggs or food. 
Public auction means any place or facility where animals are sold to the highest bidder. This definition does not apply to individual sales of animals by private owners to other private owners. 
Public nuisance means the following: 
(1)  An owner's failure to control, restrain or otherwise allow, either by conduct or condition, any animal to: 
a.  Engage in conduct which establishes such animal as a dangerous animal; 
b.  Be at large; 
c.  Cause a disturbance by excessive barking or noise-making near the private residence of another; 
d.  Produce maggots, flies, odors or unclean conditions sufficient to annoy adjacent property owners or residents; or 
e.  Chase vehicles, damage property or molest, attack or interfere with other animals or persons on public property. 
(2)  Any animal normally found in the wild that has entered onto any public or private property and by its presence is committing a threat to public health and safety or is generally interrupting the tranquility of the location. 
Residential breeder means any person licensed by the town to keep, harbor, breed and/or raise in excess of four, but not more than ten, dogs and ten cats, six months of age or older, on any premises used or zoned for residential purposes and less than two acres in area. 
Residential foster owner means any person licensed by the town to keep, harbor and/or foster in excess of four, but not more than ten, dogs and ten cats, six months or age or older, including dogs or cats belonging to or owned by the foster owner, on any premises used or zoned for residential purposes and less than two acres in area. 
Restraint. An animal is under restraint under the following conditions: 
(1)  The animal is securely enclosed or confined to a persons property by a physical fence or enclosure of sufficient strength, height, construction, and design as to prevent an animal from escaping from the area and in a manner that will isolate the animal from the public; or 
(2)  The animal is secured by a standard leash or retractable leash no more than 16 feet in length and of sufficient strength to immediately control the animal; or 
(3)  The animal is secured by a leash no longer than six feet when in any town public park or recreational area including walking trails; or 
(4)  The animal is controlled and restrained by an invisible or electronic fence which effectively and reliably prevents the animal from escaping from the premises. 
a.  Any animal that has prior history of biting a person, other than the owner, or attacking other animals will not be allowed to use an invisible/electronic fence as the sole means of restraint or confinement. 
b.  Any owner or person that uses an invisible or electronic fence whose animal has escaped the premises two or more times will no longer be permitted to use the invisible/electronic fence as a means of restraint due to lack of effectiveness and reliability. 
Secure enclosure means a fence or structure, being securely enclosed and locked, having four sides, a top attached to the sides, and a bottom that is either attached to the sides or constructed so that the sides of the structure are embedded in the ground no less than two feet, and having signs posted on all sides warning of the presence of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal with three-inch letters, that is suitable to confine and prevent the escape of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal and prevent any unauthorized entry. 
Serious bodily injury means an injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment. 
Stray means an animal that is improperly restrained and that wanders upon a public place, roadway, street, highway or the property of another person. 
Town enforcement agent means town animal control officers or other authorized representatives including, but not limited to, police officers of the town. 
Vaccination means the inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine or other medicine that is licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that species, and which is administered by a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of immunizing the animal against rabies or other diseases. 
Veterinary hospital means any establishment that is maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for the diagnosis, treatment or surgery of injuries and diseases to animals. 
Wild animal means any animal not normally considered domesticated and which is now or historically has been found in the wild, or in the wild state including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Venomous reptiles, any type of crocodile or alligator; 
(2)  Piranha; 
(3)  Condors, eagles, hawks, falcons, owls; 
(4)  Ocelots, lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, wolves, or wolf hybrids, dingoes, coyotes and coyote mixes, jackals, weasels, martens, minks, badgers, skunks, raccoons, pandas, bears, kangaroos, opossums, sloths, anteaters, armadillos, monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, porcupines, antelope, deer, fox, elephant, lynx, camel, squirrels; or 
(5)  Any species of animal illegal to own under federal, state or local law. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 1.00; Ord. No. 61-03, § 2, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 66-10, §§ 2, 3, 10-18-2010; Ord. No. 12-19 , § 1, 4-15-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-2. - Placement of poisonous substances. 
No person shall place any substance or article which has in any manner been treated with any poisonous substance in any place accessible to human beings, birds, dogs, cats or other animals with the intent to kill or harm animals. This shall include anti-freeze purposely left exposed to poison animals. This section, however, does not preclude the use of commercially sold rodent poisons when applied in accordance with the manufacturer's directions for such use. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 16.00)  
Sec. 6-3. - Disposal of dead animals except livestock. 
(a)  It shall be the owner's responsibility to remove and properly dispose of a deceased animal within 24 hours of the death of the animal. If requested by the owner, the town animal control officer will pick up a deceased domestic animal if the animal has been placed in a sealed plastic bag and left in a convenient place adjacent to a public roadway. 
(b)  The town animal control officer shall have the authority to take custody of and dispose of all deceased animals found on any roadway, street, highway, and/or public or private property where the owner cannot otherwise be identified. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 17.01)  
Sec. 6-4. - Disposal of dead livestock. 
It shall be the specific responsibility of the owner of any livestock to have the livestock removed and properly disposed of within 24 hours of the death of such livestock. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 17.02)  
Sec. 6-5. - Authority of town enforcement agent to enforce chapter provisions. 
(a)  The town enforcement agent shall be responsible for enforcement of this chapter, except as may be provided in this chapter. Enforcement may be by the filing of a criminal complaint in the municipal court, by civil proceedings to enjoin nuisances or in any other manner authorized by law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person being issued a citation to municipal court or any civil proceeding to intentionally or knowingly fail to give the town enforcement agent their true name and address or to intentionally or knowingly fail to appear in accordance with the terms of a citation or civil process issued by the town enforcement agent. 
(c)  If the individual who is to receive the citation is not present, the town enforcement agent may send the citation to the alleged offender by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. If the citation should come back unclaimed, the citation shall be sent by regular mail. If this regular mailing does not come back unclaimed, then service shall be deemed completed. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 3.01)  
Secs. 6-6—6-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-41. - Maximum number of animals. 
(a)  The keeping of more than the maximum number of animals permitted by this section shall be a public nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor more than four dogs and four cats six months of age or older on any premises used or zoned for residential purposes and less than two acres in area; provided however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to licensed residential breeders or licensed residential foster owners. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 18.01(a), (b))  
Sec. 6-42. - Disposal of excrement. 
All manure and other excrement shall be disposed of in such a manner so as to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 18.02)  
Sec. 6-43. - Noise. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to cause a disturbance by excessive barking or noise-making near the private residence of another. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 18.04) 
Cross reference— Noise control, § 34-131 et seq.  
Sec. 6-44. - Odors or unclean conditions. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to produce odors or unclean conditions sufficient to create a public nuisance. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 18.05)  
Sec. 6-45. - Animal at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to chase vehicles or molest, attack or interfere with other animals or persons on public property, be at large, or fail to keep an animal under restraint in a securely enclosed or confined area and in a manner that will isolate the animal from the public. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 18.06; Ord. No. 66-10, § 4, 10-18-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 66-10, § 4, adopted Oct. 18, 2010, changed the title of § 6-45 from animals at large to animal at large.  
Sec. 6-46. - Humane care of animals. 
Animals shall be provided humane care, treated and transported in a humane manner and not in violation of V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09 and V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code title 10 or any other provision of law, including federal, state and local laws, ordinances and rules. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 4.01; Ord. No. 61-03, § 2, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 6-47. - Prohibited actions against animals. 
A person commits an offense if: 
(1)  A person fails to provide an animal under his control and/or ownership with adequate wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from inclement weather, and veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; 
(2)  A person having charge or custody of an animal places or confines such animal, or allows such animal to be placed or confined, in a motor vehicle, trailer or other enclosure under such conditions, or for such a period of time, as to endanger the health of the animal due to heat, lack of food or water, or such other circumstances as may cause injury or death to the animal; 
(3)  A person treats an animal in an inhumane or cruel manner as defined by V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09 and V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 821; 
(4)  A person knowingly owns, harbors, trains, sells or offers for sale any animal which is to be used for the purpose of fighting; or to be trained, tormented, badgered or baited for the purpose of causing or encouraging the animal to attack human beings or animals when not provoked, except that this section shall not apply to guard dogs; 
(5)  A person mutilates any animal, whether such animal is dead or alive. This subsection does not apply to medical or veterinary medical research, medical or veterinary medical autopsies, or biology class use of animals for educational purposes; 
(6)  A person causes an animal to fight another animal or person; 
(7)  A person other than a licensed veterinarian docks an animal's tail, or crops an animal's ears; or castrates an animal; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to normal livestock operations occurring within the town; 
(8)  A person dyes or colors chicks, ducks, rabbits, reptiles or birds; 
(9)  A person transporting an animal fails to effectively restrain an animal so as to prevent the animal from leaving or being accidentally thrown from a vehicle during normal operation of the vehicle; or fails to effectively restrain an animal so as to prevent infliction of bodily harm to passersby; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit a person from transporting an effectively confined or tethered dog in the open bed of a pickup truck; 
(10)  A person is in control of a motor vehicle which strikes a domestic animal or livestock within the corporate limits of the town and fails to report the accident to the town enforcement agent as soon as practical; or 
(11)  A person abandons any animal, including the abandonment of an impounded animal at the animal control facility, with the intent to readopt the animal to avoid impoundment fees. 
(12)  A person sells, exchanges, raffles, auctions, or gives away or offers to sell, exchange, raffle, auction or give away any live dog or cat as a prize; an inducement to enter a place of amusement or a business establishment; or an inducement to participate in a charitable fundraising event. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 4.02; Ord. No. 61-03, § 2, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 01-12, § 2, 1-19-2012)  
Sec. 6-48. - Animals in park and recreational areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any animal into any public park or recreational facility that is not under the immediate control of a person by means of a cage, leash or rope no longer than six feet. This subsection shall not apply to guide dogs or other animals used to assist handicapped or disabled persons, to penned animals that are part of an activity authorized by the town's parks board or the director of parks and recreation or his designee, in park areas or recreation facilities designated as leash free by the town's parks board. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to hunt, trap, kill, injure, remove or release any animal (fish excluded) in any public park, except with written approval of the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(c)  If a pet defecates in a public park or recreation facility, it shall be unlawful if the person in control of the animal does not immediately remove any excrement from park premises or dispose of it in a town-provided trash receptacle. If an animal running at large defecates in a public park or recreation facility, the owner of the animal shall bear the foregoing responsibilities. Horses in designated equestrian areas are specifically excluded from the provisions of this subsection. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to ride or allow any type of livestock upon any public park or recreation facility except in areas designated for such purpose or with written authorization of the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 61-03, § 2, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 13-09, § 2, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 2, 12-19-2016)  
Secs. 6-49—6-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 6-81. - State regulations adopted; designation of local rabies control authority. 
(a)  The town hereby adopts the Rabies Control Act of 1981 (V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, § 826.001, et seq., and 25 Texas Administrative Code § 169.21, et. seq.) and the standards established by the state board of health as minimum standards for rabies control and quarantine provisions within the town. In addition thereto, all of the rabies control provisions of this article, which are adopted pursuant to Texas Health and Safety Code §§ 826.015 and 826.33, shall have application within the town. 
(b)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, § 826.017, the town's animal services manager is hereby designated as the local rabies control authority. 
(c)  The local rabies control authority shall enforce: 
(1)  V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Ch. 826 and the state board of health rules that comprise the minimum standards for rabies control; and 
(2)  Chapter 6 of this Code; and 
(3)  The rules adopted by the state board of health under the area rabies quarantine provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, § 826.045. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 5.01; Ord. No. 61-03, § 2, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 66-10, § 5, 10-18-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 66-10, § 5, adopted Oct. 18, 2010, changed the title of § 6-81 from state regulations adopted to state regulations adopted; designation of local rabies control authority.  
Sec. 6-82. - Annual animal identification; rabies vaccination. 
(a)  The animal control facility or town animal control officer shall annually register and issue identification tags, free of charge, to any person living in the town who owns or possesses a dog or cat requiring vaccination to prevent rabies. Such issuance will be for the purpose of owner identification in cases where a dog or cat has bitten, scratched, attacked or injured a human being or another animal and in cases where the dog or cat might become impounded, lost or injured. 
(b)  Application for the identification tag must be made annually, by the owner, in writing or in person, and be accompanied by proof that the dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies in accordance with the Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 169. Zoonosis Control, Rabies Control and Eradication. If there is a change in ownership, the new owner shall have the identification tag transferred to his name within ten days after taking possession of the dog or cat. There shall be no charge for transfer. 
(c)  Owners claiming any impounded dog or cat, four months of age or older, will be required to provide the town with proof of current rabies vaccination. If no proof is presented, then such dog or cat must be vaccinated against rabies, and the owner must provide proof of current rabies vaccination to an animal control officer and register such animal within ten days of the release of the animal. 
(d)  Identification tags shall be securely attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat and worn at all times by the animal. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 5.02; Ord. No. 04-00, § 2, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. 61-03, § 2, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 6-83. - Vaccination and license identification. 
(a)  An identification tag may not be issued for an animal that has not been currently vaccinated against rabies as required by the Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 169 Zoonosis Control, Rabies Control and Eradication. 
(b)  Currently vaccinated shall mean that the owner or custodian (excluding animal shelters) of each domestic dog or cat shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies by four months of age. The animal must receive a booster within the 12-month interval following the initial vaccination. Every domestic dog or cat must be revaccinated against rabies at a minimum of at least once every three years with a rabies vaccine licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture. The vaccine must be administered according to label recommendations. Livestock (especially those that have frequent contact with humans) and domestic ferrets should be vaccinated against rabies. 
(c)  Nothing in this section prohibits a veterinarian, an owner or custodian from selecting a more frequent rabies-vaccination interval. A veterinarian may administer an annual vaccine with the animal revaccinated within 12 months or as the label requires. Texas Health and Safety Code, §§ 826.014 and 826.015 allow local jurisdictions to establish more frequent rabies vaccination intervals. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 5.03; Ord. No. 61-03, § 2, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 6-84. - Right of entry; search warrants. 
(a)  Town enforcement agents are hereby authorized to enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of capturing, impounding and/or quarantining any animal upon having probable cause to believe the animal to have bitten, injured or otherwise attacked a human being or other animal; to have, or have been exposed to, rabies or another communicable disease posing a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; or otherwise pose a clear and present danger to human beings or other animals. This authorization is granted due to the emergency created by the potential rabies hazard or danger of injury to persons or other animals, and in recognition of the likelihood that such animal will otherwise escape capture. As a matter of policy, town enforcement agents shall not enter upon private property to capture and/or impound any animal known to belong to the owner of such property without probable cause to believe the animal poses a threat or danger to property, human beings or other animals. 
(b)  Furthermore, should the town enforcement agent have probable cause to believe an animal has been, or is being, cruelly treated or has rabies or another communicable disease, the town enforcement agency may, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.022, obtain a search warrant and impound such animal, even if it is enclosed on private property. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 9.01)  
Sec. 6-85. - Failure to deliver animal for quarantine. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to deliver an animal to the town enforcement agent, upon demand for impoundment, when an animal must be quarantined for legitimate medical reasons or for other health and safety reasons stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 9.02) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.044.  
Secs. 6-86—6-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION AND DISPOSITION 
 
Sec. 6-121. - Impoundment generally. 
(a)  Town enforcement agents are hereby authorized to capture and impound any animal upon having probable cause to believe the animal to be in violation of any provision of this chapter or state law which authorizes or requires the animal's capture and impoundment, and in so doing, to enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land when deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. As a matter of policy, town enforcement agents shall not enter upon private property to capture and/or impound any animal known to belong to the owner of such property without probable cause to believe the animal poses a threat or danger to property, human beings or other animals. 
(b)  Additionally, it is the responsibility of the town enforcement agent to accept any animal delivered to the animal control facility pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, except those animals that are voluntarily released by their owners. For an animal to be voluntary released, the owner must sign an owner release form, present a valid drivers license or identification card and provide proof of residency. 
(c)  After the expiration of any required impoundment period, any impounded animal not reclaimed by its owner will be deemed abandoned and the town will be deemed the owner of the animal. At that time, the animal may be disposed of by adoption from the facility, by offering it to a local animal humane group for adoption, or by humanely destroying the animal. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 6.01; Ord. No. 04-00, § 3, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. 66-10, § 6, 10-18-2010; Ord. No. 21-17 , § 1, 6-19-2017)  
Sec. 6-122. - Duties of town enforcement agent. 
(a)  If, by identification tag, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the town enforcement agent will, as soon as practical, notify the owner either in person or by telephone of the impoundment. If the animal is locally owned within the town and telephone contact cannot be made, the town enforcement agent will leave a notice at the owner's residence indicating that the animal has been impounded. 
(b)  All impounded animals shall be kept for not less than five days, unless the animal is reclaimed earlier by the owner under acceptable conditions. However, no impoundment period is required for an animal voluntarily delivered and released to the animal control facility or town animal control officer by its owner. 
(c)  Any animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, which is in great pain and suffering due to injury from which the animal probably will not recover, or which appears to have rabies, and/or which is at large and is posing an imminent danger to human beings or to other animals, may be destroyed by the town animal control officer. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 6.02; Ord. No. 21-17 , § 2, 6-19-2017)  
Sec. 6-123. - State laws for cat and dog sterilization adopted. 
The town shall comply with all sterilization laws as set forth in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 828, as amended. A copy of the statute may be obtained from the animal control agent. 
(Ord. No. 04-00, § 3(6.03), 1-20-2000)  
Sec. 6-124. - Adoption. 
(a)  A person may adopt a dog and/or cat from the town impoundment facility that has been spayed or neutered and classified as adoptable. If the animal has not been spayed or neutered, the adopting person must sign an agreement to have the animal spayed or neutered within a given period of time determined by an animal control agent. Written confirmation of such sterilization must be provided to animal control within seven days of the given date. The new owner shall be solely and legally responsible for compliance with all requirements specified in the adoption receipt and sterilization agreement executed at the time the animal is adopted. 
(1)  The animal control supervisor may establish an adoption receipt and sterilization agreement for use in the adoption process and violation of any term of such agreement shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Any person who fails to sterilize an animal, as set forth in the sterilization agreement, is guilty of a misdemeanor offense and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not less than $200.00 and not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  The animal control officer may refuse to allow a person to adopt an animal for any reason including, but not limited to, a person to whom he has reason to believe: 
(1)  Would not have proper facilities to contain or care for the animal. 
(2)  Wants the animal for the purpose of resale or for purposes other than pet ownership. 
(3)  There are reasonable grounds to believe the animal would be subjected to abandonment or cruelty. 
(4)  The person is under the age of 18. 
(5)  The purpose of the adoption is to avoid, or assist in the avoidance of, the enforcement of any provision of this chapter. 
(c)  The person adopting the animal shall pay all applicable costs of adoption established by the town council. 
(d)  An animal control agent shall be the sole judge as to whether an animal is suitable to offer for adoption; however, a decision to offer a particular animal for adoption shall not constitute any warranty, expressed or implied, of the health, temperament or age of the animal. 
(e)  The town and its agents, employees and officers shall have no liability associated with the adoption or impoundment of any animal. 
(Ord. No. 04-00, § 3(6.04), 1-20-2000)  
Sec. 6-125. - Reclamation of adopted animals. 
(a)  If animal control does not receive written confirmation of sterilization or other written disposition regarding an adopted animal, as required in this chapter, after the seventh day of the sterilization completion date specified in the adoption agreement and sterilization agreement executed at the time the animal was adopted, animal control may promptly reclaim the animal from the new owner, or require the new owner to return the animal to animal control, or impose any other penalty as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  A person shall not be entitled to any refund, reimbursement or other compensation regarding an animal reclaimed or returned under this section. 
(Ord. No. 04-00, § 3(6.05), 1-20-2000)  
Sec. 6-126. - Requirements to redeem an impounded animal. 
(a)  An animal which has been impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be redeemed by its owner or the lawful representative, provided that the redeeming person: 
(1)  Is at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Identifies themselves as the owner of the impounded animal or provides proof of being a lawful representative of such owner; 
(3)  Presents identification, which verifies his identity and date of birth; 
(4)  Properly completes all applicable redemption forms as required; and 
(5)  Pays the applicable redemption fees and charges as found in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  The owner of an impounded animal, which is subject to the rabies vaccination requirements of this chapter, shall be required to provide positive proof that the animal is currently vaccinated against rabies at the time it is redeemed. If the owner cannot or refuses to provide proof that the animal is currently vaccinated against rabies at the time of redemption, the owner shall also be required to sign an agreement, as prescribed by animal control, and cause the animal to be vaccinated against rabies within ten days. Failure to provide written confirmation of current rabies vaccinations is a violation of this chapter and subject to a fine as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 04-00, § 3(6.06), 1-20-2000)  
Sec. 6-127. - Interference with enforcement agent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, or attempt to prevent, a town enforcement agent from capturing or impounding any animal which may be legally impounded or otherwise interfering with the town enforcement agent while carrying out his lawful duties. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 7.00)  
Secs. 6-128—6-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, adopted April 15, 2019, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, §§ 6-161—6-165, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code 1989, ch. 2, §§ 8.01—8.05. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34. 
 
DIVISION 1. - DANGEROUS DOGS AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 6-161. - Filing of incident report. 
(a)  Any person may report an incident involving an animal that is believed to be a dangerous dog or dangerous animal to the municipal court. The report must be in writing and made under oath, and the report must include the following: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of complainant and other witnesses; 
(2)  Date, time, and location of the incident forming the basis of the report; 
(3)  Description of the animal(s) involved in the incident; 
(4)  Name, address, and telephone number of the animal owner, if known; 
(5)  A statement of facts upon which such report or application is based; 
(6)  A statement addressing whether the animal has exhibited dangerous propensities in past conduct, if known; 
(7)  Any other relevant facts or circumstances; and 
(8)  A Texas state notary stamp and signature. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a report filed under this section, the municipal court shall forward the report to the animal control authority for investigation. The animal control authority, upon receipt of a report filed under this section, shall investigate the report and may issue sworn reports based on the animal control authority's investigation or observation. The animal control authority shall file any sworn reports and any other information obtained through the investigation with the municipal court. 
(c)  The town hereby elects, for purpose of ensuring compliance with the requirements of state law, to be governed by V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code § 822.0422. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-162. - Determination that animal is dangerous. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an incident report under section 6-161, the municipal court shall send notice of the filing of the report to the owner of the animal that is the subject of the report. 
(b)  Upon the filing of an incident report under section 6-161, the municipal court shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure of the animal. The animal control authority shall seize the animal or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the animal in secure and humane conditions. The animal control authority shall provide a copy of the incident report filed with the municipal court to the owner at the time the animal is seized under this section. After a hearing under section 6-166, the owner may be ordered to pay any cost or fee assessed by the town related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the animal. The governing body of the town may prescribe the amount of the fees. The animal shall remain impounded pending an order of disposition from the municipal court. 
(c)  The municipal court shall determine, after notice and a hearing as provided in section 6-166, whether the animal is a dangerous dog or dangerous animal. 
(d)  If the municipal court determines that the animal is a dangerous dog or dangerous animal, the municipal court shall order that the owner comply with the requirements of section 6-164. The municipal court shall order that the owner of the animal comply with subsections (a)(1)—(9) of section 6-164 within 30 days of the date of the order and that the animal control authority shall continue to impound the animal in secure and humane conditions until the owner complies with subsections (a)(1)—(9) of section 6-164, at which time the animal shall be released to the owner. The municipal court shall further order that the owner shall comply with subsections (a)(10)—(11) of section 6-164 and any other applicable regulations, requirements, and restrictions on dangerous dogs or dangerous animals within 30 days of release of the animal to the owner. The municipal court may also order the owner of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal to pay all costs or fees assessed by the town related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, and destruction of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal. If the owner does not provide proof of compliance with subsections (a)(1)—(9) of section 6-164, the animal shall remain impounded until the municipal court orders disposition of the animal under section 6-165 and the animal is returned to the owner or destroyed. 
(e)  If the municipal court finds that the animals is not a dangerous dog or dangerous animal, the municipal court shall order that the animal control authority immediately release the dangerous dog or dangerous animal to the owner, and the owner shall not be responsible for the costs of seizure or impoundment of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-163. - Knowledge of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal. 
For purposes of this division, a person learns he or she is the owner of a dangerous dog or a dangerous animal and is subject to the requirements in section 6-164 upon the occurrence of any of the following: 
(1)  The owner is aware of an incident that would make the animal a dangerous dog or dangerous animal; or 
(2)  The owner is notified, either in open court or in writing, by the municipal court that the court has determined that the animal is a dangerous dog or dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-164. - Requirements of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal. 
(a)  Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal, or within the timeframe ordered by the municipal court, the person shall: 
(1)  Register the animal with the animal control authority and maintain current registration at all times; 
(2)  Provide and maintain a secure enclosure for the animal, in compliance with all of the requirements of this division, that is inspected and approved by the animal control authority; 
(3)  Post signs giving notice of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal so that they are prominently displayed on all entries onto the property where the animal is being kept, including gates to a yard or fenced area of the property and the front door of any dwelling on the property; 
(4)  Secure all gates to a yard or fenced area on the property where the animal is being kept with a padlock and keep all gates locked at all times, except when in use for entering or exiting the property; 
(5)  Not permit the animal to be outside the secure enclosure unless the animal is muzzled, in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal, and is restrained by a substantial chain or leash, no longer than six feet in length, with a capable person in immediate physical control of the leash; 
(6)  Obtain and maintain liability insurance coverage that includes coverage for animal attacks on people or animals in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the animal and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage to the animal control authority; 
(7)  Provide the following to the animal control authority: 
a.  The name and address of the owner; 
b.  The breed, age, sex, color, and any other identifying marks of the animal; 
c.  The location where the animal is to be kept if not at the address of the owner; and 
d.  Two color photographs of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal; 
(8)  Provide the animal with a fluorescent orange collar visible at 50 feet in normal daylight; 
(9)  Pay any cost or fee assessed by the town in the amount set by the town council that is related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, compliance inspection or re-inspection, or destruction of the animal; 
(10)  Microchip the animal and register the animal for its life with a national registry, and present proof of the registration to the animal control authority; 
(11)  Present proof to the animal control authority that the animal has been sterilized so as to prevent reproduction; 
(12)  Comply with all other applicable regulations, requirements, and restrictions on dangerous dogs or dangerous animals. 
(b)  If the owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal fails to comply with subsection 6-164(a), the person shall deliver the animal to the animal control authority and the animal control authority shall provide for the impoundment of the animal in humane and secure conditions. 
(c)  Once in compliance with subsection 6-164(a), the owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal shall maintain compliance with subsection 6-164(a) at all times thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-165. - Failure to comply. 
(a)  Any person may make a sworn application to the municipal court that the owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal has failed to comply with section 6-164(a) or that a dangerous dog or dangerous animal has attacked and caused bodily injury to a person or another animal. Upon the filing of a sworn application under this section, the municipal court shall schedule a hearing on the application in accordance with section 6-166. 
(b)  A sworn application under this section must include: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of complainant and other witnesses; 
(2)  Date, time, and location of the incident forming the basis of the report; 
(3)  Description of the animal(s) involved in the incident; 
(4)  Name, address, and telephone number of the animal owner, if known; 
(5)  A statement of facts upon which the application is based; 
(6)  A statement addressing whether the animal has exhibited dangerous propensities in past conduct, if known; 
(7)  Any other relevant facts or circumstances; and 
(8)  A Texas state notary stamp and signature. 
(c)  Upon the filing of a sworn application under this section, the municipal court shall order the animal control authority to seize the dangerous dog or dangerous animal and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal control authority shall seize the dangerous dog or dangerous animal or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal in secure and humane conditions. The owner may be ordered to pay any cost or fee assessed by the town related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal. The governing body of the town may prescribe the amount of the fees. The dangerous dog or dangerous animal shall remain impounded pending an order of disposition from the municipal court. 
(d)  The municipal court shall determine, after notice and a hearing as provided in section 6-166, whether the owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal has failed to comply with section 6-164(a) or whether a dangerous dog or dangerous animal has attacked and caused bodily injury to a person or another animal. 
(e)  If, after a hearing on an application filed under this section, the municipal court finds that the owner of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal has failed to comply with section 6-164(a) or that the dangerous dog or dangerous animal has attacked and caused bodily injury to a person or another animal, the municipal court shall order the animal control authority to humanely destroy the dangerous dog or dangerous animal, that the dangerous dog or dangerous animal be permanently removed from the town, or that the dangerous dog or dangerous animal be returned to the owner upon proof of compliance with all of the requirements of section 6-164(a). No dangerous dog or dangerous animal shall be ordered returned to its owner more than one time. The court may also order the owner of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal to pay all costs or fees assessed by the town related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, and destruction of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal due to the sworn complaint filed under this section. 
(f)  If, after a hearing on an application filed under this section, the municipal court finds that the owner of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal has not failed to comply with section 6-164(a) and that the dangerous dog or dangerous animal has not attacked and caused bodily injury to a person or another animal, the municipal court shall order that the animal control authority immediately release the dangerous dog or dangerous animal to the owner, and the owner shall not be responsible for the costs of seizure or impoundment of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal due to the sworn complaint filed under this section. 
(g)  A dangerous dog or dangerous animal ordered to be humanely destroyed or permanently removed from the town shall remain impounded until the dangerous dog or dangerous animal is humanely destroyed or until the owner reclaims the dangerous dog or dangerous animal under section 6-170(a). 
(h)  If the owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal seized due to a sworn application filed under this section cannot be located within 15 days after the seizure and impoundment of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal, the dangerous dog or dangerous animal shall be considered abandoned and the town shall be deemed the owner of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal. The court shall order the humane destruction of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal abandoned under this section upon application of the animal control authority, without a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-166. - Hearing. 
(a)  The municipal court, on receiving a report under section 6-161(a) or a sworn application under section 6-165(a), shall set a time for a hearing to make its determination. A hearing under this section must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the animal is seized or delivered to the animal control authority. 
(b)  The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to: 
(1)  The owner of the animal or the person from whom the animal was seized or who delivered the animal to the animal control authority; 
(2)  The person who made the report or filed the application; and 
(3)  The animal control authority. 
(c)  Any interested party, including the town attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(d)  At a hearing under this section, the municipal court shall determine the estimated costs to house and care for the impounded animal during any appeal process and shall set the amount of bond for an appeal adequate to cover those estimated costs. 
(e)  An owner or the person who made the report or filed the application may appeal the decision of the municipal court at a hearing under this section in the manner described by section 6-167. 
(f)  An animal that is the subject of a proceeding under this division shall remain impounded throughout the pendency of any appeal of a determination or order under this division. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-167. - Appeal. 
(a)  A party to a hearing on a report filed under section 6-161(a) or a hearing on an application filed under section 6-165(a) may appeal the decision to a county court or county court at law in the county in which the municipal court is located and is entitled to a jury trial on request. 
(b)  As a condition of perfecting an appeal, not later than the tenth calendar day after the date the decision is issued by the municipal court, the appellant must file a notice of appeal and, if applicable, an appeal bond in the amount determined by the municipal court from which the appeal is taken. 
(c)  Notwithstanding V.T.C.A., Government Code § 30.00014, or any other law, a person filing an appeal from a municipal court under subsection 6-167(a) is not required to file a motion for a new trial to perfect an appeal. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other law, a county court or a county court at law has jurisdiction to hear an appeal filed under this section. 
(e)  A decision of a county court or county court at law under this section may be appealed in the same manner as an appeal for any other case in a county court or county court at law. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other law or local regulation, a dangerous dog or dangerous animal shall not be destroyed during the pendency of an appeal under this section. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-168. - Notices. 
All required notices under this division shall be personally delivered or deposited with the United States Postal Service, sent certified mail, return receipt requested. When the town mails a notice in accordance with this section and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered delivered. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-169. - Registration. 
(a)  The animal control authority shall annually register a dangerous dog or dangerous animal, after an inspection of the property where the animal will be kept, if: 
(1)  The property where the animal will be kept complies with all the requirements contained in section 6-164(a); 
(2)  The owner presents proof satisfactory to the animal control authority showing compliance with all the requirements contained in section 6-164(a); 
(3)  The owner presents proof of current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal, if required by this chapter; and 
(4)  The owner pays the annual registration fee of $100.00. 
(b)  The animal control authority shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog or dangerous animal a registration tag. The owner of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal shall attach the current registration tag to the yellow fluorescent collar that is worn by the dangerous dog or dangerous animal. The current registration tag shall be displayed on the dangerous dog or dangerous animal in this manner at all times. The registration of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(c)  The animal control authority shall perform an annual inspection of the property where a dangerous dog or dangerous animal is being kept to ensure that the owner and the property is in compliance with all of the requirements contained in section 6-164(a). 
(d)  If an owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal sells or moves the dangerous dog or dangerous animal to a new address, whether in the town or not, the owner, not later than the tenth day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the animal control authority of the new address. 
(e)  If the owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal sells or gives a dangerous dog or dangerous animal to another person, the owner shall notify the other person at the time of the sale or gift that the animal has been determined to be a dangerous dog or dangerous animal. 
(f)  A person who buys or receives a dangerous dog or dangerous animal and continues to keep the animal in the town must register the animal within ten days after receiving the animal. The new owner shall be issued a registration tag upon compliance with the requirements of subsection 6-169(a). 
(g)  An owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal shall notify the animal control authority of any attack the dangerous dog or dangerous animal makes on a person or another animal no later than five days after the attack. 
(h)  An animal, which has been deemed dangerous in another jurisdiction, shall not be maintained, kept, or harbored in the town. 
(i)  In the event a dangerous dog or dangerous animal dies, the owner of the animal shall provide proof to the animal control authority or present written verification by a licensed veterinarian sufficient to verify the identity of the deceased animal as a dangerous dog or dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-170. - Dangerous dog or dangerous animal ordered removed from the town. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal that is ordered to be permanently removed from the town must provide to the animal control authority the plan for removal of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal from the town and the name, address, and phone number for the place where the dangerous dog or dangerous animal will be relocated outside of the town before the dangerous dog or dangerous animal will be released to the owner. Upon receipt of the required information, the animal control authority shall release the dangerous dog or dangerous animal to the owner to be removed from the town. A dangerous dog or dangerous animal ordered to be removed from the town under this division must be removed from the town within ten days of the date of the order. 
(b)  If the owner does not provide the information required by subsection 6-170(a) to the animal control authority and reclaim the dangerous dog or dangerous animal within ten days of the order of the municipal court of the town, the dangerous dog or dangerous animal shall be deemed abandoned by the owner and the town shall be deemed the owner of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal. Upon application by the animal control authority, without a hearing, the court shall order that a dangerous dog or dangerous animal deemed to be abandoned under this subsection be humanely destroyed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to harbor, keep, or have possession of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal previously ordered to be removed from the town under this division within the corporate limits of the town. 
(d)  The animal control authority or any officer enforcing this division shall seize any dangerous dog or dangerous animal that has been previously ordered to be removed from the town and is found to be at any location within the corporate limits of the town. Upon seizure, the animal control authority shall provide for the impoundment of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal in humane and sanitary conditions. 
(e)  Upon application by the animal control authority, without a hearing, the court shall order that a dangerous dog or dangerous animal that was previously ordered to be removed from the town and later found to be in the town be humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-171. - Secure enclosure. 
(a)  A secure enclosure for a dangerous dog or dangerous animal under this division must comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  A dwelling may serve as a secure enclosure under this division. If a dwelling is the secure enclosure under this division, all entries to the dwelling, including doors and garage doors, must have a sign posted in a conspicuous location warning of the presence of the dangerous dog or dangerous animal, and the front door of the dwelling must be locked at all times, except when in use for entering or exiting the dwelling. 
(c)  If a secure enclosure is separate from a dwelling, all entrances to the secure enclosure must be locked with a padlock at all times, except when in use to enter or exit the secure enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-172. - Nuisance declared. 
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance that an owner or other person harbors, keeps, or maintains a dangerous dog or dangerous animal in the town unless the owner complies with the requirements of this division and, with respect to dogs, all state statutes regulating dangerous dogs. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-173. - Offenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal and the dangerous dog or dangerous animal makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the animal's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal and the dangerous dog or dangerous animal makes an unprovoked attack on another animal while the dangerous dog or dangerous animal is outside the of its enclosure and the attack causes bodily injury or death to the other animal. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal and performs an act prohibited or fails to perform an act required by this division. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog or dangerous animal and the animal attacks a person or another animal and the owner fails to notify the animal control authority within five days of the attack. 
(e)  An offense under subsections 6-173(a), (b), (c), or (d) is a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine up to but not more than $2,000.00. Each day that a violation is committed or continues is a separate offense. 
(f)  If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order that the dangerous dog or dangerous animal be humanely destroyed immediately, that the dangerous dog or dangerous animal be permanently removed from the town, or that the dangerous dog or dangerous animal be returned to its owner upon proof of compliance with all of the requirements of section 6-164(a). If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section for a second time, the court may order that the animal be humanely destroyed immediately. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-174. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 6-173 that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter, or a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the animal in connection with that position. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 6-173 that the person is an employee of the institutional division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses the dog for law enforcement or corrections purposes. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 6-173 that the person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company under V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1702. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 6-173 that the person injured was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal. 
(e)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 6-173 that the person injured was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(f)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 6-173 that the animal was protecting or defending a person, while in the person's control, from an unjustified attack or assault. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Secs. 6-175—6-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ANIMALS CAUSING DEATH OR SERIOUS BODILY INJURY 
 
Sec. 6-181. - Seizure of a dog or other animal causing death of or serious bodily injury to a person. 
(a)  The municipal court shall order the animal control authority to seize a dog or other animal and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure: 
(1)  On the sworn complaint of any person, including the town attorney or a peace officer, that the dog or animal has caused the death of or serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person; and 
(2)  On a showing of probable cause to believe that the dog or animal caused the death of or serious bodily injury to the person as stated in the complaint. 
(b)  The animal control authority shall seize the dog or animal or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog or animal in secure and humane conditions until the municipal court orders the disposition of the dog or animal. 
(c)  A sworn complaint under this section must be filed in accordance with, and must include the required information set forth in, section 6-165(b) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-182. - Hearing. 
(a)  The municipal court shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog or other animal caused the death of or serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the warrant is issued. 
(b)  The municipal court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to: 
(1)  The owner of the dog or animal or the person from whom the dog or animal was seized; and 
(2)  The person who made the complaint. 
(c)  Any interested party, including the town attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(d)  The municipal court shall order the dog or animal be destroyed if the municipal court finds that the dog or animal caused the death of a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. If that finding is not made, the municipal court shall order the dog or animal released to: 
(1)  Its owner; 
(2)  The person from whom the dog or animal was seized; or 
(3)  Any other person authorized to take possession of the dog or animal. 
(e)  The municipal court may order the dog or animal destroyed if the municipal court finds that the dog or animal caused serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. If that finding is not made, the municipal court shall order the dog or animal released to: 
(1)  Its owner; 
(2)  The person from whom the dog or animal was seized; or 
(3)  Any other person authorized to take possession of the dog or animal. 
(f)  The municipal court may not order the dog or animal destroyed if the municipal court finds that the dog or animal caused the serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person and: 
(1)  The dog or animal was being used for the protection of a person or a person's property, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog or animal was being kept, and: 
a.  The enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog or animal from leaving the enclosure on its own and provided notice of the presence of a dog or other animal; and 
b.  The injured person was at least eight years of age, and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite, or mauling occurred. 
(2)  The dog or animal was not being used for the protection of a person or a person's property, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog or animal was being kept, and the injured person was at least eight years of age and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite, or mauling occurred; 
(3)  The attack, bite, or mauling occurred during an arrest or other action of a peace officer while the peace officer was using the dog for law enforcement purposes; 
(4)  The dog or animal was defending a person from an assault or a person's property from damage or theft by the injured person; or 
(5)  The injured person was younger than eight years of age, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog or animal was being kept, and the enclosure was reasonably certain to keep a person younger than eight years of age from entering. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-183. - Destruction of dog or other animal. 
The destruction of a dog or animal under this division must be performed by: 
(1)  A licensed veterinarian; 
(2)  Personnel of a recognized animal shelter or humane society who are trained in the humane destruction of animals; or 
(3)  Personnel of a governmental agency responsible for animal control who are trained in the humane destruction of animals. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 6-184. - Provocation or location of attack irrelevant. 
Except as provided by subsection 6-182(f), this division applies to any dog or other animal that causes a person's death or serious bodily injury by attacking, biting, or mauling the person, regardless of whether the dog or animal was provoked and regardless of where the incident resulting in the person's death or serious bodily injury occurred. 
(Ord. No. 12-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Secs. 6-185—6-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 6-201. - Prohibition within corporate limits of town. 
Any species of wild or exotic animal, not normally considered domesticated, that poses a potentially serious threat to public health, safety or welfare, or is protected by international, federal or state regulations or any other wild animal, including birds of prey capable of or inclined to do serious bodily harm to humans or other animals or fowl, shall not be kept within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 10.01)  
Sec. 6-202. - Exemptions to general prohibition. 
The provisions in section 6-201 shall not apply to the keeping of wild or exotic animals if the owner or possessor: 
(1)  Is a governmental agency or entity; 
(2)  Holds a circus, carnival or zoo license from the state; 
(3)  Is a licensed individual, or a member of a nonprofit animal rehabilitation organization holding a permit from the state department of parks and wildlife; or 
(4)  Is a research institution or an accredited educational institution. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 10.02)  
Sec. 6-203. - Exceptions to general prohibition. 
(a)  The following wild or exotic animals may be kept within the town, provided that certain requirements are met: 
(1)  Bison, provided that they are kept on lots or tracts of land two acres or greater in area; however, it shall be a defense to prosecution regarding the keeping of bison on lots or tracts of land less than two acres in area that no more than the number of bison in question were being kept on the same premises, by the same owner, prior to the adoption of this chapter; 
(2)  Emus, ostriches, or rheas, pursuant to the provisions of article VII of this chapter; however, it shall be a defense to prosecution regarding the number of emus, ostriches or rheas being kept, that no more than the number of emus, ostriches or rheas in question were being kept on the same premises, by the same owner, prior to the adoption of this chapter; and 
(3)  Exotic birds, provided that they are not birds of prey; 
(4)  Any other animal not previously excluded in section 6-201 and legally procured from breeders, pet stores or other persons, businesses or corporations engaged in the buying, selling or trading of such animals; or 
(5)  Snakes that are venomous and indigenous as well as snakes that are venomous and not indigenous to Texas, provided a permit has been issued from the appropriate federal or state department and from the town; provided that the snake is maintained in an enclosure, corral, pen, cage, or restrictive area that contains at least three locking mechanisms to ensure that the snake is unable to escape; and provided that if a snake permitted pursuant to this subsection and kept within the town escapes from its enclosure, corral, pen, cage, or restrictive area the owner or possessor immediately notifies the town of such escape and cooperates with the town in recovery of the escaped snake. 
(b)  The animals listed in subsection (a) of this section may be kept within the town, provided that the owner or possessor of such animals meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Any area within the town where these animals are kept is zoned so as to allow the keeping of such animals; 
(2)  Any enclosure, corral, pen, cage or restrictive area in which these animals are kept is constructed so as to prevent their escape; 
(3)  All necessary international, federal, state, or town licenses and/or permits have been obtained, if required. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 10.03; Ord. No. 59-16 , § 1, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-204. - Permits. 
(a)  The town animal control officer or his designee shall register and issue wild or exotic animal permits. Such issuance will be for the purpose of owner identification in cases where an animal has bitten, scratched, attacked, or injured a human being or another animal and in cases where the animal might become impounded, lost, or injured. In cases where international, federal or state licenses and/or permits are required, the owner of the wild or exotic animal shall also obtain a wild or exotic animal permit from the town. A separate permit from the town shall be required for each animal. 
(b)  An application submitted to the town for a permit to possess a snake as required by subsection 6-203(a)(5) and subsection 6-204(a) shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the individual who will be in possession of the animal to be governed by the permit; 
(2)  Color pictures of the animal to be governed by the permit; 
(3)  A detailed description of the animal to be governed by the permit, including the name(s) given to the animal and the length, weight, and girth of the animal; 
(4)  The approximate age of the animal to be governed by the permit; 
(5)  The sex, species, and breed of the animal to be governed by the permit; and 
(6)  Color pictures of the enclosure, corral, pen, cage, or restrictive area in which the animal will be maintained. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of a wild or exotic animal permit for the possession of a snake pursuant to subsection 6-203(a)(5) and subsection 6-204(a), the town animal control officer or his designee shall inspect any and all premises at which a snake may be kept. After the issuance of a wild or exotic animal permit for the possession of a snake, the town animal control officer or his designee may annually inspect any and all premises at which a snake is kept. A permit to possess a snake may not be issued unless the inspection is conducted as required herein and unless the requirements of subsection 6-203(a)(5) and subsection 6-204(b) are complied with. The town animal control officer or his designee may revoke the town permit for possession of a snake if the individual who is in possession of the animal governed by the permit does not comply with subsection 6-203(a)(5), subsection 6-204(b), or the annual inspection requirement of this subsection 6-204(c). The individual who is in possession of the animal shall apply for a new permit under subsection 6-204(b) each time the premises at which the snake is kept changes. 
(d)  The town animal control officer or his designee may inspect at any time, without a warrant, any premise within town limits where probable cause exists that a wild or exotic animal covered by this article VI is present and a proper federal or state license and/or permit from the town has not been issued. 
(e)  The town animal control officer or his designee may arrange for the seizure or removal of wild or exotic animals covered by this article VI from a person who possesses the animal without the required license and/or permit. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 5.04; Ord. No. 59-16 , § 2, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 6-205. - Impoundment or quarantine. 
The town enforcement agent may order the immediate impoundment or quarantine, at the owner's expense, of any wild or exotic animal found in the town where there is a potentially serious threat to public health, safety or welfare. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 10.04)  
Secs. 6-206—6-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 6-241. - Keeping generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping of livestock on premises owned by him or under his control, except in compliance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Livestock shall not be kept on lots or tracts of land with a zoning classification that allows residential lot sizes of less than one acre in area. 
(2)  Livestock shall not be kept on lots and tracts of land less than one acre in area. 
(3)  On lots and tracts of land between one acre and two acres in area, inclusive, no more than five livestock shall be kept. 
(4)  On lots and tracts of land greater than two acres in area, there shall be no limit to the number of livestock that may be kept, provided that adequate fences, barriers and other facilities are provided as required in sections 6-242 and 6-243, and, provided further, that a public nuisance is not created. 
(5)  The provisions of sections 6-46 and 6-47, relative to animal care in general, shall specifically apply to the keeping of livestock. 
(6)  It shall be a defense to prosecution regarding the number of livestock being kept, that no more than the number and kinds of livestock in question were being kept on the same premises, by the same owner, prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
(7)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person, other than a veterinarian, to keep any live swine within the town, except in areas zoned or designated for rural or agricultural purposes by the town zoning ordinances. This section shall not prohibit the keeping of not more than two pure bred Vietnamese potbellied pigs with appropriate documentation as to breeding. Such documentation shall be kept available for inspection by a town enforcement agent upon demand. These potbellied pigs shall be no more than 40 inches from nose to tail, no higher than 20 inches at the shoulder and no heavier than 120 pounds. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 11.01)  
Sec. 6-242. - Adequate fences and barriers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on their premises any livestock without providing adequate fences or barriers that will prevent such livestock from escaping and/or damaging neighboring flowers, trees, shrubbery and/or other property located on adjacent property. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 11.02)  
Sec. 6-243. - Barns, stables and other animal facilities. 
All barns, stables and other animal facilities constructed shall meet the requirements of the building code set forth in chapter 14 and sections 98-985 and 98-986. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 11.03)  
Sec. 6-244. - Places livestock prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow any type of livestock upon any public school ground, public park or municipal grounds within the town other than public rights-of-way or areas designated for such purpose; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the riding or showing of horses or other livestock in conjunction with authorized parades, carnivals or other school or civic sponsored programs or events. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 11.04)  
Sec. 6-245. - Authority to impound. 
Any livestock found running at large within the corporate limits of the town may be impounded by a town enforcement agent. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 12.01)  
Sec. 6-246. - Disposal of impounded livestock. 
(a)  If ownership of the impounded livestock cannot be determined, and after being held for a period of 45 days, the livestock may be sold at public auction. Should the owner be located within the 45-day period, the owner shall pay all required fees set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  If impounded livestock are sold at public auction, the town enforcement agent will apply such amount to the proceeds as necessary to satisfy the fees and costs incurred because of animal impoundment and auction, and shall deposit the remainder of such monies, if any, in the town general fund. Such remaining money, if any, shall be subject to withdrawal by an owner upon production of a sworn notarized affidavit that the applicant was in fact the owner of the livestock immediately prior to the sale. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 12.02)  
Secs. 6-247—6-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FOWL, RABBITS AND GUINEA PIGS 
 
Sec. 6-281. - Enclosure requirements. 
(a)  Fowl, rabbits and guinea pigs must be kept indoors, or if outdoors, in a secure pen or enclosure. Litter and droppings from these animals must be collected and disposed of in accordance with section 6-42; provided, however that the provisions of this section shall not apply to ducks or other waterfowl inhabiting natural or man made watercourses or bodies of water. 
(b)  No more than four poultry shall be kept on any lot up to one acre in size. Poultry coops or other buildings for the housing of poultry shall not be located within ten feet of any property line. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess a rooster on any lot less than one acre in size. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 13.01; Ord. No. 61-03, § 2, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 37-12, §§ 2, 3, 9-17-2012)  
Sec. 6-282. - Number of pigeons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly be in possession of more than 25 pigeons on any premises in the town. It shall be a defense to prosecution regarding the number of pigeons being kept, that no more than the number and kinds of pigeons in question were being kept on the same premises, by the same owner, prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 13.02)  
Sec. 6-283. - Taking of peafowl prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take any peafowl. 
(b)  As used in this section, "take" means taking, attempting to take, hunting, molesting, capturing, or killing any peafowl, their nests or eggs, by any means, whether or not such actions result in obtaining possession of peafowl or their nests or eggs. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Nothing in this section shall prevent a property owner from removing peafowl from his or her own property in a manner that does not physically injure the peafowl. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the construction or repair of public improvements. 
( Ord. No. 40-15 , § 1, 7-20-2015)  
Secs. 6-284—6-310. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - BEES 
 
Sec. 6-311. - Keeping. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep, or allow to be kept, bees in such a manner as to deny the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent property or endanger the personal health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the town. Honey bees may be kept if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All hives shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any inhabited dwelling other than that of the person keeping such bees. 
(2)  No more than three hives shall be allowed on lots or tracts of land less than one acre in area. 
(3)  There is an adequate source of water within 20 feet of all hives. 
(4)  Any hive contaminated with or known to have Africanized honey bees (killer bees) shall be destroyed by a qualified bee keeper at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 14.00)  
Secs. 6-312—6-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PLACEMENT AND BAITING OF ANIMAL TRAPS 
 
Sec. 6-341. - Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, set or bait any trap for the purpose of catching, wounding or killing any animal, fowl or reptile without the permission and assistance of a town animal control officer. This article, however, does not preclude the use of commercially sold rat and mouse traps. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 15.01)  
Sec. 6-342. - Certain traps prohibited. 
The placing or baiting of any steel jawed trap (commonly known as a bear trap, wolf trap or coyote trap) within the corporate limits of the town is expressly prohibited. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 15.02)  
Sec. 6-343. - Traps on public property. 
Any animal traps found on public property are hereby declared to be abandoned, and the town enforcement agents are hereby authorized and directed to seize any such trap and process the same as abandoned property in accordance with the applicable provisions of state law and town procedures. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 15.03)  
Sec. 6-344. - Domestic animal traps. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter to use anything other than commercially sold dry animal food to bait any trap used for the purpose of trapping any at large domestic animal. Unless the adjacent properties are separated by a solid masonry or wood fence of a minimum six-foot height, traps used for such purpose shall not be placed or located within ten feet of adjacent property lines. If no such fence exists and the size, shape or other characteristics of the property preclude traps from being placed or located ten feet from adjacent property lines, the traps shall be placed or located as far from adjacent property lines as practicable. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 15.04)  
Secs. 6-345—6-380. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - RESIDENTIAL BREEDERS OR FOSTER OWNERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 6-381—6-400. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 6-401. - Issuance generally. 
Upon approval of the town council, the animal control officer shall issue annual residential breeder and/or residential foster owner licenses, subject to the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 18.01(c))  
Sec. 6-402. - Application. 
The initial application for an annual dog or cat residential breeder and/or residential foster owner license, and any application for the its renewal, shall at a minimum contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and permanent address of the applicant and, if different, the location and/or address of the subject property or premises; 
(2)  The maximum number of dogs or cats that the applicant will keep, harbor, breed, raise and/or foster on the subject property or premises; and 
(3)  A drawing showing the dimensions of the subject property or premises and identifying all structures on the premises, all fenced or enclosed areas, and the proximity of adjacent property owners and public streets. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 18.01(c)(2))  
Sec. 6-403. - Public hearing on application. 
The town council shall hold a public hearing on any application for either a residential breeder license or a residential foster owner license or its renewal. Public notice of the hearing shall be given by depositing a written notice in the mail addressed to all owners of real property located within 200 feet of the subject property or premises, as determined from the last approved town tax roll, and by its publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. Both the mailed and published notices shall be given at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall state the date, time and place of the public hearing; adequately identify the location and/or address of the subject property or premises; state the nature of the application to be considered; and state that any party may appear in person or by attorney or agent. The public hearing procedure prescribed in this division shall apply to the initial application for any such license and any application for its renewal. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 18.01(c)(1))  
Sec. 6-404. - Fee. 
An annual license and inspection fee listed in appendix A of this Code shall be paid to the town prior to the issuance of any residential breeder and/or residential foster owner licenses or annual renewal. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 18.01(c)(9))  
Sec. 6-405. - Licensee requirements. 
Requirements to be met by licensees are as follows: 
(1)  The dogs or cats shall be housed in cages or pens inside a residence or a completely enclosed accessory structure. 
(2)  The dogs or cats shall be kept, harbored, bred, raised and/or fostered so as to not be a nuisance or detriment to any adjoining property or adjacent neighbors. 
(3)  The dogs or cats shall not bark, howl, create noises that cause the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the adjacent premises to be disturbed, or create a public nuisance. 
(4)  The cages or pens in which the dogs or cats are housed shall be maintained in a sanitary condition, subject to the provisions of sections 6-42 and 6-44, so as not to create any hazards to the general health and welfare of the community. 
(5)  The subject property or premises shall provide an enclosed or fenced area for the exercise of the dogs or cats that will be kept, harbored, bred, raised and/or fostered thereon containing a minimum area equal to or greater than 500 square feet multiplied by the number of dogs or cats six months of age or older, including dogs or cats belonging to or owned by foster owners. 
(6)  The enclosed area in which the dogs or cats are to be housed shall be of adequate size, height and construction to prevent the dogs or cats from running at large. 
(7)  The subject property or premises shall be subject to inspection by the town enforcement agent between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1989, ch. 2, § 18.01(c)(3)—(8), (10))  
Chapter 10 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AVIGATION EASEMENT AND RELEASE 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport aircraft sound exposure map adopted. 
The map entitled "Aircraft Sound Exposure: Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport and Environs," dated October 14, 1971, (called the "map" in this article), a copy of which is on file in the office of the town secretary is hereby approved and adopted as it relates to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 14.02)  
Sec. 10-32. - Execution prerequisite to plat approval. 
Any party desiring to subdivide their property pursuant to and in accordance with the statutory requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 212.001 et seq. and the subdivision rules and regulations of the town, Ordinance No. 24-77, and any and all amendments to such ordinance, which property is located within the area delineated as zone B and/or zone C on the map shall execute an avigation easement and release, which avigation easement and release shall appear on the face of all approved subdivision plats and shall constitute a covenant running with the land. No subdivision plat of property located within the zones B and/or C shall be approved without the avigation easement and release being executed in the form described in section 10-34. All subdivision plats shall be filed for record with the county clerk as required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 14.03)  
Sec. 10-33. - Execution prerequisite to building permit approval. 
Any party desiring to construct any improvements which require the obtaining of a building permit and/or a certificate of occupancy on any property which is located within the area delineated as zone B and/or zone C on the map shall execute an avigation easement and release in the form described in section 10-34 as a condition precedent to the obtaining of a building permit and/or a certificate of occupancy. The avigation easement and release shall be filed for record in the deed records of the county and shall constitute a covenant running with the land. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 14.04)  
Sec. 10-34. - Form. 
The form of the avigation easement and release required by sections 10-32 and 10-33 is as follows: 
AVIGATION EASEMENT AND RELEASE 
THE STATE OF TEXAS 	) 
COUNTY OF DENTON 	) 
	) 
 
WHEREAS, ___________ hereinafter called "Owner" (whether one or more), is the owner of that certain parcel of land situated in the Town of Flower Mound, Denton County, Texas, being particularly described on the subdivision plat or in Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein, as the case may be; 
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the sum of ONE DOLLAR ($1.00) and other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby fully acknowledged and confessed, Owner does hereby waive, release, remise, quitclaim and surrender to the Dallas-Fort Worth Regional Airport Board, the Cities of Dallas, Texas and Fort Worth, Texas, the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, municipal corporations, their successors and assigns, hereinafter collectively called "Cities" for the use and benefit of the public and its agencies, any and all claims for damages of any kind that Owner may now have or may hereafter have in the future by reason of the passage of all aircraft ("aircraft" being defined for the purposes of this instrument as any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used, or designed for navigation of or flight in the air) by whomsoever owned and operated, in the air space over Owner's property above a level measured 150 feet from the average ground level of said property as same presently exists, to an infinite height above said 150 feet from the average ground level, or the causing in all air space above the surface of Owner's property such noise, vibration, fumes, dust, fuel and lubricant particles, and all other effects that may be caused by the operation of aircraft landing at, or taking off from, or operating at or on the Dallas-Fort Worth Regional Airport; and Owner does hereby fully waive, remise and release any right or cause of action which it may now have or which it may in the future have against Cities, their successors and assigns, whether such claim be for injury to person or damages to or taking of property, due to noise, vibration, fumes, dust, fuel and lubricant particles, and all other effects that may be caused or may have been caused by the operation of aircraft landing at, or taking off from, or operating and/or maintenance of aircraft landing at, or taking off from, or the operation and/or maintenance of aircraft or aircraft engines at or on said Dallas-Fort Worth Regional Airport. This instrument does not release the owners or operators of aircraft from liability for damage or injury to person or property caused by falling aircraft or falling physical objects from aircraft, except as stated herein with respect to noise, fumes, dust, fuel and lubricant particles. 
It is agreed that this Release shall be binding upon Owner's heirs and assigns, and successors in interest to said property described on the subdivision plat or in Exhibit "A" attached hereto, as the case may be, and it is further agreed that this instrument shall be a covenant running with the land, and shall be recorded in the deed records of Denton County, Texas. 
EXECUTED at ___________, Texas, this _____ day of ________, A.D., 20___. 
	_____
OWNER 
	_____
OWNER 
	_____
OWNER 
ATTEST: 
___________ 	
THE STATE OF TEXAS 	) 
COUNTY OF DENTON 	) 
	) 
 
BEFORE ME, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for the State of Texas, on this day personally appeared ___________, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he or she executed the same for the purposes and consideration therein expressed. 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE, this _____ day of ________ A.D., 20___. 
	_____
NOTARY PUBLIC in and for the State of Texas 
My commission expires: 
_____ 
 
THE STATE OF TEXAS 	) 
COUNTY OF DENTON 	) 
	) 
 
BEFORE ME, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for the State of Texas, on this day personally appeared ___________, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he or she executed the same for the purposes and consideration therein expressed. 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE, this _____ day of ________ A.D., 20___. 
	_____
NOTARY PUBLIC in and for the State of Texas 
My commission expires: 
_____ 
 
THE STATE OF TEXAS 	) 
COUNTY OF DENTON 	) 
	) 
 
BEFORE ME, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for the State of Texas, on this day personally appeared ___________, ___________ (title) of ___________, a corporation, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he or she executed the same as the act and deed of said corporation for the purposes and consideration therein expressed, and in the capacity therein stated. 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE, this _____ day of ________ A.D., 20___. 
	_____
NOTARY PUBLIC in and for the State of Texas 
My commission expires: 
_____ 
 
THE STATE OF TEXAS 	) 
COUNTY OF DENTON 	) 
	) 
 
BEFORE ME, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for the State of Texas, on this day personally appeared ___________, ___________ (title) of ___________, a corporation, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he or she executed the same as the act and deed of said corporation for the purposes and consideration therein expressed, and in the capacity therein stated. 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE, this _____ day of ________ A.D., 20___. 
	_____
NOTARY PUBLIC in and for the 
State of Texas 
My commission expires: 
___________ 	
 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 14.05)  
Sec. 10-35. - Amends subdivision regulations and building code. 
This article, to the extent necessary, shall be deemed an amendment to the town ordinances governing rules and regulations of subdivisions and the building code of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 14.06) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; subdivisions, ch. 90.  
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of town council to require building permits and to adopt building code, electrical code and plumbing code, § 3.07(g). 
Cross reference— Contractors, § 18-31 et seq.; construction, remodeling, conversion plans of food and food establishments, § 18-171 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; general provisions for land development regulations, ch. 74; development standards for land development regulations, ch. 82; signs, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; vegetation, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 98; exterior building material, § 98-1161 et seq.; building, plumbing, mechanical and electrical permit fees, app. A. 
State Law reference— Authority of home rule city to require the construction of buildings to comply with energy conservation standards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.901. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Fees and charges. 
All building and construction fees and charges are in the fee schedule set out in appendix A of this Code.  
Sec. 14-2. - Home improvement incentive program. 
(a)  Purpose. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 380, the town may, subject to available funding and the conditions of this program, provide economic development incentives equal to the increase in property taxes for a single-family residential structure following the construction of improvements to, or the remodeling of, such residence. 
(b)  Incentive. The town may provide an economic development incentive equal to 100 percent of the increase in property taxes for the tax year following the completion of an approved project as the result of the increase in the certified appraised value of the residence as determined by the appraisal district. Said incentive will be based on the increase in property taxes in the first tax year following completion of the improvements. That amount will be multiplied by ten and paid in a single lump-sum payment (see example below). The economic development incentive shall be provided through a contract between the town and the property owner to be prepared and approved by the town attorney. The economic development incentive may be assigned one time in connection with the sale or transfer of the ownership (including a life estate) of the residence to a subsequent owner. In the event the residence is sold or transferred following an assignment, the economic development incentive agreement shall automatically terminate. 
(c)  Eligibility requirements. All residential property zoned single-family is eligible for participation in the program. Projects for home improvements, modifications or remodeling of single-family residences are eligible for the property tax rebate incentive provided the certified construction costs of the project are a minimum of $20,000.00. The project must be completed within 24 months after approval by the town as an eligible project for participation in the program. The property owner will be required to consent to periodic inspections by the town as the project is constructed. The property owner will be required to provide such information as the town staff may reasonably require to verify the costs incurred by the property owner for the project. Property owners or persons who are delinquent in payment of property taxes or other fees owed to the town are ineligible to participate in the program. 
(d)  Application. A person desiring to participate in the program shall submit an application to the neighborhood services division on a form provided by the town. The application shall require the property owner to provide the details of the proposed home improvement project, the estimated project costs and such other information as the town may require. 
(e)  Review process. The application shall be reviewed by the executive director of financial services department (or designee) who shall determine whether the proposed project qualifies for the program and the amount of the approved project costs. The executive director of financial services shall review a completed application within 15 business days after submission. If an application is incomplete or if additional information is required, the executive director of financial services shall notify the property owner accordingly. The property owner shall provide a complete application or the requested information, as the case may be, within the stated time period or the application will be deemed withdrawn. The financial services department will notify the property owner in writing if the application is denied or approved, and if approved, the amount of the approved project costs, as well as provide the required incentive contract. The property owner will be required to execute and return the incentive contract within 15 business days after receipt from the town. 
(f)  Incentive payment. The total incentive will be paid to the property owner pursuant to the home improvement incentive program agreement on April 1 of the first full calendar year after completion of an approved project. For example, assume that a project is completed in December 2015. The payment of the economic development incentive would be paid on April 1, 2017. Further assume that the 2016 property taxes increased $300.00 above the 2015 property taxes as a result of the increase in the taxable value of the improvements. The total incentive would be $3,000.00 and would be paid on April 1, 2017. The amount of the incentive shall be determined by the executive director of financial services, whose decision shall be final in all respects. 
( Ord. No. 07-16 , § 1, 2-1-2016)  
Secs. 14-3—14-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 14-31. - International Building Code adopted. 
The International Building Code, 2018 edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the town secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the building code of the town, the same as though the provisions of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, were copied at length in this section, subject to the deletions, amendments, and additions provided in section 14-32. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 1.01; Ord. No. 82-99, § 1, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 1-18-2005; Ord. No. 06-08, § 2, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 12-11, § 2, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 20-14, § 2, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 32-16 , § 2, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 28-19 , § 2, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 14-32. - Local amendments to International Building Code. 
The building code adopted in section 14-31 is hereby amended as follows, and all sections not expressly amended remain in full force and effect. 
(a)  Section 101.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of The Town of Flower Mound, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(b)  Section 101.4 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 101.4. Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.8 and referenced elsewhere in this code, when specifically adopted, shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said codes and standards shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted and amended. 
(c)  Section 101.4.8 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 101.4.8. Electrical. The provisions of the Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(d)  Section 103 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 103
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTIONS 
(e)  Section 103.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 103.1. Creation of enforcement agency. The Department of Building Inspections is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. 
(f)  Section 104.2.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 104.2.1. Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings and structures in flood hazard areas. Deleted. 
(g)  Section 104.10.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 104.2.1. Flood hazard areas. Deleted. 
(h)  Section 105.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 105.1. Required. Any owner, contractor, or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or causes any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permits . 
It shall be the responsibility of any person, firm, or corporation, upon submittal of an application for a building permit for work regulated by this code, to register as a contractor with the Town of Flower Mound. This form must be submitted with the permit application. Said registration shall be upon forms supplied by the building official and shall become null and void on December 31st of each year. An appropriate fee for registration shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound. 
Any contractor registration regulated by this code may be placed on hold or suspended by the building official, thereby preventing any additional permits being issued to the contractor or applicant, if it is determined by the building official that corrective action is needed for compliance with the requirements of Chapter 18, Article II, Section 18-32. If any contractor registration regulated by this code is suspended, the procedures outlined in Chapter 18, Article II, shall apply. Any registration placed on hold more than three times in a calendar year may be subject to suspension by the building official . 
(i)  Section 105.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting Item Nos. 1, 2, 6, 10 and 12, from the list of items that are exempt from building permit requirements. 
(j)  Section 105.5 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 105.5. Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. For this section, suspended or abandoned will be defined as an elapsed time of 180 days between any two approved required inspections. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing, and justifiable cause demonstrated. Once a permit becomes invalid and before such building or work can be recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such building or work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the previously submitted and approved plans and specifications for such building or work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration of more than one year, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee. 
(k)  Section 109.4 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 109.4. Work commencing before permit issuance. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit , a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a citation and/or an investigation fee equal to the total permit fee for that project, and this citation and/or investigation fee shall be in addition to the required permit fees. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt the applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes nor from penalty prescribed by law for performing work without the required permit(s). 
(l)  Section 110.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 110.1. General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official , and such work shall remain visible and able to be accessed for inspection purposes until approved. Before any inspection is approved, all rights-of-way, streets, and alleys shall be clean and clear of mud, sand, concrete, and building materials. All trash, construction debris, and construction material on site shall be contained. In addition to the above requirements, toilet facilities shall be provided for construction workers, and such facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. Construction-worker toilet facilities of the non-sewer type shall conform to ANSI Z4.3. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor, or the owner's authorized agent to cause the work to remain visible and able to be accessed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(m)  Section 110.3.5 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting the exception to such Section as follows: 
Section 110.3.5. Lath and gypsum board inspection. Exception: Deleted. 
(n)  Section 110.3.11 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 110.3.11. Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. No building or structure or any portion of a building or structure shall be occupied by persons or possessions without first receiving final inspection and approval from the building official . 
(o)  Section 111.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 111.1. Use and Occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied by persons or possessions, and no change in the existing occupancy classification or change in tenant or change in business name or ownership of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
(p)  Section 113.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 113.1. General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The members of the Flower Mound Board of Adjustment are hereby appointed to serve as the Board of Appeals as provided by the International Building Code , 2018 edition. Any changes in membership of the Flower Mound Board of Adjustment shall likewise be reflected in the membership of said Board of Appeals. 
(q)  Section 202 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending the definitions of "ambulatory health care facility", "assisted living facilities", "atrium", "high-rise building" and creating a new definition for "construction trash and debris" to read as follows, each of which definitions shall be inserted into the list of definitions to replace the amended definition or add a new definition in alphabetical order: 
Section 202. Definitions. {Text of existing definitions save and except to the extent specifically amended hereby remains unchanged.} 
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing, or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individuals who are rendered incapable of self-preservation. This group may include but not be limited to the following: 
- Dialysis centers 
- Sedation dentistry 
- Surgery centers 
- Colonic centers 
- Psychiatric centers 
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a 24-hour basis, who because of age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment which provides personal care services. The occupants are capable of responding to an emergency situation without physical assistance from staff. 
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories… {Balance remains unchanged}. 
CONSTRUCTION TRASH AND DEBRIS. Any material generated by or from a construction site that has no useful purpose as determined by the administrative authority. 
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building having any floor used for human occupancy located more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
(r)  Section 303.1.3 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 303.1.3 Associated with Group E occupancies. A room or space used for assembly purposes that is associated with a Group E occupancy is not considered a separate occupancy, except when applying the assembly requirements of Chapter 10 and 11. 
(s)  Section 304.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding the following new occupancies to the list of business occupancies for Business Group B, which new occupancies shall be inserted therein in alphabetical order: 
Section 304.1. Business Group B. {List of existing occupancies remains unchanged.} 
Fire Stations 
Police Stations with detention for 5 or less 
(t)  Section 307.1.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a sentence to the end of Exception No. 4 to read as follows: 
Section 307.1.1. High Hazard Group H. Exception: 4. {existing text remains unchanged} …See also IFC chapter 12, Dry Cleaning Plant provisions. 
(u)  Section 403.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting Exception No. 3 in its entirety and providing a new Exception No. 3 to read as follows: 
Section 403.1. Applicability. Exception 3. Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.6. 
(v)  Section 403.3 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting Exception No. 2 as follows: 
Section 403.3. Automatic sprinkler systems. Exception 2. Deleted. 
(w)  Section 403.3.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (36.5 m) in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate. 
(x)  Section 404.5 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting the Exception in its entirety as follows: 
Section 404.5. Smoke control. Exception: Deleted. 
(y)  Section 406.3.3.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a sentence to read as follows: 
Section 406.3.3.1. Carport separation. {existing text remains unchanged} …A separation is not required between a Group R-2 and U carport provided that the carport is entirely open on all sides and that the distance between the two is at least 10 feet (3048mm). 
(z)  Table 506.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting footnote i. in its entirety read as follows: 
Table 506.2 Allowable Area Factor in Square Feet. Footnote i.: Deleted. 
(aa)  Section 506.3.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a sentence to the end of the existing text to read as follows: 
Section 506.3.1. Minimum percentage of perimeter. {existing text remains unchanged} … In order to be considered as accessible, if not in direct contact with a street or an approved fire lane , a minimum 10-foot-wide pathway meeting fire department access from the street or approved fire lane shall be provided. 
(bb)  Section 602.1.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a sentence to read as follows: 
Section 602.1.1. Minimum requirements. {existing text remains unchanged}… Where a building contains more than one distinct type of construction, the building shall comply with the most restrictive area, height, and stories, for the lesser type of construction or be separated by fire walls. 
(cc)  Section 708.4.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a sentence to read as follows: 
Section 708.4.2 Fireblocks and draftstops in combustible construction. Exception 1. {existing text remains unchanged} … Portions of buildings containing concealed spaces filled with noncombustible insulation as permitted for sprinkler omission shall not apply to this exception for draftstopping. 
(dd)  Section 712.1.9 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by replacing No. 4 to read as follows: 
Section 712.1.9 Two-story opening. 4. Is not open to a corridor in Group I and H occupancies. 
(ee)  Section 718.3 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by to read as follows: 
Section 718.3 Draftstopping in floors. Exception . Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. and provided that in combustible construction, sprinkler protection is provided in the floor space. 
(ff)  Section 718.4 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by to read as follows: 
Section 718.4 Draftstopping in attics. Exception . Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. and provided that in combustible construction, sprinkler protection is provided in the floor space. 
(gg)  Section 901.6.1.1. of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years: 
1.  The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be backflushed when foreign material is present, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems. 
2.  For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall: connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions properly; confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry standpipe; there is no required pressure criteria at the outlet; verify that check valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system. 
3.  Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised. 
4.  If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDCs as required by the fire code official. 
5.  Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as "Fifth Year" for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read "5 Year Standpipe Test" at a minimum. 
6.  The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed. 
7.  Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25. 
8.  Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions. 
9.  Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official. 
(hh)  Section 903.1.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with a new Section [F] 903.1.1 to read as follows: 
Section 903.1.1. Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard, or as approved by the fire code official. 
(ii)  Section 903.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows and by deleting the exception: 
Section 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12. Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED." 
(jj)  Section 903.2.9 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Section 903.2.9.3, entitled "Self-service storage facility," to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.9.3. Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-storage facilities. 
(kk)  Section 903.2.11 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending Section 903.2.11.3, entitled "Buildings more than 35 feet in height," and by adding new Sections 903.2.11.7, entitled "High-piled combustible storage," 903.2.11.8, entitled "Spray booths and rooms," and 903.2.11.9, entitled "Buildings over 5,000 sq. ft.," to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.11.3. Buildings more than 35 feet in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings with a floor level, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1510 of the International Building Code , that is located 35 feet (10,668 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
Exception: Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage. 
Section 903.2.11.7. High-piled combustible storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4,572 mm), see IFC Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply. 
Section 903.2.11.8. Spray booths and rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
Section 903.2.11.9. Buildings over 5,000 sq. ft. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all buildings with a building area over 5,000 sq. ft. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings. 
Exceptions: 1. Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code . 
(ll)  Section 903.3.1.1.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.1.1. Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction, or contains electrical equipment. 
1.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard. 
2.  Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the fire code official. 
3.  Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
4.  Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. 
(mm)  Section 903.3.1.2.3 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.2.3. Attached garages and attics. Sprinkler protection is required in attached garages and in the following attic spaces: 
1.  {existing text remains unchanged} 
2.  {existing text remains unchanged} 
3.  Attic spaces of buildings that are two or more stories in height above grade plane or above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
4.  Group R-4, Condition 2 occupancy attics not required by Item 1 or 3 to have sprinklers shall comply with one of the following: {existing text remains unchanged} 
(nn)  Section 903.3.1.3 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.3. NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings; Group R-3; Group R-4 Condition 1, and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law. 
(oo)  Section 903.3.1.4 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section. 
Section 903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, preaction, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces. 
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces where: 
1.  The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the building, and 
2.  Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard, and 
3.  The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level. 
Section 903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved by the fire code official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe. 
(pp)  Section 903.3.5 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a paragraph to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.5 Water supplies. {existing paragraph unchanged} … Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of the respective standards; however, every water-based fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference Section IFC 507.4 for additional design requirements. 
(qq)  Section 903.4 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows: 
Section 903.4. Sprinkler system supervision and alarms. {text of existing paragraph and exceptions remain unchanged.}… 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
(rr)  Section 903.4.2 of the International Building Code , 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph after the existing text to read as follows: 
Section 903.4.2. Alarms. {existing text remains unchanged} … 
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. 
(ss)  Section 905.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 905.2. Installation standards. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm. 
(tt)  Section 905.3 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Section 905.3.9, entitled "Building area," and adding an Exception to Section 905.3.9 to read as follows: 
Section 905.3.9. Building exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60,960 mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided 
Exception: 
1.  Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14. 
2.  R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors. 
(uu)  Section 905.4 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending Item 1, 3, and 5, and adding a new Item No. 7 to read as follows: 
Section 905.4. Location of Class I standpipe hose connection. 
1.  In every required interior exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
3.  In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building. 
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an interior exit stairway hose connection by a……{No change to remaining text.} 
5.  Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the roof or at the highest landing of a stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1011.12. 
7.  When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the structure and at two-hundred-foot (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
(vv)  Section 905.9 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph after the two listed exceptions to read as follows: 
Section 905.9. Valve supervision. {text of existing paragraph and two listed exceptions remain unchanged} … 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
(ww)  Section 907.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Section 907.1.4, entitled "Design standards," to read as follows: 
Section 907.1.4. Design standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke detectors shall have analog initiating devices. 
(xx)  Section 907.2.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 907.2.1. Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall: 
1.  Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking surface level, and 
2.  Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions. 
{existing exception remains unchanged} 
(yy)  Section 907.2.3 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending the first paragraph of 907.2.3, amending Exception No. 1, and adding a new Exception No. 1.1 to read as follows: 
Section 907.2.3. Group E. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' of open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
Exception: 
1.  A manual fire alarm system is not required in Group E occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or less. 
1.1  Residential in-home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2 ½ or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6.) 
{No change to remainder of exceptions.} 
(zz)  Section 907.2.12 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending the third exception to read as follows: 
Section 907.2.12 High-rise buildings. Exception 3. Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of the International Building Code; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants and similarly enclosed areas. 
(aaa)  Section 907.4.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending the first paragraph of 907.4.2 and adding a new Section 907.4.2.7, entitled "Type," to read as follows: 
Section 907.4.2 Manual fire alarm boxes. {Text unchanged}… Section 907.4.2.1 through 907.4.2.7. 
Section 907.4.2.7. Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double-action type. 
(bbb)  Section 907.6.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Section 907.6.1.1, entitled "Installation," to read as follows: 
Section 907.6.1.1. Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from a signaling line circuit interface device may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the interface device to the initiating device is ten feet or less. 
(ccc)  Section 907.6.3 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting all four exceptions as follows: 
Section 907.6.3. Initiating device identification. Exceptions 1 through 4. Deleted. 
(ddd)  Section 907.6.6 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end of the paragraph to read as follows: 
Section 907.6.6. Monitoring. {Text unchanged}… See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station. 
(eee)  Section 910.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending Exception No. 2 and 3 and adding a new subsection 910.2.3. with exceptions to read as follows: 
Section 910.2. Where required. Exception: 
2.  Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited. 
3.  Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*S)1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited. 
Section 910.2.3. Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as follows. 
1.  In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square feet (1394 m2) in single floor area. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
2.  In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification. 
Exceptions: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
(fff)  Section 910.3 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new subsection 910.3.4. to read as follows: 
Section 910.3.4 Vent operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3. 
Section 910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically. The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed. 
Exception: Manual only system per 910.2. 
Section 910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above ambient. 
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents. 
(ggg)  Section 910.4.3.1. of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 910.4.3.1. Makeup air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust. 
(hhh)  Section 910.4.4. of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated automatically by the automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual controls shall also be provided. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
(iii)  Section 912.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Section 912.2.3. to read as follows: 
912.2.3. Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection as the fire hose lies along an unobstructed path. 
(jjj)  Section 913.2.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new subsection 913.2.1.1 to read as follows: 
913.2.1.1 Fire Pump Room Access. When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as required by IFC Section 506.1. 
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by IFC Section 506.1. 
(kkk)  Section 1006.2.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a Section 1006.2.2.7 to read as follows: 
Section 1006.2.2.7. Electrical rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the electrical code as adopted. 
(lll)  Section 1009.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Exception No. 3 to read as follows: 
Section 1009.1. Accessible means of egress required. Exception: 
3.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State-registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be considered compliant with the requirements of Section 1009. 
(mmm)  Section 1010.1.9.5 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending Exception No. 3 and Exception No. 4 to read as follows: 
Section 1010.1.9.5. Bolt locks. Exceptions: 
3.  Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M, or S occupancy, {remaining existing text unchanged} . 
4.  Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M, or S occupancy, {remaining existing text unchanged} . 
(nnn)  Section 1015.8 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by changing item 1. to read as follows: 
Section 1015.8. Window openings. Item 1. 
1.  Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F 2006. 
(ooo)  Section 1020.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Exception No. 6 to read as follows: 
Section 1020.1. Construction. Exceptions: 6. In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate self-annunciating alarms audible in all areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm system where such system is provided. 
(ppp)  Section 1029.1.1.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting this section as follows: 
Section 1029.1.1.1 Spaces under grandstands and bleachers. Deleted. 
(qqq)  Section 1101.1. of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new exception to read as follows: 
Section 1101.1. Design. Exception: Projects approved through the Texas Architectural Barriers Program, either directly by the state or a licensed registered accessibility specialist shall be deemed in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(rrr)  Section 1202.1. of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 1202.1 General. Buildings shall be provided with natural ventilation in accordance with Section 1202.5, or mechanical ventilation in accordance with the International Mechanical Code . 
Where air infiltration rate in a dwelling unit is 5 air changes or less per hour when tested with a blower door at a pressure 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with Section 402.4.1.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code , the dwelling unit shall be ventilated by mechanical means in accordance with Section 403 of the International Mechanical Code . {remaining text unchanged} . 
(sss)  Table 1505.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending footnote "b" and deleting footnote "c" to read as follows: 
Table 1505.1. Minimum roof covering classification for types of construction. Footnote: b. Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on buildings of U occupancies having not more than 120 sq. ft. of projected roof area. When exceeding 120 sq. ft. of projected roof area, buildings of U occupancies may use non-rated non-combustible roof coverings. 
Table 1505.1. Minimum roof covering classification for types of construction. Footnote: c. Deleted. 
(ttt)  Section 1505.7 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting this section: 
Section 1505.7. Special purpose roofs. Deleted. 
(uuu)  Section 1511.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 1511.1. General. Materials and methods of applications used for recovering or replacing an existing roof covering shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15. All individual replacement shingles or shakes shall be in compliance with the rating required by Table 1505.1. 
{Text of exception unchanged} 
(vvv)  Section 1704.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 1704.2 Special inspections and tests. Where application is made to the Building Official for construction as specified in Section 105, the owner or the owner's authorized agent, or the registered design professional in responsible charge, other than the contractor, shall employ one or more approved agencies to provide special inspections and tests during construction on the types of work listed under Section 1705 and identify the approved agencies to the Building Official. The special inspector shall not be employed by the contractor. These special inspections and tests are in addition to the inspections identified by the Building Official that are identified in Section 110. 
{Text of exceptions unchanged} 
(www)  Section 1704.2.1. of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 1704.2.1 Special inspector qualifications. Prior to the start of construction and/or upon request, the approved agencies shall provide written documentation to the registered design professional in responsible charge and the building official demonstrating the competence and relevant experience or training of the special inspectors who will perform the special inspections and tests during construction. [Remainder unchanged] 
(xxx)  Section 1704.2.4. of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 1704.2.4 Report requirement. Approved agencies shall keep records of special inspections and tests. The approved agency shall submit reports of special inspections and tests to the Building Official upon request, and to the registered design professional in responsible charge. Individual inspection reports shall indicate that work inspected or tested was or was not completed in conformance to approved construction documents. [Remainder unchanged] 
(yyy)  Section 1704.2.5.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 1704.2.5.1. Fabricator approval. Special inspections during fabrications required by Section 1704 are not required where the work is done on the premises of a fabricator registered and approved to perform such work without special inspection. Approval shall be based upon review of the fabricator's written fabrication procedures and quality control manuals and periodic auditing of fabrication practices by an approved agency, or a fabricator that is enrolled in a nationally accepted inspections program. At completion of fabrication, the acceptable or approved fabricator shall submit a certificate of compliance to the owner or the owner's authorized agent or the registered design professional in responsible charge stating that the work was performed in accordance with the approved construction documents. The certificate of compliance shall also be made available to the Building Official upon request. 
(zzz)  Section 2901.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph to the end of the existing paragraph to read as follows: 
Section 2901.1. Scope. {existing text remains unchanged}… 
The provisions of this chapter are meant to work in coordination with the provisions of Chapter 4 of the International Plumbing Code. Should any conflict arise between the two chapters, the building official shall determine which provision applies. All Health Department required fixtures for food related occupancies are in addition to fixtures listed in Table 2902.1. 
(aaaa)  Section 2902.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph to the end of the existing paragraph to read as follows: 
Section 2902.1. Minimum number of fixtures. {existing text remains unchanged}… 
In other than E occupancies, the minimum number of fixtures in Table 2902.1 may be lowered, if requested in writing by the applicant, stating reasons for a reduced number, and approved by the building official . 
(bbbb)  Section 2902.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by changing Exception 2. to read as follows: 
Section 2902.2 Separate facilities. 2. Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and customers, of 25 or less. 
(cccc)  Section 2902.6 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Table 2902.6 Small occupancies. Drinking fountains are not required in M and B occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or less, and for dining and/or drinking establishments. 
(dddd)  Section 3001.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting this section: 
Section 3001.2. Emergency elevator communication systems for the deaf, hard of hearing and speech impaired. Deleted. 
(eeee)  Section 3002.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding two exceptions to read as follows: 
Section 3002.1. Hoistway enclosure protection. Exceptions: 
1.  Elevators wholly located within atriums complying with Section 404 shall not require hoistway enclosure protection. 
2.  Elevators in open or enclosed parking garages that serve only the parking garage, and complying with Sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively, shall not require hoistway enclosure protection. 
(ffff)  Section 3005.4 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph to the end of the existing first paragraph to read as follows: 
Section 3005.4. Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces. Elevator machine rooms, control rooms, control spaces and machinery spaces shall be enclosed with fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. {remaining text unchanged}… 
(gggg)  Section 3005.7 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 3005.7 Fire Protection in Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces. 
Section 3005.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system. The building shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, except as otherwise permitted by Section 903.3.1.1.1 and as prohibited by Section 3005.7.2.1. 
Section 3005.7.2.1 Prohibited locations. Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in machine rooms, elevator machinery spaces, control rooms, control spaces and elevator hoist-ways. 
Section 3005.7.2.2 Sprinkler system monitoring. The sprinkler system shall have a sprinkler control valve supervisory switch and water-flow initiating device provided for each floor that is monitored by the building's fire alarm system. 
Section 3005.7.3 Water protection. An approved method to prevent water from infiltrating into the hoistway enclosure from the operation of the automatic sprinkler system outside the elevator lobby shall be provided. 
Section 3005.7.4 Shunt trip. Means for elevator shutdown in accordance with Section 3005.5 shall not be installed. 
(hhhh)  Section 3005.8 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 3005.8 Storage. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room, control room, machinery spaces and/or control spaces. Provide approved signage at each entry to the above listed locations stating: "No Storage Allowed." 
(iiii)  Section 3006.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by changing Item 5. to read as follows: 
Section 3006.2 Hoistway opening protection required. Item 5. 
5.  The building is a high rise and the elevator hoistway is more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) in height. The height of the hoistway shall be measured from the lowest floor at or above grade to the highest floors served by the hoistway. 
(jjjj)  Section 3109.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 3109.1. General. Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of Sections 3109.2 through 3109.5 of the 2012 International Building Code and other applicable sections of this code as well as also complying with applicable state law. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 1.03; Ord. No. 3-99, §§ 1, 2, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 82-99, § 2, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 06-05, § 3, 1-18-2005; Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 12-11, § 3, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 20-14, § 3, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 32-16 , § 3, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 17-18 , § 3, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 28-19 , § 3, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 14-33. - Additional regulations. 
In addition to the regulations contained in the Uniform Building Code, 1997 edition, the following regulations and clarifications are also adopted: 
(1)  The requirements contained in the "Residential Construction Information Packet" attached hereto as Exhibit "B" and on file in the town secretary's office. 
(2)  The requirements contained in the "Commercial Construction Information Packet" attached hereto as Exhibit "C" and on file in the town secretary's office. 
(3)  The requirements contained in the "Lawn Sprinkler Requirements" information handout attached hereto as Exhibit "D" and on file in the town sscretary's office. 
(4)  The requirements contained in the "Swimming Pool Permits and Inspection Requirements" information handout attached hereto as Exhibit "E" and on file in the town secretary's office. 
(5)  The requirements contained in the "Accessory Building Requirements" information handout attached hereto as Exhibit "F" and on file in the town secretary's office. 
(6)  In all residentially zoned districts, except A and SF-E, all exterior walls and roofs shall be constructed of materials having an Underwriter's Laboratory class B or Uniform Building Code class 2 "stoned fired" retardant rating or better. 
(Ord. No. 82-99, § 4, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 14-34. - Board of Appeals 
The members of the board of adjustment are hereby appointed as the board of appeals as provided by the Uniform Building Code, 1997 edition, and any changes in membership of such board of adjustment shall likewise be reflected in the membership of such board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 82-99, § 3, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 14-35. - Restriction of business interests. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, while holding the office of building inspector or chief building official to engage, either directly or indirectly, in the business of sale, design, installation or maintenance of any building or structure in the town pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 1.04)  
Sec. 14-36. - Display of final plats in sales offices. 
All developers and/or builders shall display a true and accurate copy of the approved final plat of the subdivision they are representing, as recorded and filed in the map and plat records of the county. The plat shall be accompanied by the names and phone numbers of the developer, builder and the community development department of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 1.05)  
Secs. 14-37—14-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 14-71. - International Plumbing Code and International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
The International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, and the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, a copy of each of which is on file in the office of the town secretary, are hereby adopted and designated as the plumbing codes of the town, the same as though the provisions of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, and the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, were copied at length in this section, subject to the deletions, amendments, and additions provided in section 14-72. The term "plumbing code" refers to both codes as one combined code. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1 (2.01), 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 20-05, § 2, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 07-08, § 2, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 13-11, § 2, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 21-14, § 2, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 33-16 , § 2, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 29-19 , § 2, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 14-72. - Local amendments to International Plumbing Code and International Fuel Gas Code. 
The International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, and the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, are hereby amended by amending only the enumerated sections and provisions, as follows, and all sections and provisions not expressly amended or deleted shall remain in full force and effect: 
(a)  The Table of Contents under Chapter 7, Sanitary drainage, 714 of the International Plumbing Code , 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
713 Engineered Drainage Design……………….69 
(b)  Section 101.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 101.1. Title. These regulations, combined with the regulations located in the International Fuel Gas Code , shall be known as the plumbing code of the town, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(c)  Section 101.5 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 101.5. License and registration required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make any installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or remodel of any plumbing system regulated by this code without having registered a valid Texas Master Plumber's License, or other applicable license, with the town. Said registration shall be upon forms supplied by the building official and shall become null and void on December 31st of each year. If appropriate, a fee for registration shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Exception: Any residential property owner who, at his legal residence, desires to personally make or perform any installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or remodel of any plumbing system regulated by this code shall be exempt from paying a registration fee. For this section, legal residence shall be defined as property for which a property owner shows proof of a homestead exemption. 
Any contractor registration regulated by this code may be placed on hold or suspended by the building official, preventing any additional permits from being issued, if it is determined by the building official that corrective action is needed for compliance with the requirements of section 18-32 of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound. If any contractor registration regulated by this code is suspended, the procedures outlined in Chapter 18, Article II, of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound, shall apply. Any registration placed on hold more than three times in a calendar year may be subject to suspension by the building official. 
The supervising master or journeyman plumber shall be on the job site at all times while plumbing work is being performed. The ratio of helpers, apprentice plumbers, or otherwise unlicensed plumbers shall not exceed three (3) unlicensed plumbers to one (1) supervising master or journeyman plumber. 
(d)  Section 102.8 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 102.8. Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in chapter 15, and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC electrical code shall mean the electrical code as adopted. 
(e)  Section 106.5.3 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 106.5.3. Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work has commenced for a period of 180 days. For this section, suspended or abandoned will be defined as an elapsed time between any two approved required inspections. Once a permit becomes invalid and before such building or work can be recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such building or work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such building or work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration of more than one year, the permittee shall submit a new application and pay a new full permit fee. 
Exception: Water heater and boiler replacement permits must receive a final inspection within 10 days of installation. 
(f)  Section 106.6.2 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 106.6.2. Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as adopted by the town. 
(g)  Section 106.6.3 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 106.6.3. Fee refunds. The building official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refunding of fees. 
(h)  Section 109 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting the entire section and replacing it with the following provision to read as follows: 
Section 109.1. Application for appeal . Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official to the board of appeals established by ordinance. The board shall be governed by the enabling ordinance. 
(i)  Section 305.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 305.1. Protection against contact. Metallic piping, except for cast iron, ductile iron and galvanized steel, shall not be placed in direct contact with steel framing members, concrete or cinder walls and floors or other masonry. Metallic piping shall not be placed in direct contact with corrosive soil. Where sheathing is used to prevent direct contact, the sheathing shall have a thickness of not less than 0.008 inch (8 mil) (0.203 mm) and the sheathing shall be made of approved material. Where sheathing protects piping that penetrates concrete or masonry walls or floors, the sheathing shall be installed in a manner that allows movement of the piping within the sheathing. 
(j)  Section 305.4.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 305.4.1. Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade. 
(k)  Section 305.7 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 305.7. Protection of components of plumbing systems. Components of a plumbing system installed within 3 feet along alleyways, driveways, parking garages, or other locations in a manner in which they could be exposed to damage shall be recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner. 
(l)  Sections 312.10.1 and 312.10.2 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 312.10.1. Cross-Connection Control Program 
A.  General . No water service connection shall be made to any establishment where a potential or actual contamination hazard exists unless the water supply is protected in accordance with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality's Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems ("TCEQ Rules") and this code. The water purveyor shall discontinue water service if a required backflow prevention assembly is not installed, maintained, and tested in accordance with the TCEQ Rules and this code. 
B.  Backflow prevention assembly installation, testing, and maintenance. 
(1)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester and certified to be operating within specifications. Backflow prevention assemblies which are installed to provide protection against health hazards shall be registered with the town and shall be tested and certified to be operating within specifications at least annually by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester. Such registration shall be effective annually and subject to the fee specified in Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound. 
(2)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and tested in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14), or The University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control. 
(3)  Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Original forms of such test, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept and submitted to the town within five (5) working days of the test, repair, or overhaul of each backflow prevention assembly. 
(4)  No backflow prevention assembly or device shall be removed from use, relocated, or other assembly or device substituted without the approval of the town. Whenever the existing assembly or device is moved from the present location or cannot be repaired, the backflow assembly or device shall be replaced with a backflow prevention assembly or device that complies with this section, the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14), current edition, The University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current edition, or the current plumbing code, whichever control is more stringent. 
(5)  Test gauges used for backflow prevention assembly testing shall be calibrated at least annually in accordance with the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14), current edition, or The University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current edition. The original calibration form must be submitted to the town within five (5) working days after calibration. 
(6)  A recognized backflow prevention assembly tester must hold a current endorsement from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality ("TCEQ" or "Commission"). 
(7)  Annual inspections shall be made of all backflow prevention assemblies and air gaps to determine whether they are operable. In the absence of local provisions, the owner is responsible to ensure that testing is performed. 
(8)  Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer assemblies, double check-valve assemblies, pressure vacuum breaker assemblies, reduced pressure detector fire protection backflow prevention assemblies, double check detector fire protection backflow prevention assemblies, hose connection backflow preventers, and spill-proof vacuum breakers shall be tested at the time of installation, immediately after repairs or relocation, and at least annually. The testing procedure shall be performed in accordance with applicable local provisions. In the absence of local provisions, the owner is responsible to ensure that testing is done in accordance with one of the following standards: 
ASSE 5013; ASSE 5015; ASSE 5020; ASSE 5047; ASSE 5048; ASSE 5052; ASSE 5056; CSA B64.10; or, CSA B64.10.1. 
C.  Customer service inspections. 
(1)  A customer service inspection shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service to all new construction, on any existing service when the water purveyor has reason to believe that cross-connections or other contaminant hazards exist, or after any material improvement, correction, or addition to the private water distribution facilities. 
(2)  Only individuals with the following credentials shall be recognized as capable of conducting a customer service inspection: 
(a)  Plumbing Inspectors and Water Supply Protection Specialists that have been licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners. 
(b)  Certified Waterworks Operators and members of other water-related professional groups who have completed a training course, passed an examination administered by the Commission or its designated agent, and hold a current endorsement issued by the Commission. 
(3)  The Customer Service Inspection must certify that: 
(a)  No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a potential source of contamination exists. 
(b)  Potential sources of contamination have been isolated from the public water system by a properly installed air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly. 
(c)  No cross-connection between the public water supply and a private water source exists. (Where an actual properly installed air gap is not maintained between the public water supply and a private water supply, an approved reduced pressure-zone backflow prevention assembly is properly installed and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and testing by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester.) 
(d)  No connection which allows water to be returned to the public drinking water supply exists. 
(e)  No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than 8% lead has been used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use. 
(f)  No solder or flux which contains more than 0.2% lead has been used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use. (A minimum of one lead test shall be performed for each inspection.) 
D.  Certified backflow prevention assembly tester responsibilities. 
(1)  No certified backflow assembly tester shall operate within the town without first registering with the town. 
(2)  A registration shall remain in effect provided: 
(a)  The tester maintains certification by the TCEQ; and 
(b)  Registration is not revoked by the town. 
(3)  A tester shall annually renew his/her registration with the town. If a certification remains expired for a period of one year, the tester shall reestablish registration eligibility. 
(4)  Each applicant for registration shall: 
(a)  Provide proof of current certification in the State of Texas. 
(b)  Provide evidence to establish that the applicant has the necessary tools and equipment to properly test backflow prevention assemblies. 
(c)  Submit a list identifying all test gauges by the name of the manufacturer, model number, and the serial numbers of each gauge that will be used in testing backflow assemblies. 
(d)  Comply with and conform to all requirements of Chapter 18, Article II, Section 18-31, of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound. 
(5)  A registered backflow prevention assembly tester shall: 
(a)  Annually have each recorded test kit tested for accuracy and calibrated according to TCEQ regulations, and submit a copy of the test results at the time of registration or renewal. 
(b)  Perform competent and accurate certifications of each backflow prevention assembly tested and shall submit complete reports thereof to the town. 
(c)  List registered serial numbers of test gauges on tests and maintenance reports prior to submitting them to the town. 
(d)  Not change the design or operation characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly. 
(e)  Submit a copy of test results to the town within 15 days of testing. 
(f)  Maintain testing and repair records for a minimum of three years. 
(6)  After notice, the town may revoke a registration if the town determines that the tester: 
(a)  Has made false, incomplete, or inaccurate assembly testing reports; 
(b)  Has used inaccurate gauges; 
(c)  Has used improper testing procedures; 
(d)  Is not in compliance with safety regulations; 
(e)  Has failed to submit the required information on his/her test kits or failed to calibrate gauges annually as required by subsection (5) above; 
(f)  Has violated any other provision of this code; or 
(g)  Is not in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 18, Article II, Section 18-32 of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound. 
(m)  Section 314.2.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 314.2.1. Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils and evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal. … {text unchanged} … Condensate shall not discharge into a street, alley, sidewalk, rooftop, or other areas so as to cause a nuisance. 
(n)  Section 401.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended, in part, by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Section 401.1. Scope. {Existing paragraph remains unchanged.} The provisions of this chapter are meant to work in coordination with the provisions of the building code. Should any conflicts arise between the two chapters, the code official shall determine which provision applies. 
(o)  Section 403.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended, in part, by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Section 403.1. Minimum number of fixtures. {Existing paragraph remains unchanged.} 
In other than E occupancies, the minimum number of fixtures in Table 403.1 may be lowered, if requested in writing by the applicant, stating reasons for a reduced number, and approved by the building official. 
(p)  Section 403.2 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by changing Exception 2. to read as follows: 
Section 403.2 Separate facilities. 
2.  Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and customers, of 25 or less. 
(q)  Section 403.5 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 403.5. Small occupancies. Drinking fountains are not required in M and B Occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or less, and for dining and/or drinking establishments. 
(r)  Section 409.2 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 409.2. Water connection. The water supply to a commercial dishwashing machine shall be protected against backflow by an air gap or backflow preventer in accordance with Section 608. {Remaining text unchanged.} 
(s)  Section 413.4 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 413.4. Required location. Floor drains shall be installed in the following areas. 
1.  In public coin-operated laundries and in the central washing facilities of multiple family dwellings, the rooms containing automatic clothes washers shall be provided with floor drains located to readily drain the entire floor area. Such drains shall have a minimum outlet of not less than 3 inches (76mm) in diameter. 
2.  Commercial kitchens. In lieu of floor drains in commercial kitchens, the code official may accept floor sinks. 
(t)  Section 419.3 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 419.3. Surrounding material. Wall and floor space to a point 2 feet (610 mm) in front of a urinal lip and 4 feet (1219 mm) above the floor and at least 2 feet (610 mm) to each side of the urinal shall be waterproofed with a smooth, readily cleanable, hard, nonabsorbent material. 
(u)  Section 502.6 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 502.6. Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine, or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2,438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) that is installed not more than ten (10) feet (3,048 mm) above the ground or floor level, may be accessible using a portable ladder. 
Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting and a receptacle outlet shall be provided. 
(v)  Section 504.6 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 504.6. Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve, or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge through an air gap. 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufacturer's installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
5.  Discharge to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors. 
6.  Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage. 
7.  Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants. 
8.  Not be trapped. 
9.  Be installed so as to flow by gravity. 
10.  Not terminate less than 6 inches or more than 24 inches (152 mm) above grade nor more than 6 inches above the waste receptor. 
11.  Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping. 
12.  Not have valves or tee fittings. 
13.  Be constructed of those materials listed in Section 605.4 or materials tested, rated, and approved for such use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1. 
14.  Be one nominal size larger than the size of the relief valve outlet, where the relief valve discharge piping is installed with insert fittings. The outlet end of such tubing shall be fastened in place. 
(w)  Section 604.4.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 604.4.1. State maximum flow rate. Where the state-mandated maximum flow rate is more restrictive than those of this section, the state flow rate shall take precedence. 
(x)  Section 606.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended, in part, as follows: 
Section 606.1. Location of full-open valves. Delete items 4 and 5 from the list. 
(y)  Section 606.2 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 606.2. Location of shutoff valves. Shutoff valves shall be installed in the following locations: 
1.  On the fixture supply to each plumbing fixture other than bathtubs and showers in one- and two-family residential occupancies, and other than in individual sleeping units that are provided with unit shutoff valves in hotels, motels, boarding houses, and similar occupancies. 
2.  On the water supply pipe to each appliance or mechanical equipment. 
(z)  Section 608.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 608.1. General. A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed, and maintained in such a manner so as to prevent contamination from non-potable liquids, solids, or gases being introduced into the potable water supply through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the system. Backflow preventer applications shall conform to applicable local regulations, table 608.1, and as specifically stated in sections 608.2 through 608.16.10. 
(aa)  Section 608.17.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 608.17.1. Beverage dispensers. The water supply connection to beverage dispensers shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer (RPZ) or an air gap. 
(bb)  Section 608.17.4 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Section 608.17.4. Connection to automatic fire sprinkler system and standpipe system. {First paragraph and exceptions remain unchanged}… 
The required backflow prevention device shall be installed in an approved; freeze protected, above ground structure, and should be monitored. 
(cc)  Section 608.17.5 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Section 608.17.5. Connections to lawn irrigation systems. {First paragraph unchanged}… 
All lawn sprinkling systems shall be equipped with a temperature sensing device that stops the flow of water through the lawn sprinkling system when the ambient temperature is thirty-eight degrees Fahrenheit (38° F) or less and a device that stops the flow of water through the lawn sprinkling system when one-quarter inch (¼") or more of rain falls. Further, pursuant to Section 551.006 of the Texas Local Government Code, all lawn sprinkling systems shall comply with Section 1903.053 of the Texas Occupations Code, and any rules adopted by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality under that section. 
(dd)  Section 608.18 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 608.18. Protection of individual water supplies. An individual water supply shall be located and constructed so as to be safeguarded against contamination in accordance with applicable local regulations. In the absence of other local regulations, installation shall be in accordance with sections 608.17.1 through 608.17.8. 
(ee)  Section 610.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding an exception to read as follows: 
Section 610.1. General. 
Exception: With prior approval, the code official may waive this requirement when deemed unnecessary. 
(ff)  Section 705.10.2 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting the exceptions as follows: 
Section 705.10.2. Solvent cementing. 
Exceptions: Deleted 
(gg)  Section 712.5 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 712.5. Dual pump system. All sumps shall be automatically discharged and, when in any "public use" occupancy where the sump serves more than 10 fixture units, shall be provided with dual pumps or ejectors arranged to function independently in case of overload or mechanical failure. For storm drainage sumps and pumping systems, see section 1113. 
(hh)  Section 713 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 713.
ENGINEERED DRAINAGE DESIGN 
(ii)  Section 713.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 713.1 Design of drainage system. The sizing, design and layout of the drainage system shall be designed by a registered engineer using approved design methods. 
(jj)  Section 803.3 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 803.3. Special waste pipe, fittings, and components. Pipes, fittings, and components receiving or intended to receive the discharge of any fixture into which acid or corrosive chemicals are placed shall be constructed of CPVC, high silicone iron, PP, PVDF, chemical resistant glass, or glazed ceramic materials. 
(kk)  Section 903.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.1. Roof extensions. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least six inches (6") (152 mm) above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet (7') (2134 mm) above the roof. 
(ll)  Section 918.8 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 918.8 Where permitted. This section shall only be used with pre-approval from the building official. A request, in writing, must be submitted with the permit application listing all reasons why open air venting cannot be utilized. If approved by the building official … {remainder of section unchanged}. 
(mm)  Section 1002.10 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby deleted as follows: 
Section 1002.10. Plumbing in mental health centers. Deleted. 
(nn)  Sections 1003.3.5, 1003.3.5.1, 1003.3.5.2, 1003.3.6, 1003.3.7, and 1003.3.8 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, are hereby deleted and replaced with a new Section 1003.3.5 to read as follows: 
Section 1003.3.5. Sizing and location of traps and interceptors. When in the determination of the building official a device is needed, the following sizing, definitions, and locations shall apply. 
Both interceptor and trap location must be approved and located outside the building. A design must be submitted at time of permit application. 
For this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Grease interceptor- An interceptor of at least 750 gallons. 
Grease trap- A device designed to retain grease from one (1) to a maximum of six (6) fixtures. If automatic dishwasher is used, fixture count is limited to a maximum of four (4) fixtures. 
Single serve kitchen- A kitchen where the meals are served on disposable plates and utensils. 
GREASE TRAPS: 
If your system is within the definition for a grease trap, use the following sizing formula: 
Total gallons per minute × .40 × 12 = Grease trap capacity in gallons. 
Fixture 	Fixture 
Abbreviation 	Gallons 
per 
minute 
Three compartment sink 	3CP 	15 
Handwash sink 	HWS 	7.5 
Mop sink 	MS 	22.5 
Floor drain 	FD 	15 
Prep sink 	PS 	7.5 
Soaking sink 	SS 	7.5 
Dishwasher 	DW 	22.5 
 
GREASE INTERCEPTORS: 
If your system does not fall under the definition of grease trap, the following formula must be used: 
Sizing Formula 
Number of meals per peak hour × Waste Flow rate × Retention time × Storage factor = Interceptor gallon capacity 
Meals served at peak hour * 
Waste flow rate 
(a)  With dishwashing machine 6 gal. 
(b)  Without dishwashing machine 5 gal. 
(c)  Single serve kitchen 2 gal. 
Retention time 
(a)  Commercial kitchen waste 
Dishwasher————- 2.5 hours 
(b)  Single serve kitchen 1.5 hours 
Storage factor for fully equipped commercial kitchen - hours of operation 
8 hours - 1 
16 hours - 2 
24 hours - 3 
Single serve kitchen - 1.5 
* Meals served at peak hour may be obtained by the total number of fixed seats multiplied by 60 and divided by the estimated time a patron takes to eat. A restaurant which moves people quickly may have a seating time from 30 minutes to 45 minutes. Another may be from 90 minutes to 120 minutes. Where establishments have no fixed seating, the occupant load in the dining area must be used. For buildings with drive-through windows, an additional 60 occupants or seats must be added to peak meals per hour. 
(oo)  Section 1101.8 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 1101.8. Cleanouts required. Cleanouts or manholes shall be installed in the building storm drainage system and shall comply with the provisions of this code for sanitary drainage pipe cleanouts. 
(pp)  Section 1106.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 1106.1. General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building storm sewers, and any horizontal branches of such drains or sewers shall be based on six (6) inches per hour rainfall rate. 
(qq)  Section 1108.3 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 1108.3. Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with section 1106. Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for which the roof was designed as determined by Section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not have an opening dimension of less than four (4) inches (102mm). The flow through the primary system shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system. 
(rr)  Section 1202.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting the exceptions as follows: 
Section 1202.1. Nonflammable medical gas. Exceptions 1 and 2. Deleted. 
(ss)  Section 102.2 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding an exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Existing dwelling units shall comply with Section 621.2. 
(tt)  Section 102.8 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 102.8. Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8, and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the electrical code as adopted. 
(uu)  Section 306.5 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended, in part, by changing the first paragraph to read as follows: 
Section 306.5. Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring access or appliances are installed on roofs or elevated structures at an aggregate height exceeding sixteen (16) feet (4,877 mm), such access shall be provided by a permanent approved means of access. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than twelve (12) feet (2,438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliance's level service space. Such access shall… {bulk of section to read the same} …on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope). {Remainder of section remains unchanged.} 
(vv)  Section 306.5.1 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 306.5.1. Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are installed on a roof having a slope of 3 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) or greater and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code. 
(ww)  Section 306.7 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 306.7. Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine, or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2,438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) that is installed not more than ten (10) feet (3,048 mm) above the ground or floor level, may be accessible with a portable ladder. 
Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with section 306.3.1. 
(xx)  Section 401.5 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Section 401.5. Identification. {Existing paragraph remains unchanged.} 
Both ends of each section of medium pressure corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel, and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING 
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure 
Do Not Remove" 
(yy)  Section 402.3 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding an exception to read as follows: 
Section 402.3. Sizing. Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of ½ inch (18EHD). 
(zz)  Section 404.12 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 404.12. Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (18") (458 mm) below grade to the top of the pipe. 
(aaa)  Section 404.12.1. of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 404.12.1. Individual outdoor appliances. Deleted. 
(bbb)  Section 406.1 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 406.1. General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the code official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power, and labor necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder, and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. 
(ccc)  Section 406.4 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 406.4. Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a monometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. 
(ddd)  Section 406.4.1 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 406.4.1. Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one half (3½) inches, a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of three (3) psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half (3½) inches, a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed twenty (20) psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing. 
(eee)  Section 406.4.2 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 406.4.2. Test duration. Test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the building official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches of water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the building official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. 
(fff)  Section 409.1.4 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 409.1.4. Valves in CSST installations . Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration, but in no case greater than twelve (12) inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
(ggg)  Section 410.1 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a second paragraph and exception to read as follows: 
Section 410.1. Pressure regulators. {Existing paragraph remains unchanged.} 
Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in section 306. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
(hhh)  Section 621.2 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding an exception to read as follows: 
Section 621.2. Prohibited use. 
Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the code official, unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in Section 108.7. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1(2.04), 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 75-02, § 1, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 20-05, § 3, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 07-08, § 3, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 01-09, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 13-11, § 3, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 21-14, § 3, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 33-16 , § 3, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 29-19 , § 3, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 14-73. - Master plumber's license required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make any installation, alternation, repair, replacement, or remodel of any plumbing system regulated by this Code without having registered a valid Texas Master Plumber's License with the town. Such registration shall be upon forms supplied by the chief building official and shall become null and void on December 31 of each year. An appropriate fee for registration shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of this Code. 
Exception: Any residential property owner who, at his legal residence, desires to make any installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or remodel of any plumbing system regulated by this Code shall be exempt from registration. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1(2.02), 3-5-2001)  
Sec. 14-74. - Supervision of unlicensed plumbers. 
The supervising master or journeyman plumber shall be on the job site at all times while plumbing work is being performed. The ratio of helper, apprentice plumbers or otherwise unlicensed plumbers shall not exceed three unlicensed plumbers to one supervising master or journeyman plumber. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 1(2.03), 3-5-2001)  
Sec. 14-75. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. Each day any such violation or violations exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 4, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 13-11, § 6, 4-18-2011)  
Secs. 14-76—14-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Contractor License Law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8861. 
 
Sec. 14-101. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
The International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the town secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the mechanical code of the town, the same as though the provisions of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, were copied at length in this section, subject to the deletions, amendments, and additions provided in section 14-102. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1(3.01), 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 21-05, § 2, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 08-08, § 2, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 14-11, § 2, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 22-14, § 2, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 34-16 , § 2, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 30-19 , § 2, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 14-102. - Local amendments to International Mechanical Code. 
The International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending only the enumerated sections and provisions, as follows, and all sections and provisions not expressly amended or deleted shall remain in full force and effect: 
(a)  Section 101.1 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code of the town, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(b)  Section 101.5 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 101.5. License and registration required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make or perform any installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or remodel of any mechanical system regulated by this code without having registered a valid Texas Mechanical License, or other applicable license, with the town. Said registration shall be upon forms supplied by the building official and shall become null and void on December 31st of each year. An appropriate fee for registration shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Exception: Any residential property owner who, at his legal residence, desires to personally make or perform any installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or remodel of any mechanical system regulated by this code shall be exempt from paying a registration fee. For this section, legal residence shall be defined as property for which a property owner shows proof of a homestead exemption. 
Any contractor registration regulated by this code may be placed on hold or suspended by the building official preventing any additional permits being issued if it is determined by the building official that corrective action is needed for compliance with the requirements of Chapter 18, Article II, Section 18-32, of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound. If any contractor registration regulated by this code is suspended, the procedures outlined in Chapter 18, Article II, of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound shall apply. Any registration placed on hold more than three times in a calendar year may be subject to suspension by the building official. 
(c)  Section 102.8 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 102.8. Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in chapter 15, and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC electrical code shall mean the electrical code as adopted. 
(d)  Section 106.4.3 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 106.4.3. Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance. Similarly, every permit issued shall become invalid if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work has commenced for a period of 180 days. For this section, suspended or abandoned will be defined as an elapsed time between any two approved required inspections. Once a permit becomes invalid and before such building or work can be recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such building or work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such building or work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration of more than one year, the permittee shall submit a new application and pay a new full permit fee. 
(e)  Section 106.5.2 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 106.5.2. Fee schedule. The fees for all mechanical work shall be as adopted by the town. 
(f)  Section 106.5.3 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 106.5.3. Fee refunds. The building official shall establish a policy authorizing the refunding of fees. 
(g)  Sections 109.1 through 109.7 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, are hereby amended by deleting such sections in their entirety and replacing them with the following provision, to read as follows: 
Section 109.1. Application for appeal . Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official to the board of appeals established by ordinance. 
(h)  Section 306.5 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 306.5. Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, an a permanent interior or exterior means of access shall be provided. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 8 12 feet (2438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall… {Remainder unchanged.} 
(i)  Section 306.5.1 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 306.5.1. Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are installed on a roof having a slope of 3 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) or greater and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code. 
(j)  Section 306.6 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 306.6. Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine, or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2,438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A maximum 10-gallon water heater (or larger with approval) may be accessed through a lay-in ceiling when the water heater is installed not more than 10 feet (3,048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with section 306.3.1. 
(k)  Section 307.2.3 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by changing item #2 to read as follows: 
2.  A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan provided with the equipment. Such overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher level than the primary drain connection. However, the conspicuous point shall not create a hazard, such as dripping over a walking surface or other areas so as to create a nuisance. 
(l)  Section 403.2.1 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new item #5, to read as follows: 
5.  Toilet rooms within private dwellings that contain only a water closet, lavatory, or combination thereof may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
(m)  Section 501.3 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a fourth exception to read as follows: 
4.  Toilet room exhaust ducts may terminate in a warehouse or shop area when infiltration of outside air is present. 
(n)  Section 607.5.1 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 607.5.1. Fire walls. Ducts and air transfer openings permitted in fire walls in accordance with section 705.11 of the International Building Code shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing. For hazardous exhaust systems, see Sections 510.1 through 510.9. 
(Ord. No. 21-05, § 3, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 08-08, § 3, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 14-11, § 3, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 22-14, § 3, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 34-16 , § 3, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 30-19 , § 3, 7-15-2019)  
Secs. 14-103—14-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ELECTRICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 70. 
 
Sec. 14-131. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
The following document, copies of which are on file in the office of the town secretary, being marked and designated as the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, or maintenance of electrical systems, wiring, or electrical equipment within the Town of Flower Mound, Texas; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. 
(Ord. No. 73-01, § 1, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 07-05, § 2, 1-18-2005; Ord. No. 63-07, § 2, 8-20-2007; Ord. No. 03-10, § 2, 1-21-2010; Ord. No. 17-11, § 2, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 07-15 , § 2, 2-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-132. - Amendments to the National Electrical Code. 
The following amendments shall supersede all requirements of the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition. Where an amendment is not clear or is silent regarding a certain requirement, the requirements of the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, must be met. 
(a)  Disconnection. 
The electrical service provider must disconnect the electrical service to any building or premises, except private residences and duplex apartments, each time such building or premises changes ownership, is leased, or changes occupancy, and it shall not again supply electricity to such building or premises until authorized to do so by the building official. The owners or the new occupants of such buildings or premises must make application to the building official for an inspection. 
(b)  Connection to electricity without building official approval. 
It is unlawful for any person, including the electrical service provider, to connect to a supply of electricity or to supply electricity to any electrical equipment that requires a permit for its installation, or which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building official, or, except for private residences, which has been disconnected for any reason whatsoever, until such connection has been authorized by the building official. 
(c)  Article 100 of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby amended by adding the definition, "Engineering Supervision" and amending the definition "Intersystem Bonding Termination" to read as follows: 
Engineering Supervision. Supervision by a qualified professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas, engaged primarily in the design or maintenance of electrical installations. 
Intersystem Bonding Termination. A device that provides a means for connecting bonding conductors for communication systems and other systems such as metallic gas piping systems to the grounding electrode system. 
(d)  Article 110.2 of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby amended by deleting said provision and replacing it with a new Article 110.2 to read as follows: 
Article 110.2. Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by this Code shall be acceptable only if approved. Approval of equipment may be evident by listing and labeling of equipment by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab (NRTL) with a certification mark of that laboratory or a qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ. 
Exception: Unlisted equipment that is relocated to another location within a jurisdiction or is field modified is subject to the approval by the AHJ. This approval may be by a field evaluation by a NRTL or qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ. 
Informational Note No. 1: See 90.7, Examination of Equipment for Safety, and 110.3, Examination, Identification, Installation, and Use of Equipment. See definitions of Approved, Identified, Labeled, and Listed. 
(e)  Article 210.52(G)(1) of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1) Garages. In each attached garage and in each detached garage with electric power. At least one receptacle outlet must be installed for each car space. 
(f)  Article 230.71(A) of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new exception at the end of this provision to read as follows: 
Exception: Multi-occupant buildings. Individual service disconnecting means is limited to six for each occupant. The number of individual disconnects at one location may exceed six. 
(g)  Article 240.91 of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby amended by deleting this section: 
Article 240.91. Deleted. 
(h)  Article 300.11(A) of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new exception immediately following said provision to read as follows: 
Exception: Ceiling grid support wires may be used for structural supports when the associated wiring is located in that area, not more than two raceways or cables supported per wire, with a maximum nominal metric designation 16 (trade size ½"). 
(i)  Article 310.15(B)(7) of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new sentence to the end of said provision to read as follows: 
(7) 120/240-volt, Single-Phase Dwelling Services and Feeders. This Article shall not be used in conjunction with 220.82. 
(j)  Article 500.8(A)(3) of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby amended by deleting said provision in its entirety and replacing it with a new Article 500.8(A)(3) to read as follows: 
(3) Articles 500 through 504 require equipment construction and installation that ensure safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more than ordinary care with regard to installation and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 2: Since there is no consistent relationship between explosion properties and ignition temperature, the two are independent requirements. 
Informational Note No. 3: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Explosion proof or dust-ignition proof equipment may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than -25°C (-13°F) unless they are identified for low-temperature service. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified as Class I, Division 1, at normal ambient temperature. 
(A) Suitability. Suitability of identified equipment is determined by one of the following: 
(1)  Equipment listing or labeling. 
(2)  Evidence of equipment evaluation from a qualified testing laboratory or inspection agency concerned with product evaluation. 
(3)  Evidence acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction such as a manufacturer's self-evaluation or an engineering judgment signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas. 
Informational Note: Additional documentation for equipment may include certificates demonstrating compliance with applicable equipment standards, indicating special conditions of use, and other pertinent information. 
(k)  Article 505.7(A) of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
(A) Implementation of Zone Classification System. Classification of areas, engineering and design, selection of equipment and wiring methods, installation, and inspection must be performed by a qualified professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas. 
(l)  Article 517.30 of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby amended by amending (G) and adding (H), to read as follows: 
(G) Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the equipment branch of the essential electrical system must be coordinated for the period of time that a fault's duration extends beyond 0.1 second. 
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective devices, where only one overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective devices exists on the transformer secondary. 
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating) in series. 
Informational Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not cover the full range of overcurrent conditions. 
(H) Selective Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the life safety and critical branches of the essential electrical system must be selectively coordinated with all supply-side overcurrent protective devices. 
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective devices, where only one overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective devices exists on the transformer secondary. 
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating) in series. 
Informational Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not cover the full range of overcurrent conditions. 
(m)  Article 680.25(A)(1) of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby amended by adding two new wiring methods as items (7) and (8) to read as follows and by deleting the exception: 
(7) Nonmetallic-sheathed cable 
(8) Type SE cable 
Exception: Deleted. 
(Ord. No. 73-01, § 2, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 1-18-2005; Ord. No. 63-07, § 3, 8-20-2007; Ord. No. 03-10, § 3, 1-21-2010; Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 07-15 , § 3, 2-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-133. - License requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make any installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or remodel of any electrical system regulated by this code without having registered a valid Texas Master Electrical License with the town. Said registration shall be upon forms supplied by the building official and shall become null and void on December 31 of each year. An appropriate fee for registration shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Exception: Any residential property owner who, at his legal residence, desires to make any installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or remodel of any electrical system regulated by this code shall be exempt from paying a registration fee. For this section, legal residence shall be defined as a property for which a property owner can show proof of a homestead exemption. 
The supervising master or journeyman electrician shall be on the job site at all times while electrical work is being performed. The ratio of helpers, apprentice electricians, or otherwise unlicensed electricians shall not exceed three unlicensed electricians to one supervising master or journeyman electrician. 
A master electrician shall only register his license with one electrical company within the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 4.04; Ord. No. 73-01, § 3, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 07-05, § 4, 1-18-2005; Ord. No. 63-07, § 4, 8-20-2007)  
Sec. 14-134. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 63-07, § 5, adopted Aug. 20, 2007, deleted § 14-134, which pertained to reciprocal licenses and derived from Code 1989, ch. 3, § 4.05.  
Sec. 14-135. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 63-07, § 6, adopted Aug. 20, 2007, deleted § 14-125, which pertained to electrical licensing examinations and derived from Code 1989, ch. 3, § 4.06.  
Sec. 14-136. - Areas of authorized work. 
Only the following licensees shall be permitted to do the electrical work specified below. 
(a)  Master electrician. A master electrician may contract for and engage in the business of installing, repairing, or replacing electrical wiring or equipment of any nature on or in buildings or structures, including signs. The master electrician may employ and supervise journeyman electricians, residential specialists, maintenance electricians, helpers, and apprentice electricians. 
(b)  Journeyman electrician. A journeyman electrician shall be permitted to perform any type of electrical work under the supervision of a master electrician, but in no case shall a journeyman electrician contract for or engage in the business of electrical work of any nature, except under the supervision of a master electrician. A journeyman electrician shall be permitted to lay out work for and to supervise no more than three helpers or apprentice electricians. 
(c)  Residential specialist. A residential specialist electrician shall be permitted to perform any type of electrical work in single-family and multifamily dwellings and uses. In no case shall a residential specialist engage in the business of electrical work of any nature, except under the supervision of a master electrician. A residential specialist shall be permitted to lay out work for and to supervise no more than two helpers or apprentice electricians. 
(d)  Maintenance electrician. A maintenance electrician shall be permitted to keep in safe repair any and all electrical installations, apparatus, equipment, and appliances within a building or in or on the premises where the maintenance electrician is regularly employed on a permanent basis, and for which an electrical permit is not required under the terms and provisions of this section. 
(e)  [Helper or apprentice electrician.] A helper or apprentice electrician may perform electrical work only when the work is laid out and supervised by a master or journeyman electrician, or by a residential specialist when performing electrical work on a single-family dwelling. 
(f)  [Miscellaneous.] The supervising master or journeyman electrician (or residential specialist where allowed) shall be on the job site at all times while electrical work is being performed. The ratio of helpers or apprentice electricians shall not exceed three helpers or apprentices to one supervising master or journeyman electrician. A residential specialist may supervise no more than two helpers. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 4.07; Ord. No. 73-01, § 4, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 07-05, § 5, 1-18-2005; Ord. No. 63-07, § 7, 8-20-2007)  
Sec. 14-137. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 63-07, § 8, adopted Aug. 20, 2007, deleted § 14-137, which pertained to revocation of licenses and permits and derived from Code 1989, ch. 3, § 4.08.  
Sec. 14-138. - Board of appeals. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this article, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The members of the Flower Mound Board of Adjustment are hereby appointed as the board of appeals, as provided by section 14-32, or article XIV of this chapter, as applicable. Any changes in membership of said board of adjustment shall likewise be reflected in the membership of said board of appeals. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 4.09; Ord. No. 73-01, § 5, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 07-05, § 6, 1-18-2005; Ord. No. 63-07, § 9, 8-20-2007; Ord. No. 03-10, § 4, 1-21-2010; Ord. No. 17-11, § 4, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 07-15 , § 4, 2-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-139. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of the National Electrical Code adopted by this article, or who shall do or attempt to do electrical work without first securing the permit prescribed herein for such work, or who shall in any other manner violate the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00, and each day or fraction of a day that an offense hereunder is committed or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 4.10; Ord. No. 73-01, § 6, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 17-11, § 7, 4-18-2011)  
Secs. 14-140—14-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SWIMMING POOL CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Public swimming pool and spa standards and regulations, § 34-351 et seq.; zoning, ch. 98. 
 
Sec. 14-171. - Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code adopted. 
The 1985 edition of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is hereby adopted with all its appendices and amendments as set out herewith. A copy of the Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code will be kept on file in the office of the town secretary. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 5.01)  
Sec. 14-172. - Amendments to Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code. 
(a)  Section 1.11, cost of permit, shall be amended to read as follows: 
Section 1.11. Cost of permit. 
Every applicant for a swimming pool, spa or hot tub shall pay a fee as set out in the fee schedule found in appendix A of the town Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Section 1.12, all work to be licensed, is hereby deleted. 
(c)  Section 1.18, board of appeals, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section. 18. Board of appeals. 
The building code board of appeals shall serve as the board of appeals for the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code. 
The filing fee to appear before the board for appeals of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of the town Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 5.03)  
Sec. 14-173. - Location requirements. 
(a)  Front yard. No swimming pool, spa or hot tub shall be located within the required or established front yard. On a corner lot, where both street exposures are treated as front yards, for the purposes of this section, the front yards shall be determined by the placement of the main building along with the legal address. 
(b)  Side yard. All swimming pools, spas and hot tubs must be located at least five feet from the side property line to the water's edge. 
(c)  Rear yard. All swimming pools, spas and hot tubs must be located at least five feet from the rear property line to the water's edge. 
(d)  Easements. No swimming pool, spa or hot tub, including applicable decks, shall be located in an easement. 
(e)  Equipment. No equipment may be placed within the required or established front yard as defined in subsection (a) of this section, or within any easement. Equipment in relation to the pool shall not be affixed to any required perimeter fencing or common fences between property owners. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 5.04)  
Sec. 14-174. - Electrical work on swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs. 
All electrical work shall be performed by a licensed electrician authorized to work in the town. All work performed shall be in compliance with the town's electrical code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 5.05)  
Sec. 14-175. - Plumbing work on swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. 
All plumbing work shall be performed by a licensed plumber authorized to work in the town. All work performed shall be in compliance with the town's plumbing code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 5.06)  
Sec. 14-176. - Required inspections. 
During all phases of construction, a temporary fence must be maintained around the construction area. The temporary fence must be a minimum of 36 inches in height. The following establishes the minimum inspections required: 
(1)  Belly steel and pool placement inspection. Before any concrete or gunite can be placed, the belly steel and placement of the pool shall be inspected and approved. Rebar shall be a minimum size of three-eighths of an inch and located no more than 12 inches on center each way. 
(2)  Deck steel, electrical bond, electrical underground and plumbing. Before any concrete is placed for the pool deck, the placement of steel and the electrical bond shall be inspected and approved. The concrete deck shall be a minimum thickness of 3½ inches. Rebar shall be a minimum size of three-eighths of an inch and located no more than 18 inches on center each way. The bond conductor shall be a minimum size of No. 8 AWG. A minimum of four ground clamps that are evenly spaced around the pool shall be required to electrically bond the pool from stray ground current. All electrical conductors buried in the ground shall be inspected and approved prior to covering. All pool plumbing shall be subjected to a minimum water test of 15 psi. 
(3)  P-trap and gas line. Before the backwash line, p-trap and gas line are covered in any way, those items shall be inspected and approved. All pools shall have a p-trap and backwash line connected to the sanitary sewer. 
Exception: Aboveground pools and spas that have a capacity of 750 gallons or less are not required to install a p-trap or backwash line. Lots that do not have access to town sewer and where sanitary drainage is provided through a septic system, no p-trap or backwash line is required; however, adequate drainage must be provided to allow for drainage of the pool. 
(4)  Pre-plaster inspection. Before any water is placed in the pool, the permanent fence shall be installed, inspected and approved. 
(5)  Drainage survey. Prior to the pool final inspection, an original survey stamped by a surveyor registered with the state, must be submitted verifying that the lot drainage is in compliance with the drainage plans for the subdivision in which the lot is located and on file with the town. The survey must show elevations and water flow for the lot. 
(6)  Pool final. Before the pool is used, all pool components shall be inspected and approved. The pool final inspection shall be approved no later than 45 days after approval of the pre-plaster inspection. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 5.07; Ord. No. 50-98, § 1, 9-14-1998)  
Secs. 14-177—14-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DANGEROUS BUILDING CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 14-211. - Title of article. 
This article shall be known as the Dangerous Building Code, may be cited as such, and will be referred to in this article as "this code." 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.01; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-212. - Purpose and scope of article. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this code to provide a just, equitable and practicable method to be cumulative with, and in addition to, any other remedy provided by the building code, housing code or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings or structures, which, from any cause, endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished. The purpose of this code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this code. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all dangerous buildings, as defined in section 14-213, which are now in existence or which may hereafter become dangerous in this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.02; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-213. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this code or as specified in the building code or the housing code. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be construed as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. 
Building code means the Uniform Building Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted in article II of this chapter. 
Dangerous building means any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects described in this definition shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than 1½ times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(4)  Whenever any portion of a building has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(5)  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance of a building is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(6)  Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on its exterior, is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings. 
(7)  Whenever any portion of a building has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
(8)  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion, because of: 
a.  Dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 
b.  Faulty construction; 
c.  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 
d.  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
e.  Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(9)  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(10)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base. 
(11)  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
(12)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become: 
a.  An attractive nuisance to children; 
b.  A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to 
c.  Enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts. 
(13)  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this town, as specified in the building code or housing code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or town relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings. 
(14)  Whenever any building or structure which, whether erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location. 
(15)  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(16)  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard. 
(17)  Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(18)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(19)  Any minimum standard provided by the housing code, building code or the Uniform Fire, Mechanical, Plumbing or Electrical Codes, as amended, and as adopted by the town council. 
Housing code means the Uniform Housing Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by this town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.03; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-214. - Alterations, additions and repairs. 
All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under provisions of this code shall be subject to all applicable sections of the building code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.04; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-215. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
(a)  Administration. The building official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this code and shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as necessary in order to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. 
(b)  Inspections. The health officer, the fire marshal and the building official, or their authorized representative, are hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this code. 
(c)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this code, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, or the owner or person in control is not identified or located, the building official or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. The term "authorized representative" shall include the officers named in subsection (b) of this section and their authorized inspection personnel. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.05; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-216. - Abatement of dangerous buildings. 
All buildings or their portions which are determined, after inspection by the building official, to be dangerous are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in section 14-220. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.06; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-217. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.07; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-218. - Inspection of work. 
All buildings or structures within the scope of this code and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official in accordance with and in the manner provided by this code and all applicable sections of the building code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.08; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-219. - Authority to secure unoccupied, unsecured, substandard, open buildings and structures. 
(a)  Purpose. The owner or person in control of an unoccupied structure shall ensure that the building is in such condition that an unauthorized person cannot enter into it through missing or unlocked doors or windows, or through other openings into the building. The town may secure unoccupied, unsecured structures. A lien may be filed on real property to assure repayment of the cost of securing the structure as stated in section 14-223. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Unoccupied structure means any structure or building that appears vacant or abandoned as evidenced by no active utility accounts, the absence of personalty or general conditions of neglect, and any other substantiated evidence of vacancy or abandonment that may be presented by the building official. 
Unsecured structure means any structure or building that currently has no legitimate occupant and which has missing or unlocked doors or windows, or other unsecured openings into the building through which unauthorized persons can enter. Any unoccupied, unsecured structure or building is hereby declared to be a danger to public health and safety and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(c)  Town may secure. The building official may secure a building that: 
(1)  Violates the standards of this code; and 
(2)  Is an unsecured structure. 
(d)  Notice. 
(1)  Before the 11th day after the date the building is secured, the building official shall give notice to the owner of record by: 
a.  Personally serving the owner with written notice; 
b.  Sending a copy of the notice certified mail, return receipt requested, and a copy by regular mail; or 
c.  Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in the town's official newspaper if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; and 
d.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building. 
(2)  The notice must contain the following: 
a.  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located; 
b.  A description of the violation of this code that is present at the building; 
c.  A statement that the town will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building; and 
d.  An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the town's securing of the building. 
(3)  The town council shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the town's securing of the building if, within 30 days after the date the town secures the building, the owner files with the town secretary a written request for the hearing. The town council shall conduct the hearing within 20 days after the date the request is filed. 
(e)  Method of securing. The securing of windows, doors or any other opening allowing access to an unsecured, unoccupied structure shall be done with such material and in such a fashion as to effectively bar entrance to the structure including, but not limited to, plywood, lumber, steel, replacement glass, nails, screws and bolts. The use of cardboard, tarpaper, window and door screens, or any other material that will not effectively prevent entrance shall not be deemed sufficient in securing a structure. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.09; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-220. - Notices and orders of town council. 
(a)  Commencement of proceedings. Whenever the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is a dangerous building, he shall prepare and file with the town Manager a written report of such inspection, giving a general description of the building or structure in question, a description of the land on which it is located and street address, and stating his opinion as to whether such building or structure should be ordered to be vacated, repaired or demolished as provided in this code. 
(b)  Notice of public hearing. The town manager, or his designee, shall give notice of a public hearing to an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee for the town council to consider or determine whether a structure or lot complies with this code and to consider or determine whether a structure or lot must be repaired, vacated or demolished. The notice of hearing shall contain the following: 
(1)  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the structure is located. 
(2)  A statement that the building official has found the structure or lot to be substandard with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the structure or lot substandard under the provisions of this code. A copy of the building official's report is sufficient for this purpose. 
(3)  The date, time and place of the public hearing. This date shall be established not less than ten days from the date of the notice. 
(4)  A statement advising that securing the required permits and physically commencing the required action set forth in the building official's report shall be considered as an intent to comply with the code, and that the hearing may be temporarily postponed at the written request of the owner, lienholder or mortgagee. Should such compliance efforts halt, or not progress at a rate determined to be reasonable by the building official, the hearing shall be recalled. 
(5)  A statement that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the ordinance and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(c)  Service of notice and order to abate and notice of hearing. The notice of hearing and any supplemental notices or orders shall be served upon the owner, lessor, lienholder, and mortgagees of record and occupant, if different than the owner of the structure or lot. Service of these notices and orders shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, and a second copy by regular mail, to each such person at his address as it appears on the county tax rolls, or as discovered by due diligence, as defined by subsections (c)(1)—(c)(6) of this section. The notice may be posted on the property in accordance with section 14-222. The following of one of more of these procedures shall be prima facie evidence of notification. If a certified notice is returned as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice shall be deemed delivered. The town has satisfied the requirements of this section to make a diligent effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder or a mortgagee if the municipality searches the following records: 
(1)  County real property records of the county in which the building is located; 
(2)  Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located; 
(3)  Records of the secretary of state; 
(4)  Assumed name records of the county in which the building is located; 
(5)  Tax records of the municipality; and 
(6)  Utility records of the municipality. 
(d)  Filing of notice and order at the county. A copy of the notice and any orders, as may be issued per subsection (f) of this section, shall be filed with the county deed records in the county in which the property is located. The filing of such notice and any such orders is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of such notice or any such orders, constitutes notice of such hearing and notice of any such orders, on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of such notice or filing of any such orders. 
(e)  Voluntary compliance. Statements advising that if the owner or owners of record are in full agreement with the building official's demolition recommendation, the owners of record may elect to demolish the property, or otherwise abate the nuisance, within 30 days of the date of the report, with such election stated in writing and submitted to the building official or, if the owners of record are financially unable to demolish and/or abate such nuisance, then the owners of record may grant the town permission to demolish and/or abate such nuisance, and, in doing so shall grant the town a lien against the real property as described in section 14-223. 
(f)  Public hearing. 
(1)  In the public hearing to determine whether a building complies with the standards of this code, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this code and the time it will take to perform the work. 
(2)  In a public hearing authorized under this code, the town council shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building within 30 days to: 
a.  Secure the building from unauthorized entry; and/or 
b.  Repair, remove or demolish the building, unless the owner, lienholder or mortgagee establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days. 
If the town council allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the town council shall establish specific schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in an approved manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the town council. 
(3)  The town council may not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder or mortgagee: 
a.  Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
b.  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot justifiably be completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
If the town council allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the town council shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the building official and to the town council to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear before the town council to demonstrate compliance with the time schedule. 
(g)  After the public hearing. 
(1)  After the public hearing, if a building is found in violation of the standards set forth in this section, the town council may order that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished by the owner within a reasonable time as provided by subsection (f) of this section. The town council also may order that the occupants be relocated within a reasonable time, at the cost of the owner. The town council reserves the right to determine what is a reasonable amount of time to perform the ordered work or what is a reasonable amount of time to relocate occupants. 
(2)  After the hearing, the town Secretary shall, within ten days: 
a.  File a copy of the order in the office of the town secretary; 
b.  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the town a notice containing: 
1.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
2.  The date of the hearing; 
3.  A statement indicating the results of the order; 
4.  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained; and 
c.  Shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, and a second copy by regular mail, a copy of the order to the owner, any lienholders and any mortgagees of the building as determined by subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.10; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-221. - Repair, vacation or demolition. 
The following standards shall be followed by the town council in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of any dangerous building or structure, and any building declared a dangerous building under this code shall be made to comply with one or more of the following: 
(1)  The building shall be repaired in accordance with the current building code or other current codes applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair. 
(2)  Repairs shall be deemed feasible only if less than 50 percent of the structure must be repaired or replaced, and the repairs amount to less than 50 percent of the structure's value. 
(3)  If the building or structure is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants, it shall be ordered vacated and secured from unlawful entry. 
(4)  If the building requires repairs over greater than 50 percent of its surface or amounting to greater than 50 percent of its value, it shall be demolished. Further, if a building cannot be repaired so that it will be brought into compliance with this code, it shall be demolished. Additionally, if the building as it stands presents an incurable fire hazard in violation of the terms of this code or any ordinance of the town or statute of the state, it shall be demolished. For the purpose of this code, the term "demolished" includes the cleaning and grading of the property and the removal of all debris and trash. 
(5)  If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the town may vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense, and may thereafter assess expenses, and establish a lien, against the property, as set forth in section 14-223. 
(6)  If, after the expiration of the time allotted under sections 14-219 or 14-220, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee fails to comply, the town may do or cause to be done the repairs necessary to bring the building into compliance with this code and only if the building is a residential building with ten or fewer dwelling units. The repairs may not improve the building to the extent that the building exceeds the minimum standards, as defined by this code, and expenses may be assessed as provided in section 14-223. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.11; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-222. - Posting. 
(a)  Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in section 14-220, be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form: 
DO NOT ENTER OR OCCUPY, DANGEROUS BUILDING, UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice. 
Building Official, Town of Flower Mound 
(b)  Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification in the notice and order issued by the town council under section 14-220, reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall occupy, remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the town council has been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.12; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-223. - Collection of liens. 
(a)  Generally. If the town does or causes to be done any work for the abatement, repair, demolition or securing of a structure or lot, the town shall proceed to secure payment for such actual costs, as described in this section. The building official shall keep an itemized account of any expenses incurred in abating, repairing, demolishing, or securing a structure or lot including, but not limited to, costs of clerical work, title searches, publications and filing fees. 
(b)  Fees and due date. The actual cost of abating, repairing, demolishing or securing a structure or lot shall become due and payable upon the completion of the repairing, demolishing or securing of the structure. The building official shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, and a second copy by regular mail, an itemized billing to the owner or owners of record, describing the work done. Any money recovered by payment of the charge or assessment, or from the sale of property at foreclosure sale, to the extent allowed by law, shall be paid to the town treasurer, who shall credit the same to the repair and demolition fund. If after 30 days from the billing date payment in full has not been made, then the town may proceed to collect all monies and fees due by filing a lien upon real property. All such charges shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date the owner of the real property receives the notice of demand for payment of such charges. The town may bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to foreclose its liens and collect all monies and fees due, as allowed by law. The written statement of such charges, or their certified copy, shall be prima facie evidence of the town's claim for charges or right to foreclose the lien. 
(c)  Establishment and extinguishment of lien. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in the county where the property is located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable due diligence effort, as stated in this section, a legal description of the real property on which the building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the town and the balance due. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the town for the expenses. 
(d)  Homestead exemption. Real property protected by the state constitution as a homestead shall not be subject to assessment of liens resulting in expenses involved in the abatement, repair, demolition or in securing a structure or lot as described in this code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.13; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-224. - Enforcement of order. 
(a)  Compliance. After any order of the town council made pursuant to this code shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Failure to obey order. If, after any order of the town council made pursuant to this code has become final, the persons to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may cause such to be prosecuted under section 14-235 and/or institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance. 
(c)  Failure to commence work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 30 days after any final notice and order issued under this code becomes effective: 
(1)  The building official shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice in conformance with section 14-222; 
(2)  The town council may, in addition to any other remedy provided in this section, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order require demolition, may cause the building to be sold, to the extent allowed by law, and/or demolished, and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the costs paid and recovered in the manner provided in this code. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such building, or from its demolition, over and above the costs of demolition and of cleaning the lot, shall be paid over to the persons lawfully entitled thereto. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.14; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-225. - Interference with repair or demolition work. 
No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this town or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this code; or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this code, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this town, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing such building pursuant to the provisions of this code, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.15; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-226. - Performance of work of repair or demolition. 
(a)  Procedure. When any work of repair or demolition is to be done pursuant to section 14-224(c)(2), the town council shall issue its order therefor to the town manager, and the work shall be accomplished by personnel of this town or by private contract under the direction of such town manager or his designee. Plans and specifications therefor may be prepared by, or cause to be prepared by such town manager, or he may employ such architectural and engineering assistants on a contract basis, as he may deem reasonably necessary. If any part of the work is to be accomplished by private contract, standard public work contractual procedures shall be followed. 
(b)  Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from the repair and demolition fund, and may be made a special assessment against the property involved, pursuant to section 14-223. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.16; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-227. - Repair and demolition fund. 
(a)  Established. The town council shall establish a special revolving fund to be designated as the repair and demolition fund. Payments shall be made out of such fund upon the demand of the town manager to defray the costs and expenses which may be incurred by this town in doing or causing to be done the necessary work of repair or demolition of dangerous buildings. 
(b)  Maintenance of fund. The town council may at any time transfer to the repair and demolition fund, out of any money in the general fund of this town, such sums as it may deem necessary in order to expedite the performance of the work of repair or demolition, and any sum so transferred shall be deemed a loan to the repair and demolition fund and shall be repaid out of the proceeds of the collections provided for in this article. All funds collected under the proceedings provided for in this article shall be paid to the treasurer of this town, who shall credit the same to the repair and demolition fund. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.17; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-228. - Recovery of cost of repair or demolition: filing of report. 
The town manager or his designee shall keep an itemized account of the expense incurred by the town in the repair or demolition of any building done pursuant to the provisions of 14-224(c)(2). Upon the completion of the work of repair or demolition, such town manager or his designee shall prepare and file with the town secretary a report specifying the work done, the itemized and total costs of the work, a description of the real property upon which the building or structure is or was located, and the names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to section 14-220. A lien may be established on the property, and a report made, as established by section 14-223, and as allowed by law. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.18; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-229. - Authority for installment payment of assessments with interest. 
The town council, in its discretion, may determine that assessments in amounts of $500.00 or more shall be payable in not to exceed five equal annual installments, in lieu of foreclosure of the lien. The town council determination to allow payment of such assessments in installments, the number of installments, whether they shall bear interest, and the rate shall be by a resolution. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.19; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-230. - Lien of assessment. 
(a)  Priority. After the notice has been given and the opportunity to repair, remove, or demolish the building is afforded to each mortgagee and lienholder, the lien becomes a privileged lien subordinate only to the tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to the real property to which the town's lien attaches, as determined by law. The lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest due and payable thereon are paid. 
(b)  Interest. Any assessment imposed under this section accrues interest at the rate of the ten percent per annum from the date of the assessment until paid in full. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.20; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-231. - Report to assessor and tax collector; addition of assessment of tax bill. 
After confirmation of the report, certified copies of the assessment shall be given to the assessor and the tax collector for this town, who shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel for municipal purposes, to the extent allowed by law. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.21; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-232. - Filing copy of report with county auditor. 
If the county assessor and the county tax collector assess property and collect taxes for this town, a certified copy of the assessment shall be filed with the county auditor. The descriptions of the parcels reported shall be those used for the same parcels on the county assessor's map books for the current year. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.22; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-233. - Collection of assessment; penalties for foreclosure. 
(a)  The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected; and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary property taxes, to the extent allowed by law. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment, to the extent allowed by law. 
(b)  If the town council has determined that the assessment shall be paid in installments, each installment and any interest thereon shall be collected in the same manner as ordinary property taxes in successive years. If any installment is delinquent, the amount thereof is subject to the same penalties and procedure for sale as provided for ordinary property taxes, to the extent allowed by law. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.23; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-234. - Repayment of repair and demolition fund. 
All money recovered by payment of the charge or assessment or from the sale of the property at foreclosure sale shall be paid to the treasurer of this town, who shall credit the same to the repair and demolition fund. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.24; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-235. - Penalty upon failure to comply. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision, requirement or order issued pursuant to this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained in this section, the town may enforce the provisions of this code pursuant to the applicable provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, which chapter provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(c)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.25; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-236. - Review. 
(a)  Judicial review. Any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of record jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the town council may present a petition to a district court, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be, presented to the court within 30 calendar days after the date a copy of the final decision of the town council is mailed by first class mail, certified, return receipt requested, to all persons to whom notice is required to be sent, as set forth in this article. 
(b)  Final decision; reconsideration. If no appeals are taken from the decision of the town council within the required period, the decision of the town council shall, in all things, be final and binding. The town council shall not entertain a reconsideration of the final order, unless a written request for reconsideration is submitted to the town council, with substantial evidence, clearly documented, of changed circumstances sufficient to warrant a change of decision, within 30 days of the final order. 
(c)  Continuances. The town council, at its discretion, may continue or table a matter for consideration if the town council finds: 
(1)  The owner of the property, lienholder or mortgagee has made reasonable efforts to obtain information and evidence for the hearing but requires additional time to secure such information; 
(2)  The property is secured from unlawful entry; and 
(3)  A delay in the proceedings will not pose a threat or danger to the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens. 
(d)  Extension of time to perform work. Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order and an agreement by such person that he will comply with the order if allowed additional time, the town council may, after hearing and additional proof in accordance with section 14-220, in its discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional 120 days, within which to complete such repair, rehabilitation or demolition, if the town council determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation eminently dangerous to life or property. This authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect the time to appeal the town council's notice and order. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.26; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Sec. 14-237. - Municipal court proceedings not affected. 
Action taken by the town pursuant to this article shall not affect the ability of the town to proceed under the jurisdiction of the town's municipal court. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 6.27; Ord. No. 25-99, § 2, 4-5-1999)  
Secs. 14-238—14-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - STREET NUMBERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 14-301. - Requirements. 
(a)  Any person owning or controlling any real property whereon is situated a residence or a business within the town shall place, or cause to be placed, street address numbers in the front of such residence business and, where there is an alley, in the rear of the residence or business so as to be visible from the street fronting such residence or business and from the alley to the rear of such residence or business. 
(b)  All street address numbers placed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be a minimum of three inches in height. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 9.00)  
Secs. 14-302—14-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - GUIDELINES ON LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION IMPROVEMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Landscaping and screening, § 82-211 et seq. 
State Law reference— State Irrigator's Licensing Law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8751. 
 
Sec. 14-331. - Adherence to article provisions required. 
No person shall install landscape materials or irrigation facilities within any portion of a dedicated street median or other public right-of-way except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 10.01)  
Sec. 14-332. - Irrigation system required for all landscaped medians, streets and rights-of-way. 
Any person desiring to provide, install, operate and maintain landscape materials, within a dedicated median, street or other public right-of-way, must also provide and install irrigation facilities for such landscape areas. Such irrigation facilities shall consist of an adequate number of heads and controllers to properly irrigate all areas landscaped, as determined by the parks and recreation director (called "director" in this article). 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 10.02)  
Sec. 14-333. - Enforcement and administration of article provisions. 
The director of the town is hereby authorized and directed to administer and supervise the policies enacted by this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 10.03)  
Sec. 14-334. - Median and right-of-way landscape and irrigation agreement. 
(a)  The terms and conditions of the "Median and Right-of-Way Landscape and Irrigation Agreement," labeled Exhibit C and included in this article as section 14-337, having been reviewed and considered by the town council, are hereby approved in all things. Such Exhibit C is hereby incorporated into the body of this article for all purposes. 
(b)  The terms and conditions set forth in such Exhibit C are adopted by the town council as policies under which developers shall be permitted to install, provide and maintain landscaping materials and irrigation facilities in dedicated streets, medians and other public rights-of-way. 
(c)  The director is hereby authorized to execute on behalf of the town a median and right-of-way landscape and irrigation agreement with any developer of a residential or nonresidential subdivision within the town desiring to execute such agreement. Such agreement shall be substantially according to the terms of Exhibit C. 
(d)  Any person desiring to provide, install, operate and maintain landscaping materials and irrigation facilities within a dedicated street, median or other public right-of-way, must first enter into and execute a median and right-of-way landscape and irrigation agreement with the town, substantially according to the terms of Exhibit C. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 10.04)  
Sec. 14-335. - Exhibit A, guidelines governing landscape and irrigation improvements in medians and rights-of-way regarding residential subdivisions and guidelines governing landscape and irrigation improvements in medians regarding commercial subdivisions. 
In order to allow orderly processing of proposed landscape and irrigation improvements in medians and rights-of-way associated with subdivisions, the procedures discussed in the following sections shall be used, and the steps are as follows: 
(1)  Submittal of plans to parks and recreation department. 
(2)  Approval of plans by parks and recreation department. 
(3)  Agreement between developer and town. 
(a)  Submittal of plans. The developer shall submit, in duplicate, to the director of parks and recreation (director), complete plans for any and all improvements. The developer shall submit a separate drawing showing the specific areas of development. In this drawing, the number of housing units, retail or commercial leasing spaces, shall be numbered and designated for tabulations. It shall be the specific purpose of this separate drawing to designate the method by which the 80 percent completion provisions of Exhibit C (section 14-337), subsection (13), of the landscape and irrigation agreement. Plans shall include the following: 
(1)  Place all the following information on a one-dimensioned, scaled drawing on a sheet size of 24 inches × 36 inches which can be reduced to an 8½- × 11-inch print. 
a.  Proper dimensions of the site and approximate distance to nearest cross street; 
b.  All existing public and private streets including street and sidewalk widths; 
c.  Screening walls and location, type and height of screening wall, whether living or masonry (masonry screening walls must be designed by a registered professional engineer); 
d.  All existing public utility services including fire hydrants, water mains and sewer mains within the tract and immediately adjacent to it with pipe size and location indicated; 
e.  All proposed water and sanitary sewer pipe lines with sizes indicated and valves, fire hydrants, manholes and other appurtenances or structures shown; 
f.  All existing or proposed water, sewer and irrigation connections, meter locations, size of meters, with meter and/or detector check valve vaults indicated; 
g.  All existing utility and visibility easements; 
h.  All existing or proposed buildings on the property, existing structures, access points on and adjacent to the property; 
i.  Existing and proposed contours of berms in intervals of one foot; 
j.  Detail structural designs of entryway features; 
k.  The following information should be submitted on the landscape plan: 
1.  Type and size of existing/proposed plant materials. 
2.  Distance of trees/shrubs from sidewalks, curbs and screening walls. 
3.  Spacing between trees/shrubs. 
4.  Total square footage of gross landscape area. 
5.  Total number of trees/shrubs and proposed allowance for loss (percentage or numbers). 
l.  Title block in the lower, right-hand comer containing: 
1.  Name of project. 
2.  Name and address of owner and representative. 
3.  Date. 
m.  North arrow (up or to the right); 
n.  Graphic scale: one inch = 40 feet (or larger); 
o.  Adjacent platted subdivisions; 
p.  Such other information deemed reasonably necessary to the director. 
(b)  Review and approval by town. The director shall review and approve submitted plans, and shall have the right to require revisions prior to approval of such plans. 
(c)  Agreement. The developer desiring to provide, install, operate and maintain landscaping or irrigation improvements in a dedicated street, median or public right-of-way must first enter into and execute, a median and right-of-way landscaping and irrigation agreement with the town, according to the rules and regulations as set forth in this article (agreement). A standard form agreement shall be available from the director. The director is authorized to execute the agreement on behalf of the town. 
(d)  Landscape plan guidelines. 
(1)  Primary landscaping material to be used by the developer shall be trees which provide shade or will provide shade at maturity. Shrubbery and other planting materials may be used to compliment the tree plantings, so as to be maintained with self-propelled mechanical equipment (i.e., tractor mower). 
(2)  Developers, at their sole expense, shall furnish or cause to be furnished all labor, materials, equipment, accessories and services necessary to maintain all plant materials installed in a healthy vigorous, growing condition. Replacing any materials (i.e., shrubs, trees, grass) when and as they become damaged or die, for the period of time the developer is responsible for maintaining the area in accordance with the approved landscape plan. (Refer to subsection 14-337(13) of the landscape and irrigation agreement). 
(3)  Any person desiring to provide, install and maintain landscaping materials and irrigation facilities must first enter into and execute a median and right-of-way landscape and irrigation agreement. 
(4)  A clear sight line for the observance of oncoming traffic is required at median breaks and street or drive intersections. The following criteria shall apply with modifications at the discretion of director or his duly appointed representative: 
a.  Upon installation, a tree canopy shall be a minimum of nine feet above grade. Shrubs and ground covers shall be a maximum of 30 inches above grade upon maturity. These specifications shall apply for a distance of 200 feet along type C thoroughfares and above, and 100 feet for lesser thoroughfares, for median ends or street intersections as measured along the curb. 
b.  Trees shall be installed at a minimum of five feet from curbs. 
c.  Trees shall be spaced a minimum of 20 feet apart. 
d.  Trees shall be placed no closer than 40 feet from the end of medians. 
e.  No plantings shall be permitted within areas less than five feet in width. All such areas shall be covered with concrete or other permanent fixed materials such as bomonite. 
f.  All landscape planting areas shall be provided with the following soil depths: 
1.  A minimum of 24 inches of topsoil for all small shrub installations; 
2.  A minimum of 36 inches of topsoil for all large shrubs and small tree installations; 
3.  A minimum of five feet of topsoil for all large and canopy tree installations; 
4.  The above soil requirements may be waived by the director, provided that alternative provisions (certified by a registered landscape architect) are designed to promote health and vigorous plant growth. 
(e)  Irrigation. 
(1)  Any person desiring to provide, install, operate and maintain landscape materials must also install permanent underground irrigation facilities for such landscaped areas in accordance with the design specifications stated in subsection (e)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Irrigation design specifications are as follows: 
a.  Irrigation line shall not be less than three feet from the curb (street). 
b.  No irrigation head or valve shall be within three feet of a water utility (fire hydrant). 
c.  No sprinkler heads or irrigation line shall be installed within 1½ feet from the alley pavement. 
(f)  Maintenance requirements. 
(1)  The developer, at its sole expense, shall furnish or cause to be furnished, all labor, materials, equipment, accessories, water and electrical utilities, and all other services necessary to maintain all plant materials installed in a healthy, vigorous, growing condition; replace any materials when and as they become damaged or die in accordance with the landscape plan. (Refer to the landscape agreement, section 14-337(13).) 
(2)  The landscape materials shall not be submitted, removed or relocated unless such action is in accordance with the approved landscape plan. 
(3)  The director, or his duly authorized representative, shall periodically inspect the areas landscaped under the median and right-of-way landscape and irrigation agreement to determine that such areas are being properly maintained by the developer. If the town finds that the developer is not properly maintaining such areas, the town shall notify the developer, in writing, specifying the deficiencies. If the developer does not remedy the deficiencies within 15 days following receipt of such written notice, the town shall have the option of performing the necessary maintainable work itself and bill the developer for all costs for such maintenance. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 10.05(Exhibit A))  
Sec. 14-336. - Exhibit B, suggested landscape materials. 
The following is a list of suggested landscape materials: 
(1)  Tree: A woody plant that produces one main trunk and a more-or-less distinct and elevated head. 
Ulmus crassifolia - Cedar Elm - 1½ to three-inch caliper 
Sapium sebiferum - Chinese Tallow - 2½ to three-inch caliper 
Quercus shumardii - Red Oak - 2½ to three-inch caliper 
Quercus virginiana - Live Oak - 2½ to three-inch caliper 
Liquidambar styraciflua - Sweetgum - 2½ to three-inch caliper 
Taxodium distichum - Bald Cypress - 2½ to three-inch caliper 
Lagerstroemia indica - Crepe Myrtle - seven to eight feet height 
(2)  Shrub: A woody plant that remains low and produces shoots or trunks from the base. 
Ilex cornuta "Burfordii" - Burford Holly - five-gallon 
Ilex cornuta "Burfordii'ana" - Dwarf Burford - five-gallon 
Ilex cornuta rotunda - Dwarf Chinese Holly - five-gallon 
Juniperus sabina tamariscifolia - Tamarix Juniper - five-gallon 
Nandina domestica compacta - Nandina - five-gallon 
(3)  Ground cover: 
Trachlospermum asiaticum - Asiatic Jasmine - 1¼-inch pots 
Vinca minor - Vinca - 4¼-inch pots 
(4)  Turf: 
Common Bermuda - Cynodon Doctylon, seeding rate two to three pounds/1,000 square feet 
Buffalo Grass - Buchloe Daltyloide, seeding rate five to six pounds/1,000 square feet 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 10.05(Exhibit B)  
Sec. 14-337. - Exhibit C, median and right-of-way landscape and irrigation agreement for residential developers and commercial developers with medians. 
This agreement made and entered into as of the _____ day of ________, 20___, by and between the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, a municipal corporation of the State of Texas (hereinafter called "town") and _____ . 
Whereas, ___________ is the developer of approximately _____ acres of land located in Town of Flower Mound, Denton County, State of Texas as more particularly described in Exhibit A attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference (hereinafter called "property"); and 
Whereas, in connection with development of the property, ___________ desires to provide certain landscaping and irrigation improvements being above and beyond the normal required town landscaping and irrigation improvements; and 
Whereas, normal required town landscaping and irrigation improvements shall be defined as: 
(1) Developer shall grade the median and/or right-of-way to a grade approved by the director of parks and recreation (hereinafter called "director"); and 
(2) Developer shall seed the areas at a predetermined rate with either Buffalo or Bermuda grass, and provide temporary irrigation, if necessary, to establish the turf; and 
(3) Developer shall be required to reseed the area if developer wishes to establish the turf other than during the recommended seeding dates (April 15 to September 1 of any year) for Bermuda or Buffalo grass; and 
(4) Developer shall not be required to install permanent underground irrigation for normal required town landscaping and irrigation improvements. 
Now, therefore, for and in consideration of the sum of $1.00 and other good and valuable consideration, including the consideration the town is allowing ___________ to install irrigation and landscape improvements within the town's medians and rights-of-way which the town will eventually assume maintenance responsibilities, and including the mutual covenants and promises contained herein, the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, the parties hereto agree as follows: 
(1)  ___________ shall be permitted and shall have the responsibility to install, improve, operate and maintain all landscaping and irrigation facilities within the medians and rights-of-way for ___________ Roads, within the parameters of the property, subject to the town's approval of plans and specifications as provided herein (hereinafter called "landscaping and irrigation improvements"). 
(2)  Prior to installation of the landscaping and irrigation improvements, ___________ shall submit to the director, in duplicate, complete plans and specifications for the landscaping and irrigation improvements, which plans and specifications shall be prepared by a landscape architect or practicing professional in the field. 
Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale, including dimensions and distances, and shall clearly indicate the location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape materials and irrigation facilities, including total quantities. In addition, the plans and specifications shall clearly indicate the configuration, location, type and total number of heads and controllers to be used in the irrigation system. 
(3)  Upon submission of the plans and specifications, the director shall review same and shall approve same to determine that the landscaping and irrigation improvements are of such quality as to improve and enhance the surrounding areas, and do not violate any town ordinance or other regulation. All landscaping and irrigation improvements shall be installed within the medians and rights-of-way in full compliance and in accordance with the plans and specifications as approved by the town. 
(4)  ___________ shall furnish or cause to be furnished, at its expense, all labor, equipment, accessories, water and electrical utilities and all other services necessary to install, operate and maintain the landscaping and irrigation improvements in accordance with the plans and specifications. The director, or his or her designee, shall have the right to inspect the installation of landscaping and irrigation improvements and shall require such steps by ___________ that in the director's, or his or her designee's, opinion are necessary to cause proper installation in accordance with the plans and specifications. Upon completion of installation mentioned above, the director shall provide ___________ with written confirmation when, in the director's opinion, the landscaping and irrigation improvements have been installed in compliance with the plans and specifications. It shall be the developer's responsibility to make all additions, corrections, renovations and changes to comply with the plans and specifications. 
(5)  ___________ shall not make any material change in the landscaping and irrigation improvements without first obtaining prior written approval from the town. Before approving any such changes, the town may require submission of new plans and specifications for approval in accordance with the terms and conditions of this agreement. 
(6)  The parties recognize that the medians and rights-of-way are public property, which have, or may have in the future, located within them improvements by public utilities, including the town. ___________ shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the town, its officers, agents and employees from and against all damages, claims, lawsuits, demands, suits, judgments and costs, including reasonable attorney fees and expenses arising out of such installation, operation and maintenance, including direct reimbursement of the town for the costs of any damage to town property. However, ___________ shall not be responsible for maintaining any public utilities located in the medians, rights-of-way or elsewhere. 
(7)  Except in the event of an emergency, the town will coordinate with ___________ to minimize damage to the landscaping the irrigation improvements should the landscaping and irrigation improvements be affected by any proposed town improvements to or maintenance or repair of ___________ roads or town utilities located therein. All damage to the landscaping and irrigation improvements caused by the town as a result of the aforementioned improvements, maintenance or repair by the town shall be repaired by the town. However, notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, at such time that the left-turn lanes on ___________ roads be installed, any damage caused to the landscaping and irrigation improvements within the medians shall not be the responsibility of the town, and such landscaping and irrigation improvements shall be repaired or replaced at ___________ expense. 
(8)  Should ___________ desire to erect, construct, and maintain other improvements in such medians and rights-of-way in addition to the landscaping and irrigation improvements, including such items as nondirectional signs, project identification, sculptures or other objects, ___________ must request and obtain prior written approval from the director which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Such additional improvements shall hereinafter be called "additional improvements." 
(9)  The parties recognize that one of the benefits that ___________ received as a result of this agreement, is the opportunity to install and maintain the landscaping and irrigation improvements which are above and beyond the normal improvements allowed in street medians and rights-of-way. The greater improvements shall enhance the value of the property. 
(10)  ___________ shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the town and its officers, agents, and employees, from and against all damages, claims, fees and expenses, arising out of, or resulting from, the installation, operation and maintenance of the landscaping and irrigation improvements, or additional improvements, provided for in this agreement. 
(11)  ___________, at its own expense, agrees to provide and keep in force during the term of this agreement, owner's excess liability insurance covering ___________ and the town as an insured party in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury, including death; $300,000.00 for bodily injury, including death; $300,000.00 for damages arising out of or in connection with the installation, operation or maintenance of the landscaping and irrigation improvements as provided for in this agreement. All such insurance policies shall provide that the insurance policy shall not be cancelled by the insurer unless and until at least 30 days written notice of such cancellation is delivered by the town. ___________ shall furnish the town with certificates of insurance required by this paragraph. Such certificates must be delivered to the town before ___________ commences any work within the town medians and rights-of-way. 
(12)  Should any landscaping and irrigation improvements provided for pursuant to this agreement be damaged or destroyed by the fault of a third party, ___________ shall have the responsibility of pursuing recovery from such third party and shall hold harmless the town and its officers, agents and employees from or resulting from pursuing recovery from such third party. The obligations of and the benefits to ___________ under this agreement may not be assigned without prior written consent of the town. 
(13)  ___________ shall maintain the landscaping and irrigation improvements except that it may terminate some of its maintenance responsibility under the following conditions: 
a.  The developer's maintenance responsibility according to the approved landscape plan shall cease in a residential subdivision at the end of such time that 80 percent of the lots have building permits issued for the construction of homes, plus a period of one year. The developer's maintenance responsibility shall not be less than two years and not more than five years. 
b.  The developer's maintenance responsibility, according to the approved landscape plan, shall cease in a nonresidential development at the end of such time that 80 percent of the retail spaces have been issued certificates of occupancy, plus a period of one year. The developer's maintenance responsibility shall not be less than two years and not more than five years. 
c.  At the end of such time that the developer ceases maintenance responsibility in a residential subdivision or a nonresidential development, the town will not assume responsibility of the irrigation system until it has been inspected by the director or his or her duly appointed representative, and proven to be in proper working order. 
d.  Should the developer desire to continue maintenance at the end of his time of responsibility: 
1.  The town shall be responsible for the water used in the medians (grass and trees only). 
2.  The developer shall be responsible for the water used in all other portions of the medians and rights-of-way. 
3.  The town shall not be required to water its portion of the medians. 
4.  The town shall have the right to require at the developer's expense, that the developer change the irrigation system to allow the town to water its portions of the medians separately. In such an event, the town shall provide the meters. 
5.  At such a time the developer wishes to discontinue maintenance responsibility, the developer shall notify the director, in writing, three months prior to ceasing maintenance. 
(14)  This agreement embodies the entire agreement between the parties and cannot be varied, changed, altered or amended except by the written agreement of all parties hereto. 
(15)  All the terms and conditions of this agreement are hereby made binding on the executors, heirs, administrators, successors and assigns of all parties hereto. 
(16)  All notices permitted hereunder shall be in writing and shall be deemed to have been properly given or served by the deposit of such with the United States Postal Service, or any official successor thereto, designated as registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, bearing adequate postage, at the address set forth below the signatures of the pertinent party. Each such notice shall be effective upon being deposited as aforementioned. The time period within which a response to any such notice must be given, however, shall commence to run from the date of receipt thereof by the addressee. Rejection of, the refusal to accept or the inability to deliver because of address change of which no notice was given, shall be deemed notified as of the date of receipt or rejection thereof. Any part shall have the right from time to time and at any time until the termination hereof, to change is respective address by notifying the other party, in writing, and each shall have the right to specify as its address any other address within the United States of America. 
(17)  This agreement shall be governed by, and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas. Venue for any suit brought to enforce any rights or obligations under this agreement shall be Denton County, Texas. 
(18)  In case any one or more of the provisions contained in this agreement shall be held to be invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any respect, such invalidity, illegality or unenforceability shall not affect any other provision hereof, and this agreement shall be construed as if such invalid, illegal or unenforceable provisions have never been contained herein. 
(19)  The effective date shall be the last date of any signature of a party as set forth below. 
In witness whereof, this agreement has been executed and delivered as of the effective date as herein provided. 
	Town of Flower Mound 
Date: _____ 	_____
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
STATE OF TEXAS 	§ 
COUNTY OF DENTON 	§ 
 
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ___________ of the Town of Flower Mound, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he or she executed the same as the act and deed of the Town of Flower Mound, for the purposes and consideration therein expressed and in the capacity therein stated. 
Given under my hand and seal of office this the _____ day of ________, 20___. 
	_____
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
	Notary Printed Name: _____
My Commission Expires: _____ 
Date: _____ 	_____
Developer 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
STATE OF TEXAS 	§ 
COUNTY OF DENTON 	§ 
 
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ___________ of ___________ known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he or she executed the same as the act and deed of ___________, for the purposes and consideration therein expressed and in the capacity therein stated. 
Given under my hand and seal of office this the _____ day of ________, 20___ 
	_____
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
	Notary Printed Name: _____
My Commission Expires: _____ 
 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 10.05(Exhibit C))  
Sec. 14-338. - Definitions. 
Lawn sprinkler system means irrigation system, sprinkler system, and/or any outlet on a sprinkler system or device with perforations through which water issues from a hose to sprinkle a lawn. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, trust, partnership, corporation, association, customer, and/or user of the town's water system, or other legal entity, except for the town. 
(Ord. No. 24-10, § 2, 4-19-2010)  
Sec. 14-339. - Unlawful to operate sprinklers when temperature is at or below freezing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a lawn sprinkler system within the town to permit operation and engagement of such system when the temperature is at or below freezing (32°F or 0°C) or to permit water spray or water from the lawn sprinkler system to enter onto any streets, alleys, sidewalks, or thoroughfares of the town when the temperature is at or below freezing (32°F or 0°C). The official temperature at the Dallas-Fort Worth Airport shall be used to determine and shall be prima facie evidence of the temperature at the time of the offense. 
(Ord. No. 24-10, § 2, 4-19-2010)  
Sec. 14-340. - Violation for penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. Each day any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under [this section]. 
(b)  In addition to the proceeding, under the authority of subsection (a) of this section, the town shall be entitled to disconnect or discontinue water services to any such person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 24-10, § 2, 4-19-2010)  
Secs. 14-341—14-370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - MOBILE HOMES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Manufactured Housing Standards Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f. 
 
Sec. 14-371. - Unlawful to occupy except in conformance with zoning provisions. 
Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to occupy any house trailer or mobile home within the town, other than on an area zoned for a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision as provided in ch. 98, zoning, and amendments thereto. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 11.01)  
Sec. 14-372. - Exceptions. 
(a)  A house trailer or mobile home temporarily parked upon a lot or tract of land as a temporary construction office during the time of actual construction, and where no person occupies such house trailer as a dwelling or sleeping place. 
(b)  A house trailer or mobile home located upon a lot or lots and occupied and used as a dwelling by the owner of the lot under a special limited permit from the town council as provided in this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 11.02)  
Sec. 14-373. - Permit required. 
(a)  Any person desiring to locate a house trailer or mobile home upon a lot, other than in an approved mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, for use as a dwelling, shall file an application for special limited permit with the building inspector requesting that he be permitted to locate a house trailer or mobile home upon his lot for occupancy and use as a dwelling. 
(b)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant; 
(2)  Legal description of the lot and the local address upon which the house trailer is to be located if a special permit is granted by the town council; 
(3)  Description and size of the house trailer proposed to be located upon the lot; 
(4)  A drawing or plot plan showing the dimensions of the lot and the location of the existing buildings or structures upon the lot, if any, together with the location of existing buildings and structures upon adjoining lots; 
(5)  The persons to occupy the house trailer or mobile home; 
(6)  The length of time for which the permit is desired, which in no event shall exceed one year. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 11.03)  
Sec. 14-374. - Permit fee. 
Accompanying any application shall be a mobile home permit fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code, payable to the town, to help pay the cost of processing the application and the cost of maintaining notices required by this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 11.04)  
Sec. 14-375. - Building inspector to inspect. 
Upon the filing of the application, the building inspector shall investigate the application by inspecting the house trailer proposed to be located upon the lot. He shall then advise the town council as to whether the house trailer meets the requirements of the building code and other applicable ordinances of the town, and whether or not the lot and house trailer, if allowed to be placed upon the lot, would meet all of the requirements of the building code, the zoning ordinance, and other applicable ordinances of the town. The building inspector shall forward the application, together with his report and investigation, to the town council. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 11.05)  
Sec. 14-376. - Public hearing requirements on all applications; notices. 
(a)  After receiving the application and report of the building inspector, the town council shall set a date for a public hearing on the application. Public notice of the public hearing shall be sent to owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the lot upon which the house trailer is proposed to be located. Such notice shall be given, not less than ten days before the date set for hearing, to all such owners who have rendered their property for town taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved town tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the notice, properly addressed and postage paid, in the town post office. 
(b)  After such public hearing, the town council shall either grant, grant as modified, or deny the request taking into consideration the location and size of the lot, the size and construction of the house trailer proposed to be located upon the lot, the population density in the area, the location and use of the buildings, structures, and land in the area; provided, however, that no request shall be granted if the house trailer or lot, or the lot with the house trailer located thereon, would be contrary to any ordinance or regulation of the town or in violation of any ordinance or regulation. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 11.06)  
Sec. 14-377. - Issuance of permits. 
After the public hearing if the request is granted, the town council, by resolution, shall cause a special limited permit to be issued authorizing the location of the house trailer upon the lot for occupancy and use as a dwelling along with any conditions which are necessary and desirable to carry out the purpose of this article and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens, and the building inspector shall then issue a certificate of occupancy under the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 11.07)  
Sec. 14-378. - Permit does not waive other codes and regulations. 
Where applicable, all building codes, rules and regulations shall be effective as to house trailers and mobile homes located as allowed under a special limited permit. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 11.08)  
Sec. 14-379. - Use of mobile homes longer than one year. 
The maximum length of time a house trailer or mobile home may be located upon any tract of land under the same ownership or possession by the same person is one year unless an exception has been made by the town council due to extraordinary circumstances. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 11.09)  
Sec. 14-380. - Issuance of permit does not constitute rezoning of property. 
Issuance of such special limited permit shall in no manner constitute a rezoning of the area, and such permit may be revoked or suspended if the conditions shall be violated. Any time limit placed upon the special limited permit shall not entitle such use beyond its expiration. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 11.10)  
Secs. 14-381—14-410. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - MOVING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 14-411. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means an individual or a partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association or other legal entity however organized, or agent of such. 
Street or public street means any street, alley, avenue, lane, boulevard, drive, place or highway commonly used for the purpose of travel within the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 12.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-412. - Moving permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move, remove from or relocate within the town any new or used house, building or structure or any assembled portion of any new or used, house, building or structure from a location within or without the town, without first obtaining a building permit. This section shall not apply to house trailers and mobile homes governed by article X of this chapter or to accessory structures as defined in the zoning chapter, nor shall apply to house trailers and mobile homes governed by section 14-421. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 12.02)  
Sec. 14-413. - Application, permit fee and contents. 
(a)  Any person desiring to move or relocate any new or used house, building or structure, or any assembled portion of any new or used, house, building or structure from a location within or without the town to another location, lot or tract of land within the town, shall file an application with the director of community development requesting permission to move or relocate a particular house, building or structure upon a lot or tract of land in the town. 
(b)  Upon the filing of the application, the applicant shall pay the town a fee to move or relocate any new or used house, building or structure as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code to pay the cost of processing the application. An application fee is not required when the structure is certified by the state. 
(c)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, and proof that the applicant or his agent is licensed in compliance with section 14-421(6). 
(2)  Description and size of the house, building or structure to be moved, together with a picture. 
(3)  Legal description of the lot and the local address upon which the house, building or structure is to be moved or relocated. 
(4)  A drawing or plot plan showing the dimensions of the lot or tract of land upon which the house, building or structure is to be relocated, and the location of existing buildings or structures upon the lot, if any, together with the location of the existing buildings or structures upon adjoining lots. 
(5)  The number, make, type and weight of the vehicles, whether powered or otherwise, which the applicant proposes to use in the course of the move. 
(6)  A certificate of insurance showing insurance coverage in force by the applicant as follows: 
a.  Public liability insurance in amounts not less then $50,000.00 per person and $100,000.00 per accident for bodily injury, and $50,000.00 per accident for property damage. 
b.  Such insurance policies shall name the town as an additional insured covering all of the applicant's operations in the town. Written notice of cancellation of any policy shall be provided to the town manager at least 30 days prior to the date of cancellation. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 12.03)  
Sec. 14-414. - Inspection of building or structure proposed to be moved required. 
Upon filing of the application, the town's director of community development shall investigate the application by inspecting the house, building or structure to be moved or relocated, and the lot or tract of land upon which the house, building or structure is to be relocated. A determination shall be made as to whether the house, building or structure meets the requirements of the building code and other applicable ordinances of the town and whether or not the house, building or structure, if allowed to be moved to the designated lot or tract of land, would meet all of the requirements of the building code or other ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 12.04)  
Sec. 14-415. - Grounds to refuse permit. 
After a determination is made, no building permit will be issued if the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The house, building or structure to be moved could not, once relocated, meet all the requirements of all applicable ordinances of the town. 
(2)  The lot or tract of land after the house, building or structure is located thereon, would not meet all of the requirements of the applicable ordinances of the town. 
(3)  The house, building or structure to be moved has deteriorated more than 50 percent of its original value by virtue of fire, age or normal wear and tear of the elements. 
(4)  The relocation of such house, building or structure upon the lot or tract of land would cause injury to persons or property or damage to the street or other public improvements. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 12.05)  
Sec. 14-416. - Issuance of moving permit; conditions. 
The director of community development may authorize a building permit to be issued to move such house, building or structure upon the lot or tract of land, upon compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  The condition that an irrevocable letter of credit or performance bond, made out to the town, in a form approved by the town attorney and in the amount of the estimated cost of relocating the house, building or other structure and improving the same to conform to all town ordinances and state statutes, as approved by the town engineer, is completed and filed with the town secretary; 
(2)  The filing of the indemnity bond required by section 14-420; and 
(3)  Compliance with any other requirements or restrictions as the director of community development shall determine are necessary and appropriate. 
Such letter of credit or performance bond shall be available to the town to secure the proper location of the house, building or other structure in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 12.06)  
Sec. 14-417. - Time for completing exterior improvement. 
Once the house, building or structure has been relocated, the approved applicant shall have 90 days to complete all exterior improvements to such house, building or structure, including all masonry requirements and lot landscaping. The building official may grant one 90-day extension to this period. No additional extension can be granted by the building official, and any request of the applicant beyond 180 days must be submitted to the town council for approval. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 12.07)  
Sec. 14-418. - Certificate of occupancy not to be issued unless in compliance with town ordinances. 
The director of community development shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for use of such house, building or structure until it complies with all applicable ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 12.08)  
Sec. 14-419. - Governmental agencies are exempt from article regulations. 
The United States government, the state, the county, the town, independent school district or any other governmental agency of the federal, state, county or municipal government are hereby exempted from complying with the provisions of this article; provided, however, that each governmental agency desiring to move a house, building or other structure shall first notify the director of community development, in writing, of such proposed move, secure the approval of the director of community development of such proposed relocation of such building, and comply with the building code and other ordinances of the town. Additionally, all governmental agencies shall provide the required indemnity bond contained in section 14-420. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 12.09)  
Sec. 14-420. - Indemnity bond required. 
(a)  Any person shall, before moving any house, building, structure or assembled portion, along, upon or across any public street, avenue, thoroughfare, or alley in the town, file with the town secretary a surety bond executed by some good and solvent surety company, authorized to do business in the state, payable to the town for the use and benefit of any party injured as a result of the relocation of any house, building or structure, conditioned that the person applying for such permit will indemnify and save and protect the town and any injured person harmless from any and all damages arising from or caused by the moving of such house, building or structure. 
(b)  Such bond shall be for the sum of $1,000.00, and any person who is damaged, in any way, by reason of the moving of such house, building, structure or its assembled portion, shall be entitled to such bond pursuant to an order of any court having jurisdiction. Such bond shall be subject to the approval of the town attorney. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 12.10)  
Sec. 14-421. - Permit conditions. 
A permit to move any house, building, structure or assembled portion thereof, along, upon, or across any street, avenue, thoroughfare, or alley of the town, shall be issued by the director of community development, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant must have complied with the prescribed requirements for an indemnity bond and letter of credit or performance bond before a permit shall be issued. 
(2)  The route over which any house, building or other structure is to be moved is subject to the approval of the town engineer. 
(3)  No stakes, poles or other devices shall be driven into any paved portion of any street, avenue, thoroughfare, or alley, nor shall any device used in connection with the moving of any house, building or structure be attached in any way to electrical or telephone poles. The applicant shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the director of community development, through letters of approval from all affected utility companies, that the payment of all expenses in the taking down, moving, disconnecting and connecting of any and all wire and poles in connection with any house or other structure shall be at the expense of the applicant. 
(4)  No permit shall be granted for moving any house, building or structure along or across any fire lane. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the mover of any house, building or other structure to use due speed and dispatch in moving such house, building, structure or its assembled portion, and such mover shall in no case obstruct or otherwise interfere with traffic along or across any street, avenue, thoroughfare or alley for a longer period of time than is absolutely necessary under the circumstances, and such mover shall make a report to the chief of the fire department as to the location of such house, building, structure or its assembled portion, while the same is being moved over or upon any public street, avenue, thoroughfare or alley. Such mover shall keep such house, building, structure or its assembled portion properly lighted at night as a warning or danger signal to the public. 
(6)  The applicant or the person making the move for the applicant must be a licensed house mover by the state. 
(7)  The applicant shall perform house moving activities only during daylight hours. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 12.11)  
Sec. 14-422. - Mobile home permit required. 
Except, as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to move or cause to be moved any mobile home into or out of any mobile home park or mobile home subdivision as provided in the comprehensive zoning ordinance, as amended, without first securing a permit. Therefore, as hereafter provided: 
(1)  The owner and/or manager of a mobile home park or subdivision within the corporate limits of the town shall be responsible for notifying new and current tenants of the mobile home permit requirement. An owner and/or manager shall not permit a mobile home moving into or out of their park or subdivision without the appropriate town permit. 
(2)  The owner of a mobile home shall provide the following information to the town in order to obtain a mobile home moving permit: 
a.  Name and address of the owner of the mobile home being moved; 
b.  The make, model and/or serial number; 
c.  The year built; 
d.  The size or square footage of the mobile home; 
e.  Its present location and proposed new location by lot and block and subdivision or street number or other legal description of the property, the state and the county, and the city or town, if applicable; 
f.  Any other information deemed necessary. 
(3)  Accompanying any mobile home moving permit application shall be a permit fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code to help pay the cost of processing the application. 
(4)  A mobile home moving permit for the movement of a mobile home out of a mobile home park or subdivision shall not be issued until such time as the applicant has provided a correct forwarding address and has made payment of any and all outstanding tax liabilities. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 12.12)  
Secs. 14-423—14-450. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - CONSTRUCTION WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, adopted March 2, 2015, amended Art. XII in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Art. XII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 67-05, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 2005. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-451. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on or over the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Assist the town in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(4)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the town; 
(5)  Preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways; 
(6)  Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians; 
(7)  Keep track of the different entities using the rights-of-way to prevent interference between them; 
(8)  Assist in scheduling common trenching and street cuts; and 
(9)  Protect the safety, security, appearance, and condition of the public rights-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-452. - Authority and scope. 
No person shall commence or continue with the construction of facilities within the public rights-of-way except as provided by the ordinances and directives of the town. All construction activity in the public rights-of-way will be in accordance with this article. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-453. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  The town may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person from knowingly using the public rights-of-way unless the person has complied with the terms of this article. 
(b)  A person commits a class C misdemeanor offense who commences or continues with the construction of facilities within the public rights-of-way, except as permitted by this article or by state law. Each day the person continues with the construction of facilities or engages in maintenance that requires excavation in or blocks the public rights-of-way in violation of this article constitutes a separate offense. Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 per violation per day. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-454. - Conflict with franchise. 
To the extent the provisions of this article conflict with the specific provisions of a franchise granted by the town and accepted by the franchisee, the provisions of the franchise shall prevail during the term of the franchise. To the extent that the provisions can be reconciled, both the franchise and this article shall be given effect. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-455. - Definition of terms. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
Certificated telecommunications provider means the same as in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.002(2), as amended. Certificated telecommunications provider shall include any entity that has been granted a certificate from the Texas Public Utility Commission under V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 54 authorizing that entity to provide local exchange telephone service. 
Construction means the construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, removal, excavation, maintenance, repair or other work in connection with facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
Contractor means a person registered with the town to construct facilities on behalf of a user within the public rights-of-way. This definition includes both contractors and subcontractors. 
Facilities means any and all of the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, pipes, underground and overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plant, and appurtenances and all associated physical equipment placed in, on or under the public rights-of-way. 
Franchise means the initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the town or other franchising authority having jurisdiction over the public rights-of-way, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, ordinance, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or agreement. 
Permittee means a person who holds an issued permit from the town to work in the public rights-of-way. 
Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, governmental entity or any other legal entity. 
Public rights-of-way means public right-of-way as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.002(6), as amended to include the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the town has an interest. The term includes Texas Department of Transportation right-of-way. 
Town means the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, or an authorized agent of the town. 
User means a person who owns and maintains facilities within the public rights-of-way. A user includes a franchise holder, certificated telecommunications provider, or property owner and their employees. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Secs. 14-456—14-470. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION AND PERMIT 
 
Sec. 14-471. - Registration. 
(a)  In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, all users and contractors within the public rights-of-way shall annually register with the town. This includes contractors working for the town on town projects. For entities with a current franchise, that franchise shall be submitted with the registration form. When any information provided with the registration changes, the user or contractor shall inform the town of the change before the change occurs. If the name of the company or responsible person changes, a new registration form must be submitted for approval. 
(b)  Said registration shall be upon forms supplied by the town and shall become null and void on December 31 of each year. An appropriate fee for registration shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  A registration fee shall not be charged to a residential property owner in connection with his legal residence. For this section, legal residence shall be defined as property for which a property owner shows proof of a homestead exemption. 
(2)  For entities with a franchise, no registration fee shall be charged and the registration shall be valid for the term of the franchise. 
(c)  The town shall issue a registration to the applicant if the town, after review of the application, determines that the applicant: 
(1)  Has complied with all requirements for issuance of the registration; and 
(2)  Has not made a false or inaccurate statement as to a material matter on the application for registration; and 
(3)  Has not failed to pay any fees owed the town as a result of work performed in the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  Any registration regulated by this article may be placed on hold or suspended by the town thereby preventing any additional permits being issued if it is determined by the town that corrective action is needed for compliance with the requirements of section 18-32. If any contractor registration is suspended, the procedures outlined in chapter 18, article II, shall apply. Any registration placed on hold more than three times in a calendar year may be suspended. 
(e)  The town shall revoke a registration if the town determines that the registration holder has: 
(1)  Given false or inaccurate information on the application for registration or in a hearing concerning the registration; or 
(2)  Violated the provisions of this article; or 
(3)  If the registration holder has a franchise with the town, violated the terms of the franchise. 
(f)  If the town denies or revokes a right-of-way registration, the town shall give notice by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or registration holder. The applicant or registration holder may appeal the decision to deny or revoke by filing written notice with the town manager, within five days after receipt of notice. The town manager shall mail or cause to be personally delivered, written notice of the time and place of a hearing on the appeal to the person appealing. The notice shall be mailed to the address specified in the notice of appeal form. The town manager shall conduct a hearing and shall make a decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The decision of the town manager shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-472. - Construction permits. 
(a)  No person shall perform any construction of facilities in public rights-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit from the town. A completed application for a permit with all required information attached shall be submitted on forms supplied by the town. Permits will be limited to street sections, block sections, or addresses, at the discretion of the town. The submittal of a completed permit application with an attached approved permit from the Texas Department of Transportation shall serve as the construction permit for work within Texas Department of Transportation rights-of-way, once submitted, approved, and issued. An appropriate fee for permit application review shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Emergency responses related to existing facilities. When necessary to prevent service interruptions or the imminent threat of harm to persons or property, work may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however, immediately after cessation of the emergency a permit must be obtained for the work performed, or being performed, in the public rights-of-way and an updated map of any relocated facilities shall be submitted. Permits shall be issued only to persons who have a valid registration or franchise with the town. Permits shall be issued only to persons who will be doing the work within the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Work issued as a part of a development permit, CIP project, or a building permit. 
(3)  Maintenance of equipment, such as exchange of equal parts, in the same location. 
(b)  Permit submittals will be reviewed and comments sent back to the applicant within ten working days. If the permit submitted is incomplete, the application will be rejected as an "incomplete submittal" and the determination shall specify the documents or other information needed to complete the application and shall state that the application shall expire if the required documents or other information are [not] submitted within 45 days after the date the application was submitted. Each subsequent re-submittal will be reviewed and comments sent to the applicant within ten working days. 
(c)  An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have expired 45 days after the date of submittal, unless such application has been pursued as provided above or a permit has been issued. The town is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 45 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything else in this section, no work may begin until a permit has been issued and an onsite pre-construction inspection between the permittee and the town inspector has been scheduled and approved as required by section 14-484, "Notification of construction start". 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015; Ord. No. 42-19 , § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Secs. 14-473—14-480. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 14-481. - Compliance with permit. 
(a)  All construction in the public rights-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the facilities. The town shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as may be reasonably required to ensure compliance with the permit. 
(b)  A copy of the construction permit, and engineering plans if required, that have been reviewed and released for construction shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the town at all times when construction is occurring. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-482. - Time for completion. 
All construction authorized by a permit must be completed in the time specified in the permit. For good and satisfactory reasons, any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this article. The town may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 30 days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-483. - Federal or state permits. 
A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state rights-of-way located in the town shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the town at all times when construction is occurring. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-484. - Notification of construction start. 
An on-site pre-construction inspection meeting must be scheduled and attended by the contractor, and construction must be approved by the town, before any construction may begin. Before this meeting is scheduled, all non-town owned utilities must be marked. During this inspection all town utilities will be identified and marked, if needed. In addition, during this on-site pre-construction inspection meeting the permittee shall provide the "One-Call" ticket number assigned in compliance with the Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act. The permittee shall also provide notification to property owners adjacent to the construction site by letter or door hangers at least 48 hours in advance of the start of construction. The notification shall include contact information. In the event the construction is an emergency response as described in section 14-472(a)(1), notification of construction shall be made to the town as soon as practicable, but no later than the next business day. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-485. - Compliance with codes and laws. 
Construction shall be in conformance with all town codes and applicable local, state, and federal laws. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-486. - Storm water and erosion control. 
The permittee shall be responsible for storm water management and erosion control that complies with town, state, and federal guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, silt fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open holes, and backed silt fencing in high erosion areas. Upon request, the permittee may be required to furnish documentation submitted to or received from the federal or state government. Erosion control facilities shall be in place prior to commencement of construction. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-487. - Notification of damage. 
The permittee shall notify the town immediately of any damage to other utilities, whether owned by the town, another public entity, a franchisee or a private utility. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-488. - Working hours. 
Except in emergency situations, all construction within public rights-of-way shall be performed during standard daylight hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Saturday (collectively referred to as "standard working hours"). Notwithstanding the definition of standard working hours, all required inspections and the performance of any construction which requires monitoring by the town's inspection staff shall only be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday ("regular inspection hours"), unless special hours have been approved. Construction not requiring inspections or monitoring by the town's inspection staff can be done at any time during standard working hours. Any construction performed under emergency conditions, or when construction must be concluded under artificial lighting, lighting shall be erected and directed so that it shall not shine upon any residence or create a visual traffic hazard. 
Required inspections and monitoring of construction by the town's inspection staff outside of regular inspection hours but within standard working hours may be requested by the permittee. The approval of any request to perform construction requiring inspections or monitoring of construction by the town's inspection staff outside of regular inspection hours but within standard working hours shall only be granted if: 
(1)  Contractor submits the request together with a detailed schedule of the construction proposed to be performed in writing to the town no later than 4:00 p.m. at least three days before the inspections/monitoring are requested to begin; 
(2)  Overtime sheet has been submitted, approved and required overtime has been paid; and 
(3)  Town inspection staff are available to perform the inspections and monitoring requested. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-489. - Worksite regulations. 
(a)  In performing the work covered by the construction permits, the permittee shall: 
(1)  Comply with trench safety requirements adopted by federal, state, and local law; 
(2)  Follow the appropriate national safety code, as applicable, regarding design and construction procedures; 
(3)  Compact the backfillings to a density of 95 percent standard proctor density, as determined by a testing laboratory so as to prevent settling when a trench lies under any town street, or within 18 inches of a town street, and otherwise, to a density which meets the North Central Texas Council of Government specifications, as adopted by the town; 
(4)  Install new facilities located within the right-of-way at a minimum depth of 24 inches, or at a minimum depth approved by the town, with the following minimum clearances, except where the town finds an alternate clearance can safely accommodate existing utilities: 
a.  All conduits that cross an existing sanitary sewer or water main shall have a two-foot minimum vertical clearance from any existing pipes; 
b.  All conduits that cross an existing storm sewer shall have a two-foot minimum vertical clearance from the exterior face of the existing storm sewer; and 
c.  All conduits that run parallel to an existing storm sewer, sanitary sewer or water main shall have a three-foot minimum horizontal clearance from the exterior face of the pipes or manholes and all electrical conduits shall run on the opposite side of the street from water lines; 
d.  All conduits crossing an existing traffic signal conduit shall have a two-foot clearance from any existing conduit; 
(5)  Have the obligation to use trenchless technology. The town may waive the requirement of trenchless technology if the town determines that the field conditions warrant the waiver, based upon information provided to the town by the permittee; 
(6)  Ensure that the portion of the public rights-of-way in which repair work is conducted is, at all times and to the extent practicable, kept free of accumulating water; 
(7)  Promptly remove from the public rights-of-way all earth, gravel, stone or other material excavated from the area of such repair work, which is not needed for fill material at that location; 
(8)  Notify the town immediately of any damage to other facilities, either town or privately owned; 
(9)  Ensure that newly installed facilities will not interfere with other facilities, in particular gravity dependent facilities; 
(10)  Maintain a vertical clearance of at least four feet below the bottom of the proposed stream bed or drainage facilities, if applicable. The applicant shall contact the town to determine whether future improvements to the channel may impact the cable alignment. 
(11)  Maintain a minimum of 20 feet vertical clearance above the top of pavement at any signalized intersection and shall not obstruct any traffic signal indication or detection device. No franchise device shall be attached to any traffic signal equipment. 
(b)  In performing work on facilities within the public rights-of-way, a permittee shall not: 
(1)  Unreasonably interfere with the operation of other facilities or equipment situated within the public rights-of-way, whether owned or maintained by the town or other users; 
(2)  Use dynamite or other explosives during the excavation without the prior written approval of the town; or 
(3)  Remove locate flags from a location while facilities are being constructed. 
(c)  A permittee is responsible for the workmanship and any damages by a contractor or subcontractor. This provision is not intended to affect any legal relationship between a permittee and its contractors. A responsible representative of the permittee will be available to the town at all times during construction. 
(d)  A permittee is responsible for: 
(1)  Physically verifying the location both horizontal and vertical of all affected facilities, or, if required by the town, hand digging or potholing, prior to any excavation or boring, with the exception of work involving only lane closures; and 
(2)  Obtaining line locaters from all affected utilities prior to any excavation. Use of the Geographic Information System or the plans of record does not satisfy this requirement. 
(e)  The town must approve in advance the placement of all franchise utility poles, manholes and/or handholes. Franchise utility poles, handholes or manholes shall not be located in sidewalks or handicap ramps, unless approved by the town. 
(f)  The town may stop work under the permit at any time upon finding that conditions at the worksite exist that pose an immediate risk of harm to persons and/or property. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-490. - Traffic, detours, barricades. 
(a)  Except in emergency conditions, a person shall obtain prior approval of the town when a street or sidewalk cut is required, and comply with all requirements of the town for street cuts. 
(b)  A permittee or person shall not cut or open more than one-half of the roadway at any time in order to maintain the flow of traffic at all times. However, in an emergency or with the permission of the town along with an approved traffic control plan, the total width of the roadway may be cut or opened provided barricades are placed at the first intersection each way from the cut and detour signs are erected. 
(c)  Except in an emergency, all street closures or detours that will exceed 24 hours in duration shall require an approved traffic control plan and shall be posted by a sign at least two days prior to the closure or detour. If a cut or opening in a street is left open after 4:00 p.m., a barricade or temporary fencing must be placed on both sides of the cut and flares or red or amber lights shall be placed in front of each barricade. In the alternative, the permittee may cover the cut with steel plates. 
(d)  In performing the work, a permittee shall furnish and install the barricades, flares, and lights as necessary, and in compliance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and an approved traffic control plan. In the event there is a conflict between the provisions of this article and the provisions of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, the latter shall be controlling. 
(e)  During the time the work is actually being conducted, the permittee shall provide a flagger to alert the public to the work, when required by the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices or when required by the town. 
(f)  Lane closures on arterial streets as shown on the town's thoroughfare plan will be limited to between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. All traffic control devices shall be in place prior to the start of construction. All lane closures shall comply with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Traffic control plans shall be submitted and approved by the traffic engineer. Alterations to these lane closure times shall be approved by the traffic engineer or designee. 
(g)  Any work that may involve construction within the public rights-of-way adjoining a school within the town must be coordinated with the town so as to minimize traffic conflicts and street closures during school days. Lane closures near schools shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. while school is in session. Alterations to these lane closure times shall be approved by the traffic engineer or designee. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-491. - Information signs. 
For projects permitted in lengths greater than 1,000 lineal feet, a minimum three feet by three feet informational sign with four-inch letters stating the identity and the telephone number of the permittee shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur prior to the beginning of the work in the public rights-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time of construction. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-492. - Restoration of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  When a permittee completes construction the permittee shall promptly restore the public rights-of-way to a condition at least as good as existed immediately prior to work commencing. The permittee shall return all flowlines and grades in the public rights-of-way to their original condition and shall complete restoration, which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Replacing or properly repairing the surface, base, irrigation system, and landscape treatment of any public rights-of-way that may be excavated or damaged by reason of the construction of the permittee's facilities; 
(2)  Replacing all ground cover with equal to the type of ground cover damaged during work, or better either by sodding or seeding, as directed by the town. 
(3)  Installing of all manholes and handholes, as required. 
(4)  Backfilling all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes, unless other safety requirements are approved by the town. 
(5)  Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines. 
(6)  Restoring excavation site to town specifications. 
(7)  Removing all locate flags during the clean-up process. 
(b)  The permittee shall be responsible for any damage caused by its work in the public rights-of-way, whether to public or private property, and shall immediately repair or replace said property or compensate the owner for damage to said property. Until such repair, replacement or compensation has been made, the permittee's work shall not be deemed completed. Traffic signal damage must be repaired the same day by a qualified traffic signal contractor. The traffic signal must be placed back in full operation. 
(c)  The permittee shall complete restoration to the reasonable satisfaction of the town within 30 calendar days after completion of the work, unless otherwise extended by the town. 
(d)  Upon failure of a permittee to perform any such repair or replacement work, after five working days of receipt of a written notice given by the town to the permittee, the town may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the permittee. The permittee shall reimburse the town for the costs so incurred within 60 calendar days from the receipt of the town's invoice by the permittee. 
(e)  Should the town reasonably determine, within two years from the date of completion of the repair work by the permittee, that the surface, base, irrigation system, or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to bring the work to a condition at least as good as existed immediately prior to the construction commencing, the permittee shall perform such additional restoration work. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the town determines that the failure of the permittee to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the town may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts subject to the indemnification requirements of section 14-503. The permittee shall promptly reimburse the town for all costs incurred by the town within 60 calendar days from the receipt of the town's invoice. 
(g)  If a permittee performs emergency construction in the public rights-of-way pursuant to section 140-172(a) of this article, the permittee shall comply with the requirements of this section for restoration of the public rights-of-way. 
(h)  Although no work will be permitted on private property adjacent to public rights-of-way, these restoration provisions shall apply to any damages to the adjacent private property as a result of construction within the public rights-of-way. 
(i)  If the permittee fails to diligently perform the work described in the permit, abandons the job, or for other reasons does not complete the work within a timely manner, the town, after giving notice to the permittee, shall have the authority to take such action as is necessary to restore the public rights-of-way to a good and safe condition for the benefit and convenience of the public. If the failure to complete the work causes a safety hazard, the town shall commence restoration and shall notify the permittee as promptly as possible after commencing work. Under these circumstances, the permittee shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the town in restoring the public rights-of-way and shall make no claim against the town for any excess costs or expenses or damage incurred by the permittee on account of the town's action. 
(j)  If a permittee fails to perform necessary restoration in accordance with the requirements of this section, all work in progress, except that related to the required restoration, which has been permitted but not completed may be halted and the town may place a hold on any permits not approved until all restoration is complete. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-493. - Record drawings. 
When requested, the permittee shall provide "record drawings" within 90 days of completion of construction. The "record drawings" shall be in a format used by the permittee in its ordinary course of business, but may exclude customer specific, proprietary or confidential information. If the release of the location of any utility, including water and sewer or of the "record drawings" submitted under this section would jeopardize public safety, the information shall be considered confidential. In addition, if "record drawings" submitted under this section include information expressly designated by the user as a trade secret or other confidential information protected from disclosure by state law, the town may not disclose the information to the public without the consent of the user, unless otherwise compelled by an opinion of the attorney general pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, or by a court having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-494. - Emergency conditions. 
If the town manager declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by written notice the removal or abatement of facilities, a permittee shall remove or abate the permittee's facilities by the deadline provided in the manager's request. Upon failure of a permittee to perform such removal or abatement after five working days of receipt of written request from the town manager, the town may perform such work. The permittee shall reimburse the town for all costs or liability incurred by the town within 60 calendar days from the date of the town invoice. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-495. - Conditions for occupancy of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  In the exercise of governmental functions, as lawfully authorized by state and federal law, the town has first priority over all other users of the public rights-of-way. The town reserves the right to construct sewer, gas, water, drainage and other pipe lines, cables and conduits, to do underground and overhead work and/or change aerial facilities, in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley, or public rights-of-way occupied by a user, and to change the curbs, sidewalks, or the grade of the streets in accordance with state and federal law. Other projects within the public rights-of-way, such as beautification facilities, will not have higher priority over other users. 
(b)  The town shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way among known users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the public health and safety considerations of each type of user and to the extent the town can demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional users, may limit new users, as allowed under state or federal law. 
(c)  If the town authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley or public rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the authorized users of the public rights-of-way. If the town closes or abandons public rights-of-way that contains a portion of a user's facilities, the town shall close or abandon such public rights-of-way subject to the rights of the user. 
(d)  Subject to applicable state law, whenever the town has determined that removal, relocation, change, or alteration of a user's facilities in the public rights-of-way is reasonably necessary for the widening or straightening of a street, or because the facilities otherwise interfere with the public use of the public rights-of-way, upon written notice by the town, the user shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of the user's facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within 120 days, except in circumstances that require additional time as reasonably determined by the town based upon information provided by the user. Prior to relocation, the town shall provide a suitable location within the public rights-of-way or another property or place for relocation of the facilities sufficient to maintain service. For projects expected to take longer than 120 days to remove, relocate, change, or alter, the town will confer with the user and will determine a reasonable period of time for the removal, relocation, change or alteration. Should the removal, relocation, change or alteration be deemed by the user to impose a significant financial hardship, the user shall have the right to present alternative proposals to the town and the town shall give due consideration to any such alternative proposals. This section shall not be construed to prevent a permittee's recovery of the cost of removal, relocation, change or alteration from private third parties who initiate the request for removal, relocation, change or alteration. If the permittee fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by the town under this section, the town may pursue legal action to compel action by the permittee and to recover from the permittee any liabilities or damages incurred by the town on account of such delay. Notwithstanding anything in this subsection (d), the town and the permittee may agree in writing to different time frames than those provided above if circumstances reasonably warrant such change. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to, weather conditions, emergency conditions, accuracy and completeness of engineering plans or changes in design, relocation, coordination and other criteria which may delay projects. 
(e)  A permittee may trim trees in or over the public rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the town including the prohibition of tree topping. A permittee trimming trees within public rights-of-way shall be either certified or shall have initiated the process to obtain certification using the standards of Tree Line USA, a program sponsored by the National Arbor Day Foundation. The permittee shall make reasonable efforts to contact affected property owners prior to necessary tree trimming operations. Should the permittee, its contractor or agent fail to remove tree trimmings within 24 hours under routine circumstances, or within 24 hours after all service restoration activities have been completed under emergency conditions, the town may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the town, the permittee shall reimburse the town for all costs incurred within 60 calendar days. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Secs. 14-496—14-500. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INSURANCE 
 
Sec. 14-501. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  A permittee shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts reasonably prescribed by the town with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas and acceptable to the town throughout the term of occupancy of public rights-of-way. At the time of registration, a permittee shall furnish the town with proof of insurance. The town reserves the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably adjust insurance and limits when the town determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the permittee require adjustment of the coverage. For purposes of this section, the town will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas or letters written by the permittee in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein. However, for the town to accept such letters the permittee must demonstrate by written information that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the town, based on financial information requested by and furnished to the town. 
(b)  The permittee shall furnish to the town copies of certificates of insurance or proof of self-insurance evidencing the coverage required by section 14-502. 
(c)  Insurance policies shall: 
(1)  Name the town and its officers, employees, board members, and elected representatives as additional insureds for all applicable coverage. 
(2)  Provide for 30 days notice to the town for cancellation or non-renewal. 
(d)  The permittee shall immediately advise the town attorney of actual or potential litigation that may develop and affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify. 
(e)  This section creates no right of recovery of an insurer against the town. The required insurance policies shall protect the permittee and the town. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. 
(f)  The policy "other insurance" shall not apply to the town if the town is an insured under the policy. 
(g)  The permittee shall pay premiums and assessments. A company which issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the town for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by the permittee must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the town in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-502. - Minimum amounts of insurance. 
(a)  Comprehensive general liability. 
Property damage ..... $1,000,000.00 
Personal injury ..... $1,000,000.00 
Products—Comp/OP AGG ..... $2,000,000.00 
Aggregate ..... $2,000,000.00 
(b)  Comprehensive automobile liability. 
Personal injury, each person ..... $500,000.00 
Property damage, each occurrence ..... $500,000.00 
(c)  Worker's compensation and employer's liability. 
Each accident ..... $1,000,000.00 
Disease—Policy limit ..... $1,000,000.00 
Disease—Each employee ..... $1,000,000.00 
(d)  Umbrella liability insurance. 
Combined single limit ..... $2,000,000.00 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 14-503. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Except as to certificated telecommunications providers, each permittee placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall agree to promptly defend, indemnify and hold the town harmless from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for: (1) damage to or loss of property of any person (including, but not limited to the user, a permittee, its agents, officers, employees, contractors and subcontractors; the town's agents, officers, and employees; and third parties); and/or (2) death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person (including but not limited to the agents, officers, contractors, subcontractors, and employees of the user, a permittee, or the town, and third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful act of omissions of the permittee, its agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to this article. 
(b)  This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability attributable to the negligence of the town, its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors. 
(c)  The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the town and are not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other permittee or entity. 
( Ord. No. 12-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015)  
DIVISION 5. - NETWORK NODES AND NODE SUPPORT POLES 
 
Sec. 14-504. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to establish policies and procedures for the placement of network nodes and node support poles in the public right-of-way and on service poles within the town's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefits and will be consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the town public rights-of-way and the town as a whole. 
(b)  Intent. In enacting this division, the town is establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by network nodes and node support poles, including without limitation, ensuring that network nodes and node support poles do not adversely affect: 
(1)  Use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  The operation of facilities lawfully located in public right-of-way or public property; 
(4)  The ability of the town to protect the environment, including the prevention of damage to trees; 
(5)  The character of residential and historic areas, and town parks, in which network nodes may be installed; and 
(6)  The rapid deployment of network nodes to provide the benefits of wireless services. 
( Ord. No. 28-17 , § 1, 8-21-2017)  
Sec. 14-505. - Adoption and implementation of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Title 9, Subtitle A, Ch. 284. 
(a)  The town hereby adopts and implements the authority promulgated by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Title 9, Subtitle A, Ch. 284, as it may be amended, subject to the limitations of the same. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.002 are hereby adopted as if set forth herein in their entirety. 
( Ord. No. 28-17 , § 1, 8-21-2017)  
Sec. 14-506. - Small wireless facility design manual adopted. 
Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.108, the "Town of Flower Mound Small Wireless Facility Design Manual," as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as the design manual, which together with the regulations set forth in this article XII of chapter 14, where consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 284, shall govern the installation, construction, maintenance and occupancy of the public right-of-way of network nodes and node support poles within the public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 28-17 , § 1, 8-21-2017) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 28-17 , adopted Aug. 21, 2017, incorporates to this article the Town of Flower Mound Small Wireless Facility Design Manual by reference.  
Sec. 14-507. - Conformance with the town's public rights-of-way ordinance. 
Installation of network nodes and node support poles within the public rights-of-way shall require a permit in accordance with section 14-472 of town Code of Ordinances. Any application for the installation of network nodes and node support poles within the public rights-of-way shall conform to this article XII of chapter 14, to the extent said article is not in conflict with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 284, and the Town of Flower Mound Small Wireless Facility Design Manual. All applications shall be required to include an appropriate fee in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound for a permit obtained pursuant to section 14-472 of the town Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 28-17 , § 1, 8-21-2017; Ord. No. 43-19 , § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 14-508. - Agreement required. 
The town manager is authorized to require and enter into a license agreement governing a network provider's use of the public rights-of-way for any purpose authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 284 and in conformance with this article XII of chapter 14, to the extent said article is not in conflict with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 284, and the Town of Flower Mound Small Wireless Facility Design Manual. 
( Ord. No. 28-17 , § 1, 8-21-2017)  
Secs. 14-509, 14-510. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-511. - Title and scope of article. 
(a)  Title. The regulations of this article shall be known as the town "Property Maintenance Standards," and may be cited as such and will be referred to as "this article." 
(b)  Purpose. The purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town by establishing minimum standards applicable to property and structures. 
(2)  The standards of this article are found to be remedial and essential to the public interest, and it is intended that the standards of this article are liberally construed to effect their purpose. 
(c)  Application of article provisions. Nothing in the standards of this article shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the land development code, subpart B of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 9-98, § 2(13.01), 2-16-1998)  
Sec. 14-512. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
(a)  Authority. The town's code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this article's standards. 
(b)  Inspections. For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this article exist, the code official is authorized to inspect the exterior of a structure and exterior property areas. 
(Ord. No. 9-98, § 2(13.02), 2-16-1998)  
Sec. 14-513. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section or as specified in the building code. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of The English Language, Unabridged, Copyright 1986, shall be considered as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. 
Accessory building or structure means a building or structure devoted to uses incidental and accessory to the main use and can be either attached or detached, such as an attached garage, storage area, carport, detached garage, shed or outbuilding. 
Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
Building code means the current building code officially adopted by the town council, or other such codes officially designated by the town council for the regulation of construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and structures. 
Code official means the official charged with the administration and enforcement of this article, or any duly authorized representative. 
Department means the department designated by the town manager to enforce and administer this article. 
Deterioration means a state of disrepair making the building or structure or appurtenance in question of such quality or integrity as to be unsafe and subject to structural failure or to depreciate and infringe on adjacent properties. 
Dilapidated or deteriorated fence means any fence, or portion thereof, that is ten degrees or more out of vertical alignment, has broken or missing pickets or has rotted and deteriorated supports and/or boards. 
Exterior property areas means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of the same owners or operators of such premises. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving and nonconsumption of food. 
Global fence permit means a permit for the repair or replacement of any fencing and/or masonry screening walls located within the same subdivision, to be constructed on two or more contiguous lots without interruption. Interruption may be, but is not limited to, a street, another lot, an open space, or an easement. 
Maintenance means repair and other acts to prevent a decline in the condition of property, ground, structures, appurtenances and equipment; such that the condition does not fall below the standards established by this article and other applicable statutes, codes and ordinances. 
Occupant means any person living and/or sleeping in a dwelling unit or having possession of a space within a building. 
Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without actual possession; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
Perimeter fence means any fence as defined for the purposes of this article that is adjacent to an arterial or collector road as defined in the town's thoroughfare plan, and does not meet the requirements of section 98-821 perimeter screening of this Code. This definition does not include any fence allowed under the town's urban design plan or any barbed wire or metal/wire livestock fencing allowed by this Code in A, agricultural district. 
Premises means a platted lot or its part or an unplatted lot or tract of land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure, and includes any such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon. 
Public nuisance means the following: 
(1)  The physical condition or use of any premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law; 
(2)  Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, deteriorated or dilapidated fences and unsafe structures; 
(3)  Any premises which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or is manifestly unsafe or unsecured as to endanger life, limb or property; or 
(4)  Because of violations of this article, any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances that is in such a state of disrepair that it could reasonably cause injury, damage or harm to a considerable portion of the community in the use and enjoyment of property, materially interfering with the proper use or comfort and enjoyment of surrounding property, taking into consideration the nature and use of the properties in the area and the character of the community in which they are situated, which condition would be substantially offensive and annoying to persons of ordinary sensibilities living in the community." 
Refuse means a heterogeneous accumulation of wornout, used, broken, rejected or worthless materials including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, paper or litter, and other decayable or nondecayable matter. 
Safety means the condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease. 
Sanitary means any condition of good order and cleanliness that precludes the probability of disease transmission. 
Stacks means a number of flues embodied in one structure rising above a roof. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or appurtenances to the same, or any piece or work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
(Ord. No. 9-98, § 2(13.03), 2-16-1998; Ord. No. 46-07, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 53-09, § 2, 12-17-2009; Ord. No. 67-19 , § 1, 12-16-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-514. - Declared a public nuisance. 
The presence of any of the offenses or conditions described in division 2 of this article within the corporate limits of the town in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 9-98, § 2(13.05), 2-16-1998)  
Sec. 14-515. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any property maintenance standard or requirement of this article, who continues to violate or fail to comply with the same after ten days after notice is given and received as set forth in section 14-516, shall also be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1-13 of this Code, not to exceed $500.00 for each separate offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur, not to exceed a maximum total fine of $5,000.00, exclusive of court costs, for a single violation or failure to comply that continues to occur for a period longer than one day. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained in this section, the town may enforce the provisions of this article pursuant to the applicable provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, which chapter provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(c)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article. 
(Ord. No. 9-98, § 2(13.06), 2-16-1998)  
Sec. 14-516. - Notices. 
The procedure for the issuing of notices shall be the same as the issuing of notices in division 4, article II of chapter 34 of this Code, relevant to tall weeds and grass, stagnant water and unsanitary and unsightly matter. 
(Ord. No. 9-98, § 2(13.07), 2-16-1998)  
Sec. 14-517. - Removal by the town upon failure of owner to comply. 
The procedure for the town to correct any violations and assess liens shall be the same as the procedure for the town to correct violations and assess liens under division 4, article II of chapter 34 of this Code, relevant to tall weeds and grass, stagnant water, and unsanitary and unsightly matter. 
(Ord. No. 9-98, § 2(13.08), 2-16-1998)  
Secs. 14-518—14-540. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 14-541. - Enumeration. 
An owner and/or occupant commits an offense under this article if he fails to: 
(1)  Securely close or cover a well, cesspool or cistern; 
(2)  Keep the doors and windows of a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure securely closed to prevent unauthorized entry; 
(3)  Maintain fences and related appurtenances in good condition and not as a dilapidated or deteriorated fence. Fences shall not be propped up or leaned against a pole, piece of lumber or other similar object as a means of support. If 25 percent or more of the perimeter fence is determined to be dilapidated or deteriorated, it may not be repaired; instead the perimeter fence that is adjacent to a town arterial or collector road shall be completely replaced and constructed in accordance with section 14-542; 
(4)  Maintain in good condition and protect all exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and from decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion, and all surfaces with rust and corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from all exterior surfaces; surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement; 
(5)  Maintain all perimeter walls, carports, awnings, patio covers, garages and garage doors, sheds, storage buildings, outbuildings, and other accessory buildings or structures in a structurally sound condition, and free of deterioration; 
(6)  Maintain all satellite dishes, antennas, towers, stacks and other similar structures in a structurally sound and secure condition free of deterioration and instability; 
(7)  Maintain the interior of a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure free from rubbish and garbage; or 
(8)  Replace all broken glass on the exterior of homes and accessory structures. 
The property standards of this section do not apply when the subject premises are the site of either a new construction project or a repair or remodeling project for which a building permit has been issued and reasonable and continuous progress is being made to complete the project or construction. 
(Ord. No. 9-98, § 2(13.04), 2-16-1998; Ord. No. 46-07, § 3, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-13, § 2, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 67-19 , § 2, 12-16-2019)  
Sec. 14-542. - Perimeter fence standards. 
Any perimeter fence found to be in violation of subsection 14-541(3) must be repaired or replaced, as applicable, in conformity with the standards set forth below. In addition, any new perimeter fence shall be constructed in conformity with the standards set forth below. Perimeter fence repair, replacement and construction must meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Fences shall be a minimum of six feet in height and a maximum of eight feet in height. The height of the fence shall not extend above any masonry column. The style of the fence shall be board on board, with a nominal size one-inch by four-inch trim board at the top of the fence. Fences located within front yard setbacks must be constructed of tubular steel and may not exceed four feet in height. 
(2)  All vertical posts shall be 2 3/8 -inch minimum outside diameter, .095 gauge galvanized metal. Vertical posts shall be spaced at no greater than eight feet on center, set a minimum of 18 inches deep into two-foot deep, ten-inch diameter concrete post footings. 
(3)  For a six-foot tall fence, a minimum of three rails shall be used. For an eight-foot tall fence, a minimum of four rails shall be used. The fence pickets shall be attached to the horizontal rails running from vertical post to post as described in subsection (4) below. The size of the rails shall be no less than nominal size two-inches by four-inches and shall be bolted to steel posts with noncorrosive metal anchor straps and ¼-inch noncorrosive bolts or screws. 
(4)  All nails or fasteners shall be of non-rusting, non-corrosive metal such as hot-dipped galvanized steel. All nails or fasteners shall be of the type (such as screw shank, ring shank, or divergent-point staples) that when properly driven, will not work free due to wind vibration, or shrinkage of members. 
(5)  All materials shall be securely fastened, vertical pickets to horizontal rails, rails to vertical posts, trim board to top rail, to ensure an ongoing attractive appearance and safe condition, free from rot, rust, vandalism, and other sources of decay. 
(6)  The bottom of the fence shall be designed to prevent ground to picket contact. A nominal size two-inch by six-inch kick board shall be used to cover the gap between bottom of pickets and ground. This kick board may have ground contact; however, the kickboard may not impede drainage patterns or create a gap of more than two inches above grade. 
(7)  Posts and rails must be placed on the inside of the fence so that they are not facing a street. 
(8)  The perimeter wood fence shall be constructed with pre-stained western red cedar in medium brown color or composite material in redwood color. Composite material is produced by combining wood fiber and polyethylene plastic, whereby the plastic encapsulates the wood. 
(Ord. No. 46-07, § 4, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 53-09, § 3, 12-17-2009)  
Secs. 14-543—14-570. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 14-571. - International Residential Code adopted. 
The International Residential Code, 2018 edition, including Appendix H and Appendix Q, a copy of which is on file in the office of the town secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the residential building code of the town, the same as though these provisions of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, were copied at length in this section; subject to the deletions, amendments, and additions provided in section 14-572. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 22-05, § 2, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 15-11, § 2, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 23-14, § 2, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 35-16 , § 2, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 31-19 , § 2, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 14-572. - Local amendments to International Residential Code. 
The International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending only the enumerated sections and provisions, as follows, and all sections and provisions not expressly amended or deleted shall remain in full force and effect: 
(a)  Section R101.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section R101.1. Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-family dwellings of the Town of Flower Mound and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code." 
(b)  Section R102.4 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section R102.4. Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Section R102.4.1 and R102.4.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference made to NFPA 70 or the electrical code shall mean the electrical code as adopted. 
(c)  Section R104.10.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby deleted in its entirety as follows: 
Section R104.10.1. Flood hazard area. Deleted. 
(d)  Section R105.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section R105.1. Required. Any owner, contractor, or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or causes any such work to be performed, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permits . 
It shall be the responsibility of any person, firm, or corporation, upon submittal of an application for a building permit for work regulated by this code, to register as a contractor with the town. This form must be submitted with the permit application. Said registration shall be upon forms supplied by the building official and shall become null and void on December 31st of each year. An appropriate fee for registration shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound. 
Exception: Any residential property owner who, at his legal residence, desires to personally make or perform any installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or remodel regulated by this code shall be exempt from paying a registration fee. For this section, legal residence shall be defined as property for which a property owner shows proof of a homestead exemption. 
Any contractor registration regulated by this code may be placed on hold or suspended by the building official , preventing any additional permits being issued, if it is determined by the building official that corrective action is needed for compliance with the requirements of Section 18-32 of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound. If any contractor registration regulated by this code is suspended, the procedures outlined in Chapter 18, Article II, of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound shall apply. Any registration placed on hold more than three times in a calendar year may be subject to suspension by the building official . 
(e)  Section R105.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended, in part, by deleting Item Nos. 5 and 10 and amending Item Nos.1 and 2 to read as follows: 
Section R105.2. Work exempt from permit. Building : 
1.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11.15 m2). 
2.  Fences where an existing gate or pickets are being replaced as long as they are of the same height, material, size, and location, as those being replaced. 
… 
5.  Deleted. 
… 
10.  Deleted. 
(f)  Section R105.3.1.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby deleted in its entirety to read as follows: 
Section R105.3.1.1. Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings in flood hazard areas. Deleted . 
(g)  Section R105.3.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section R105.3.2. Time limitations of applications. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 45 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 45 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(h)  Section R105.5 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending Section 105.5, adding a new Section 105.5.1, entitled "Swimming pools," adding a new Section 105.5.2, entitled "Lawn irrigation systems," adding a new Section 105.5.3, entitled "Fences and retaining walls," adding a new Section 105.5.4, entitled "Foundation repair, electrical, patio cover, re-roof, window/door, and all MISC permits," adding a new Section 105.5.5, entitled "Plumbing permits," adding a new Section 105.5.6, entitled "Mechanical permits," adding a new Section 105.5.7, entitled "Demolition permits," and adding a new Section 105.5.8, entitled "Umbrella permits," to read as follows: 
Section R105.5. Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 45 days after its issuance. In addition, except for those permits specifically named in this section, every permit issued shall become invalid if work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. For this section, suspended or abandoned will be defined as an elapsed time of 180 days between any two approved required inspections. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing, and justifiable cause demonstrated. Once a permit becomes invalid and before such building or work can be recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such building or work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such building or work and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration of more than one year, the permittee shall submit a new application and pay a new full permit fee. 
105.5.1. Swimming pools. Every swimming pool permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and becomes null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection approval within 180 days of the issuance of the permit. In the event of the expiration of the permit, no work or inspections shall be performed until a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be equal to the original fee. ;b3;Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 30 days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
105.5.2. Lawn irrigation systems. Every lawn irrigation system permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and becomes null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection approval within 60 days of the issuance of the permit. In the event of the expiration of the permit, no work or inspections shall be performed until a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be equal to the original fee. ;b3;Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 30 days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
105.5.3. Fences and retaining walls. Every fence or retaining wall permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and becomes null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection approval within 60 days of the issuance of the permit. In the event of the expiration of the permit, no work or inspections shall be performed until a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be equal to the original fee. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 30 days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
105.5.4. Foundation repair, electrical, patio cover, re-roof, window/door, and all MISC permits. Every foundation repair, electrical, patio cover, or any other MISC permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and becomes null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection approval within 60 days of the issuance of the permit. In the event of the expiration of the permit, no work or inspections shall be performed until a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be equal to the original fee. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 30 days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
105.5.5. Plumbing permits. Every plumbing permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and becomes null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection approval within 45 days of the issuance of the permit. In the event of the expiration of the permit, no work or inspections shall be performed until a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be equal to the original fee. 
Exception: Water heater replacement permits must receive a final inspection within 10 days of issue date. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 30 days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
105.5.6. Mechanical permits. Every mechanical permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and becomes null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection approval within 45 days of the issuance of the permit. In the event of the expiration of the permit, no work or inspections shall be performed until a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be equal to the original fee. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 30 days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
Exception: Indoor unit replacement permits must receive a final inspection within 10 days of issue date. 
105.5.7. Demolition permits. Every demolition permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and becomes null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection approval within 60 days of the issuance of the permit. In the event of the expiration of the permit, no work or inspections shall be performed until a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be equal to the original fee. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 30 days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
105.5.8. Umbrella permits. Every umbrella permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and becomes null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection approval within 180 days of the issuance of the permit. In the event of the expiration of the permit, no work or inspections shall be performed until a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be equal to the original fee. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 30 days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. Permits may be extended more than once, but not more than three times. 
(i)  Section R105.10 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section R105.10. Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a citation for working without a permit and/or a fee equal to the total permit fee for that project, which shall be in addition to the required permit fees. 
(j)  Section R106.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by appending a paragraph following the existing text, to read as follows: 
Section R106.1 Submittal documents. {existing text unchanged}…. Foundation and framing plans must be submitted with each application. These plans shall be designed by an engineer licensed by the State of Texas and shall bear that engineer's seal. With the exception of conventional framing per this code, all framing plans for residential dwellings shall be designed by an engineer licensed by the State of Texas, and all drawings and documents must be signed and sealed. 
(k)  Section R106.1.4 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby deleted in its entirety to read as follows: 
Section R106.1.4. Information for construction in flood hazard area. Deleted. 
(l)  Section R106.5 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section R106.5. Retention of construction documents. One set of approved foundation documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from the date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws. 
(m)  Section R109.1.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by appending a paragraph following the existing text, to read as follows: 
Section R109.1.1 Foundation inspection. {existing text unchanged}… Prior to scheduling the required foundation inspection, the design engineer must perform an inspection and provide the building official with a signed and sealed letter stating that the foundation has been installed per the design. 
(n)  Section R109.1.4 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by appending a paragraph following the existing text, to read as follows: 
Section R109.1.4 Framing and masonry inspection. {existing text unchanged}… Prior to scheduling the required "top-out" inspection, the design engineer must perform an inspection and provide the building official with a signed and sealed letter stating that the framing has been installed per the design. 
(o)  A new Section R109.5 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section R109.5. General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official , and such work shall remain accessible and exposed for such purposes until approved. Before any inspection is approved, an address shall be posted that can be read from the street; and all rights-of-way, streets, and alleys shall be clean and clear of mud, sand, concrete, and building materials. All trash, construction debris, and construction material on site shall be contained in an approved manner. In addition to the above requirements, toilet facilities shall be provided for construction workers, and such facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. Construction-worker toilet facilities of the non-sewer type shall conform to ANSI Z4.3. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the town. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the town shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the town shall be liable for any expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. Any inspection that is scheduled and found not to be ready may be assessed a re-inspection fee listed in Appendix A of the code of ordinances. This fee must be paid before approval of a Utility Final inspection. If a Utility Final inspection is not required, this fee must be paid before approval of the All Finals inspection. 
(p)  Section R110 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby deleted in its entirety: 
Section R110. Certificate of occupancy. Deleted. 
(q)  Section R202 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a definition for "Construction trash and debris" and amending the definition of "Townhouse" to read as follows, in alphabetical order: 
Section R202. Definitions. 
CONSTRUCTION TRASH AND DEBRIS. Any material generated by or from a construction site that has no useful purpose as determined by the administrative authority. 
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units separated by property lines in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides. 
(r)  Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Table R301.2 (1). Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria. 
 
Delete remainder of table Manual J Design Criteria and footnote N 
(s)  Section R302.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Exception No. 6 to read as follows: 
Section R302.1. Exterior walls. Exceptions: 
6.  Open non-combustible carport structures may be constructed when approved as required by other adopted ordinances. 
(t)  Section R302.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Exception No. 3 to read as follows: 
Section R302.3. Two-family dwellings. Exception: 
3.  Two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a property line through the structure shall be separated as required for townhouses. 
(u)  Section R302.5.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section R302.5.1. Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with a solid wood doors not less than 1? inches (35mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 1? inches (35mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors. 
(v)  Section R303.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending the Exception to read as follows: 
Section R303.3. Bathrooms. Exception: The glazed areas shall not be required where artificial light and a local exhaust system are provided. The minimum local exhaust rates shall be determined in accordance with Section M1507. Exhaust air from the space shall be exhausted directly to the outdoors unless the space contains only a water closet, a lavatory, or a water closet and a lavatory, which are permitted to be ventilated using an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar system device to remove odors from the air. 
(w)  Section R311.7.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section R311.7.3. Vertical rise. A flight of stairs shall not have a vertical rise larger than 20 feet (6,096 mm) between floor levels or landings. 
(x)  Section R311.7.8 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section R311.7.8. Handrails . Handrails shall be provided on at least one side of each continuous run of treads or flight with four or more risers, except that for stairs or flights of stairs that incorporate winders, the handrail shall be located on the inside radius of the stair or flight of stairs. 
(y)  Section R311.7.8.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending Exception No. 1 to read as follows: 
Section R311.7.8.2. Continuity. Exceptions: 
1.  Handrails shall be permitted to be interrupted by a newel post at a stair landing. 
(z)  Section R313 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting it in its entirety as follows: 
Section R313. AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. Deleted. 
(aa)  Section R315.2.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending exception 2. to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
2.  Installation, alteration, or repairs of electrical powered plumbing or mechanical systems are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(bb)  Section R322 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting it in its entirety as follows: 
Section R322. FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION. Deleted 
(cc)  Section R326.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section R326.1 General. The design and construction of pools and spas shall comply with the 2015 IRC Appendix Q. Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs. 
(dd)  Section R401.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph following the existing paragraph and adding two new exceptions to read as follows: 
Section R401.2. Requirements. {existing text unchanged} … 
Every foundation and/or footing, or any size addition to an existing post-tension foundation, regulated by this code shall be designed and sealed by a Texas-registered engineer. In addition, a letter stating that the design complies with this code shall be submitted at time of application for permit. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Detached storage sheds, play houses, and other similar buildings up to and including 150 square feet: 
Buildings up to and including 150 square feet may be placed on the ground and shall provide resistance to wind load by one of the following methods: 
Anchored to a 4 inch thick slab reinforced with 6 × 6 #10 wire mesh or #3 (?") rebar spaced at 18 inches on center each way. 
Anchored at all corners, each corner anchored by a system to resist a horizontal wind load of 115 (3-sec-gust)/76 miles per hour. 
2.  Habitable additions up to and including 500 square feet, and accessory buildings, play houses, and similar buildings greater than 150 square feet up to and including 500 square feet: 
Beams must be constructed at all perimeters. All beams are required to be at least 10 inches wide and 20 inches deep with 2 #5 (?") bars in the top and 2 #5 (?") bars in the bottom of the beam. Interior beams must also be constructed and located no more than 15 feet apart. All beams must extend at least 12 inches into undisturbed soil. Place #3 (?") bars 18 inches on center each way in the middle of the new 4-inch slab. 
For house additions, the existing concrete pad must be connected to the perimeter beam of the new foundation by #3 (?") bars doweled in to the existing foundation at 24-inch centers. The dowel bars must penetrate into the existing slab a minimum of 6 inches and extend into the new perimeter beam a minimum of 6 inches. 
Note: Regardless of square footage, if the existing slab is post-tensioned, an engineer's design is required. 
(ee)  Section R602.6.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended, the Exception is deleted in its entirety, and Figure R602.6.1 is replaced with a new Figure R602.6.1, entitled "Top Plate Framing to Accommodate Piping" to read as follows: 
Section R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. When piping or ductwork is placed in or partly in an exterior wall or interior load-bearing wall, necessitating cutting, drilling, or notching of the top plate by more than 50 percent of its width, a galvanized metal tie not less than 0.054 inch thick (1.37 mm) (16 Ga) and 5 inches (127 mm) wide shall be fastened across and to the plate at each side of the opening with not less than eight 10d (0.148 inch diameter) having a minimum length of 1 ½ inches (38 mm) at each side of the notch to the first nail hole or equivalent. Fasteners will be offset to prevent splitting of the top plate material. The metal tie must extend a minimum of 6 inches past the opening. See figure R602.6.1. 
Exception: Deleted. 
 
FIGURE R602.6.1
Top Plate Framing to Accommodate Piping
(ff)  Section R703.8.4.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new second paragraph prior to the existing Exception to read as follows: 
Section R703.8.4.1. Size and spacing. { Existing paragraph unchanged .}… 
In stud framed exterior walls, all ties shall be anchored to studs as follows: 
1.  When studs are 16 in (407 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 24 in (737 mm) vertically starting approximately 12 in (381 mm) from the foundation; or 
2.  When studs are 24 in (610 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 16 in (483 mm) vertically starting approximately 8 in (254) from the foundation. 
(gg)  Section R902.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows, and a new Exception No. 5 is added to read as follows: 
Section R902.1. Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. Class A, B, or C roofing shall be installed… {remainder unchanged}. 
Exceptions: 
5.  Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on one-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet. 
(hh)  Part IV-Energy Conservation of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by renaming this Part IV , as follows: 
Part IV-Residential Provisions for Energy Efficiency 
(ii)  Chapter 11 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby deleted and replaced with the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, Residential Provisions with amendments. 
(jj)  Section M1305.1.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section M1305.1.2. Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided… {bulk of paragraph unchanged} …sides of the appliance where access is required. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, access to the attic space shall be provided by one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance can be serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is unobstructed …{remaining text unchanged} . 
(kk)  Section M1401.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section M1401.3 Equipment and appliance sizing. Heating and cooling equipment and appliances for new construction, including additions 500 square feet or greater, shall be sized in accordance with ACCA Manual S or other approved sizing methodologies based on building loads calculated in accordance with ACCA Manual J or other approved heating and cooling calculation methodologies. {remaining existing text unchanged}… 
(ll)  Section M1411.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to replace the first sentence to read as follows: 
Section M1411.3. Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils or evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to the sanitary sewer through the fixture side of a trap, by means of a direct or indirect drain. {remaining existing text unchanged}… 
(mm)  Section M1411.3.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending Item Nos. 3 and 4 by adding a new sentence at the end of each item to read as follows: 
Section M1411.3.1. Auxiliary and secondary drain systems. 
3.  {existing text unchanged}…. A water-level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
4.  {existing text unchanged}…. A water-level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
(nn)  Section M1411.3.1.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new sentence at the end of the existing paragraph to read as follows: 
Section M1411.3.1.1. Water-level monitoring devices. { existing text unchanged }…. A water-level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
(oo)  Section M1503.6 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section M1503.6. Makeup air required. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of 400 cubic feet per minute (0.19 m3/s) shall be provided with makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the difference between the exhaust air rate and 400 cubic feet per minute. Such makeup air systems shall be equipped with a means of closure and shall be automatically controlled to start and operate simultaneously with the exhaust system. 
Exception: Where all appliances in the house are of sealed combustion, power-vent, unvented, or electric, the exhaust hood system shall be permitted to exhaust up to 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) without providing makeup air. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) shall be provided with a makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the difference between the exhaust air rate and 600 cubic feet per minute. 
(pp)  Section M2005.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section M2005.2. Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a storage closet. Water heaters located in a bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion air will not be taken from the living space. Access to such enclosure may be from the bedroom or bathroom when through a solid door, weather-stripped in accordance with the exterior door air leakage requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code and equipped with an approved self-closing device. Direct-vent water heaters are not required to be installed within an enclosure. 
(qq)  Section G2408.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting this section and the listed Exception in their entirety to read as follows: 
Section G2408.3. Private garages. Deleted. 
Exception . Deleted. 
(rr)  Section G2413.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding an exception after the three listed Items to read as follows: 
Section G2413.3. (402.3) Sizing. {existing text unchanged}…. 
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of 1/2" (18 EDH). 
(ss)  Section G2415.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new second paragraph to the existing paragraph to read as follows: 
Section G2415.2. CSST. {existing text unchanged.}…. 
Both ends of each section of medium pressure corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel, and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING 
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure 
Do Not Remove" 
(tt)  Section G2415.12 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section G2415.12. (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade. 
(uu)  Section G2415.12.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting this section in its entirety as follows: 
Section G2415.12.1. (404.12.1) Individual outside appliances. Deleted. 
(vv)  Section G2417.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section G2417.1. (406.1) General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in sections 2417.1.1 through 2417.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code . The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the building official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power, and labor necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder, and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. 
(ww)  Section G2417.4 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section G2417.4. (406.4) Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a monometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. 
(xx)  Section G2417.4.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section G2417.4.1. (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be not less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the building official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diaphragm diameter of three and one half inches (3½"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation, and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3½"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation, and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. 
For welded piping , and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches of water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. 
Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing. 
(yy)  Section G2420.1 (409.1) of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Section G2420.1.4 (409.1.4), entitled "Valves in CSST installations," to read as follows: 
Section G2420.1.4. (409.1.4) Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration, but in no case greater than 12 inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping , fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping . 
(zz)  Section G2420.5.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end to read as follows: 
Section G2420.5.1. (409.5.1) Located within the same room. { existing text unchanged }…. A secondary shutoff valve must be installed within 3 feet (914 mm) of the firebox if appliance shutoff is located in the firebox. 
(aaa)  Section G2421.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new second paragraph and new exception to read as follows: 
Section G2421.1. (410.1) Pressure regulators. { existing text unchanged }…. 
Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in section M1305. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
(bbb)  Section G2422.1.2.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting Exception Nos. 1 and 4 in their entirety as follows: 
Section G2422.1.2.3. (411.1.3.3) Prohibited locations and penetrations. 
Exception No. 1. Deleted 
Exception No. 4. Deleted. 
(ccc)  Section G2445.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new exception to read as follows: 
Section G2445.2. Prohibited use. { existing text unchanged }…. 
Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the building official, unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in International Fuel Gas Code section 108.7. 
(ddd)  Section G2448.1.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section G2448.1.1. (624.1.1) Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access, sizing, relief valves , drain pans, and scald protection shall be in accordance with this code. 
(eee)  Section P2603.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section P2603.3 Protection against corrosion. Metallic piping, except for cast iron, ductile iron and galvanized steel, shall not be placed in direct contact with steel framing members, concrete or cinder walls and floors or other masonry. Metallic piping shall not be placed in direct contact with corrosive soil. Where sheathing is used to prevent direct contact, the sheathing shall have a thickness of not less than 0.008 inch (8 mil) (0.203 mm) and the sheathing shall be made of approved material. Where sheathing protects piping that penetrates concrete or masonry walls or floors, the sheathing shall be installed in a manner that allows movement of the piping within the sheathing. 
(fff)  Section P2603.5.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section P2603.5.1. Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade. 
(ggg)  Section P2801.6.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section P2801.6.1. Pan size and drain. { existing text unchanged }…The pan shall not be less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in depth and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in Table 2906.5. Where a pan drain was not previously installed, a pan drain shall be required for replacement water heaters located on exterior walls or in garages. Replacement water heaters that are not located on an exterior wall or in a garage, shall not be required to add a pan drain, but must be equipped with an automatic shutoff or water-level detection device. 
(hhh)  Section P2801.7 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding new Exception No. 2 to read as follows: 
Section P2801.7. Water heaters installed in garages. { existing text unchanged }…. 
Exception: 
3.  Electric water heaters. 
(iii)  Section P2801.9 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section P2801.9 Water heaters installed in attics or with living space below. Water heaters other than tankless, when located in attic space or a space located above living space, shall be equipped with an approved device to automatically shut off the water supply if a water leak is detected. 
(jjj)  Section P2804.6.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section P2804.6.1. Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge through an air gap 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufacturer's installation instructions and installed in compliance with those instructions. 
5.  Discharge to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors. 
[remainder unchanged] 
(kkk)  Section P2902.5.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section P2902.5.3. Lawn sprinkler systems. The potable water supply system to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed down-stream from an atmospheric breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
All lawn sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a temperature sensing device that stops the flow of water through the lawn sprinkler system when the ambient temperature is thirty-eight degrees Fahrenheit or less. In addition, all systems shall be equipped with a device that stops the flow of water through the lawn sprinkler system when one-quarter inch or more of rain falls. Further, pursuant to Section 551.006 of the Texas Local Government Code, all lawn sprinkling systems shall comply with Section 1903.053 of the Texas Occupations Code, and any rules adopted by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality pursuant to that section. 
(lll)  Section P3003.9.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by deleting the exceptions to read as follows: 
Section P3003.9.2. Solvent cementing. 
Exceptions. Deleted. 
(mmm)  Section P3005.2.2.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section P3005.2.2.1. Building sewer and sewer lateral junction. A clean out must be provided at this junction in compliance with most current Town of Flower Mound Design Criteria and Construction Standards. 
(nnn)  Section P3005.2.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Section P3005.2.3. Building drain and building sewer junction. For swimming pools that are constructed on lots that have public sewer, a drain or backwash line with a minimum size of 1½ inch must be provided. This line must direct waste into the public sewer by use of an air gap into a 3-inch trap. The trap seal of this trap must be protected from freezing, and the standpipe must rise at least 3 inches above grade. 
(ooo)  Section P3111 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, together with all of its component sections, is hereby deleted in its entirety as follows: 
Section P3111. Combination waste and vent system. Deleted. 
Section 3111.1. Type of fixtures. Deleted. 
Section 3111.1.1 Single-fixture systems. Deleted. 
Section 3111.2. Installation. Deleted. 
Section 3111.2.1. Slope. Deleted. 
Section 3111.2.2. Vent connection. Deleted. 
Section 3111.2.3. Vent size. Deleted. 
Section 3111.3. Size and length. Deleted. 
(ppp)  Section P3112.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section P3112.2. Installation. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed in above the floor and may be vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not less than the drain board height, and then returning it downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided with a foot vent taken off the vertical fixture vent by means of a wye-branch immediately below the floor and extending to the nearest partition and then through the roof to the open air, or may be connected to other vents at a point not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings shall be used on all parts of the vent below the floor level, and a minimum slope of one-quarter (¼) inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) back to the drain shall be maintained. The return bend used under the drain board shall be a one (1) piece fitting or an assembly of a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius), a ninety (90) degree (1.6 radius), and a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius) elbow in the order named. Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this code. The island sink drain, upstream of the return vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of the foot vent. 
(qqq)  Section AH101.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section AH101.2 Permitted uses. Solid-roofed patio covers shall be permitted to be attached or detached. Attached solid-roofed patio covers must maintain the setbacks required for the main structure. Detached solid-roofed patio covers must be set back five feet from any building or structure located on the property, must be located no closer to the front property line than the main building, and must maintain a minimum of five feet from all property lines, except that on corner lots, the patio cover must adhere to the exterior side-yard setback established for the primary structure. Open-roofed patio covers shall be permitted to be attached or detached and must be located at least five feet from any property line and must be located no closer to the front property line than the main building. Patio covers shall be used for recreational, outdoor living purposes and not as carports, storage areas, accessory buildings, or habitable rooms. 
(rrr)  Section AH103.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section AH103.1. Patio covers. The sides of detached patio cover structures shall not enclose more than 25 percent of the exterior walls measured around the perimeter or more than 25 percent of the floor area measured under roof. Any structure that exceeds these percentages must be reviewed and permitted using the accessory building regulations. No patio cover may exceed 25 percent of the floor area of the main structure. 
(sss)  Section AH104.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section AH104.1 Height. Attached patio covers must comply with the height requirements of the main structure. Detached patio covers shall be permitted as one-story structures not exceeding 14 feet in height, except that those located in SFE (single-family estate) and A (agriculture) zoning shall be limited in height to 20 feet. Height shall be measured from the average grade adjacent to the patio cover to the peak of the roof. 
(ttt)  Appendix Q of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Appendix Q. SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS, AND HOT TUBS 
(uuu)  Section AQ101 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
SECTION AQ101 GENERAL 
(vvv)  Section AQ101.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ101.1. General. The provisions of this appendix shall control the design and construction of swimming pools, spas and hot tubs installed in or on the lot of a one- or two-family dwelling. 
(www)  Section AQ101.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ101.2. Location requirements. 
(a)  Front yard. No swimming pool, spa, or hot tub shall be located within the required or established front yard. On a corner lot, where both street exposures are treated as front yards, for the purposes of this section, the front yards shall be determined by the placement of the main building along with the legal address. 
(b)  Side yard. All swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs must be located at least five feet from the side property line to the water's edge. 
(c)  Rear yard. All swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs must be located at least five feet from the rear property line to the water's edge. 
(d)  Easements. No swimming pool, spa, or hot tub, including applicable decks, shall be located in an easement. 
(e)  Equipment. No equipment may be placed within the required or established front yard as defined in subsection (a) of this section, or within any easement. Equipment in relation to the pool shall not be affixed to any required perimeter fencing or common fences between property owners. Adequate drainage must be provided between any equipment and any property line. At a minimum, a two foot open space must be maintained. 
(xxx)  Section AQ101.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ101.3. Required inspections. 
(1)  Pre-drainage inspection. This visual inspection verifies and approves the Drainage and Access plan that was submitted during the plan review phase. 
(2)  Belly steel and pool placement inspection. Before any concrete or gunite can be placed, the belly steel and placement of the pool shall be inspected and approved. Rebar shall be a minimum size of three-eighths of an inch and located no more than 12 inches on center each way. 
(3)  Deck steel, electrical bond, electrical underground and plumbing. Before any concrete is placed for the pool deck, the placement of steel and the electrical bond shall be inspected and approved. The concrete deck shall be a minimum thickness of 3½ inches. Rebar shall be a minimum size of three-eighths of an inch and located no more than 18 inches on center each way. The bond conductor shall be a minimum size of No. 8 AWG. A minimum of four ground clamps that are evenly spaced around the pool shall be required to electrically bond the pool from stray ground current. All electrical conductors buried in the ground shall be inspected and approved prior to covering. All pool plumbing shall be subjected to a minimum water test of 15 psi. 
(4)  P-trap and gas line. Before the backwash line, p-trap, and gas line are covered in any way, those items shall be inspected and approved. All pools shall have a p-trap and backwash line connected to the sanitary sewer. 
Exception: Aboveground pools and spas that have a capacity of 750 gallons or less are not required to install a p-trap or backwash line. On lots that do not have access to town sewer and where sanitary drainage is provided through a septic system, no p-trap or backwash line is required; however, adequate drainage must be provided to allow for drainage of the pool. 
(5)  Pre-plaster inspection. Before any water is placed in the pool, the permanent fence shall be installed, inspected, and approved. 
(6)  Final drainage inspection. At the time of this inspection, all drain lines and dirt work must be completed. Installation of permeant vegetation in all disturbed areas must be installed before receiving a final drainage approval. 
Exception: If pre-approved, the requirement for final vegetation may be waived. If permeant vegetation is waived, erosion control devices would be required in all disturbed areas before this inspection could be approved. 
(7)  Pool final. All pool permits must receive an approved final inspection within 180 days of the issue date, or the permit will be expired. 
(yyy)  Section AQ102 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
SECTION AQ102 DEFINITIONS 
(zzz)  Section AQ102.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 102.1 General. For the purposes of these requirements, the terms used shall be defined as follows and as set forth in Chapter 2. 
ABOVE-GROUND/ON-GROUND POOL. See "Swimming pool." 
BARRIER. A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof which completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool. 
HOT TUB. See "Swimming pool." 
IN-GROUND POOL. See "Swimming pool." 
RESIDENTIAL. That which is situated on the premises of a detached one- or two-family dwelling, or a one-family townhouse not more than three stories in height. 
SPA, NONPORTABLE. See "Swimming pool." 
SPA, PORTABLE. A nonpermanent structure intended for recreational bathing, in which all controls, water-heating and water-circulating equipment are an integral part of the product. 
SWIMMING POOL. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water more than 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. 
SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR. A swimming pool which is totally contained within a structure and surrounded on all four sides by the walls of the enclosing structure. 
SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR. Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool. 
(aaaa)  Section AQ103 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
SECTION AQ103 SWIMMING POOLS 
(bbbb)  Section AQ103.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ103.1. In-ground pools. In-ground pools shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-5. 
(cccc)  Section AQ103.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ103.2. Above ground and on ground pools. Above-ground and on-ground pools shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-4. 
(dddd)  Section AQ104 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
SECTION AQ104 SPAS AND HOT TUBS 
(eeee)  Section AQ104.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ104.1. Permanently installed spas and hot tubs. Permanently installed spas and hot tubs shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-3. 
(ffff)  Section AQ104.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ104.2. Portable spas and hot tubs. Portable spas and hot tubs shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-6. 
(gggg)  Section AQ105 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
SECTION AQ105 BARRIER REQUIREMENTS 
(hhhh)  Section AQ105.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ105.1. Application . The provisions of this appendix shall control the design of barriers for residential swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. These design controls are intended to provide protection against potential drownings and near-drownings by restricting access to swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. At all times during the construction of a pool, or until a permanent barrier meeting all the requirements of AG105.2 is installed, a temporary barrier that is at least thirty-six inches (36") in height, and meets the opening provisions of AG105.2, shall completely surround the pool excavation. 
(iiii)  Section AQ105.2 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ105.2. Outdoor swimming pool. An outdoor swimming pool, including an in-ground, above-ground or on-ground pool, hot tub or spa shall be surrounded by a barrier which shall comply with the following: 
1.  The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1219mm) above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches (51 mm) measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance at the bottom of the barrier may be increased to four (4) inches when grade is a solid surface such as a concrete deck. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such as the pool structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches (102mm). 
2.  Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102mm) sphere. 
3.  Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints. 
4.  Where a barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members, and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1,143 mm), the horizontal members must be on located on the swimming pool side of the fence unless the barrier is a common fence between neighbors or the tops of any one member is at least 45 degrees, when measured from the horizontal, in which such members would not be considered horizontal. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44mm) in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width. 
5.  Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width. 
6.  Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 2.25-inch (57 mm) square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to not more than 1.75 inches (44 mm). 
7.  Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall not be more than 1.75 inches (44 mm). 
8.  Access gates shall comply with the requirements of Section AQ105.2, Items 1 through 7, and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and openings shall comply with the following: 
8.1.  The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches (76 mm) below the top of the gate, and 
8.2.  The gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than 0.5 inch (13 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism. 
9.  Where a wall of a dwelling serves a part of the barrier one of the following conditions shall be met: 
9.1.  The pool shall be equipped with a powered safety cover in compliance with ASTM F1346; or 
9.2.  Doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm which produces an audible warning when the door and/or its screen, if present, are opened. The alarm shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2017. The deactivation switch(es) shall be located at least 54 inches (1,372 mm) above the threshold of the door; or 
9.3.  Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices, which are approved by the governing body, shall be acceptable as long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than the protection afforded by Item 9.1 or 9.2 described above. 
10.  Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then: 
10.1.  The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or 
10.2.  The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of Section AQ105.2, Items 1 through 9. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch diameter (102 mm) sphere. 
(jjjj)  Section AQ105.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ105.3. Indoor swimming pool. Walls surrounding an indoor swimming pool shall comply with Section AQ105.2, Item 9. 
(kkkk)  Section AQ105.4 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ105.4. Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb them. 
(llll)  Section AQ105.5 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ105.5. Barrier exceptions. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover which complies with ASTM F 1346, as listed in Section AQ107, shall be exempt from the provisions of this appendix. 
(mmmm)  Section AQ106 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
SECTION AQ106 ENTRAPMENT PROTECTION FOR SWIMMING POOL AND SPA SUCTION OUTLETS 
(nnnn)  Section AQ106.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ106.1. General. Suction outlets shall be designed and installed in accordance with ANSI/APSP-7. 
(oooo)  Section AQ107 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
SECTION AQ107 ABBREVIATIONS 
(pppp)  Section AQ107.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ107.1. General. 
ANSI—American National Standards Institute 
11 West 42nd Street 
New York, NY 10036 
APSP—Association of Pool and Spa Professionals 
NSPI—National Spa and Pool Institute 
2111 Eisenhower Avenue 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
ASCE—American Society of Civil Engineers 
1801 Alexander Bell Drive 
Reston, VA 98411-0700 
ASTM— International 
100 Barr Harbor Drive 
West Conshohocken, PA 19428 
UL—Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. 
333 Pfingsten Road 
Northbrook, IL 60062-2096 
(qqqq)  Section AQ108 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
SECTION AQ108 REFERENCED STANDARDS 
(rrrr)  Section AQ108.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section AQ108.1. General. 
ANSI/NSP 		
ANSI/NSPI-3—99 	Standard for Permanently Installed Residential Spas 	AQ104.1 
ANSI/NSPI-4—99 	Standard for Above-ground/On-ground Residential Swimming Pools 	AQ103.2 
ANSI/NSPI-5—03 	Standard for Residential In-ground Swimming Pools 	AQ103.1 
ANSI/NSPI-6—99 	Standard for Residential Portable Spas 	AQ104.2 
ANSI/APSP 		
ANSI/APSP-7—06 		
Standard for Suction Entrapment Avoidance in Swimming Pools, Wading Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs and Catch Basins 	AQ106.1 	
ASTM 		
ASTM F 1346—91 (2003) 	Performance Specification for Safety Covers and Labeling Requirements for All Covers for Swimming Pools Spas and Hot Tubs 	AQ105.2, AQ105.5 
UL 		
UL 2017—2000 	Standard for General-purpose Signaling Devices and Systems—with revisions through June 2004 	AQ105.2 
 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 2, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 76-02, § 1, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 22-05, § 3, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 10-08, § 3, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 01-09, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 15-11, § 3, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 23-14, § 3, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 35-16 , § 3, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 31-19 , § 3, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 14-573. - Board of appeals. 
The members of the town board of adjustment are hereby appointed as the board of appeals as provided by the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, and any changes in membership of the board of adjustment shall likewise be reflected in the membership of said board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 3, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 22-05, § 4, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 10-08, § 4, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 15-11, § 4, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 23-14, § 4, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 35-16 , § 4, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 31-19 , § 4, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 14-574. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-13 of is Code. Each day any such violation or violations exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 6, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 15-11, § 7, 4-18-2011)  
Secs. 14-575—14-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - ENERGY CODE 
 
Sec. 14-601. - International Energy Conservation Code adopted. 
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the town secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the energy code of the town, the same as though the provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, were copied at length in this section, subject to the deletions, amendments, and additions provided in section 14-602. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 19-05, § 2, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 09-08, § 2, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 16-11, § 2, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 24-14, § 2, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 36-16 , § 2, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 32-19 , § 2, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 14-602. - Local amendments to International Energy Conservation Code. 
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending only the enumerated sections and provisions, as follows, and all sections and provisions not expressly amended or deleted shall remain in full force and effect: 
(a)  Section C101.1 and Section R101.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section C101.1. Title. This code shall be known as the Energy Conservation Code of the Town of Flower Mound and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as "this code." 
Section R101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the Energy Conservation Code of the Town of Flower Mound and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as "this code." 
(b)  Section C102.1.2 and R102.1.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, are hereby added to read as follows: 
Section C102.1.2. Alternative compliance . A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the code official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. 
Section R102.1.2. Alternative compliance . A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the code official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. Regardless of the program or the path to compliance, each 1- and 2-family dwelling shall be tested for air and duct leakage as prescribed in Section R402.4.1.2 and R403.3.3 respectively. 
(c)  Section C202 and R202 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, are hereby amended by adding a new definition of "Projection Factor" to the list of definitions, adding the definition of "Dynamic Glazing" to R202 only, and amending the definition of "Building Thermal Envelope," in alphabetical order to read as follows: 
BUILDING THERMAL ENVELOPE. {Existing text unchanged}. The building thermal envelope shall include any building element that separates a commercial occupancy from a residential occupancy and provides a boundary between conditioned spaces. 
DYNAMIC GLAZING. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change its performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible transmittance (VT). 
PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device, divided by the distance measured vertically from the bottom of the fenestration glazing to the underside of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device. 
(d)  Table R402.1.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
CLIMATE ZONE 	FENESTRATION U-FACTOR 
3 	0.35 
 
(e)  Table R402.1.4 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
CLIMATE ZONE 	FENESTRATION U-FACTOR 
3 	0.35 
 
(f)  Section C402.2.8 and R402.2.14 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, are hereby added to read as follows: 
Section C402.2.8. Insulation installed in walls. To ensure that insulation remains in place, insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing, netting, or other equivalent material approved by the building official. 
Section R402.2.14. Insulation installed in walls. To ensure that insulation remains in place, insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing, netting, or other equivalent material approved by the building official. 
(g)  Section R402.3.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a paragraph and table following the exception to read as follows: 
Section R402.3.2. Glazed fenestration SHGC. {Existing text unchanged}. Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhang, eave, or permanently attached shading device, the SHGC required in Table R402.1.2 shall be reduced by using the multipliers in Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections. 
Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections a 
Projection Factor 	SHGC Multiplier 
(all Other Orientation) 	SHGC Multiplier 
(North Oriented) 
0—0.10 	1.00 	1.00 
>0.10—0.20 	0.91 	0.95 
>0.20—0.30 	0.82 	0.91 
>0.30—0.40 	0.74 	0.87 
>0.40—0.50 	0.67 	0.84 
>0.50—0.60 	0.61 	0.81 
>0.60—0.70 	0.56 	0.78 
>0.70—0.80 	0.51 	0.76 
>0.80—0.90 	0.47 	0.75 
>0.90—1.00 	0.44 	0.73 
 
a North oriented means within 45 degrees of true north. 
(h)  Section R402.4.1.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a paragraph at the end to read as follows: 
Section R402.4.1.2. Testing. {Existing text unchanged} …Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
(i)  Section R402.4.1.3 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by to read as follows: 
Section R402.4.1.3 Testing option - ACH tradeoff. As an option to the air leakage rate set out in Section R402.4.1.2, 1- and 2-family homes meeting all of the listed criteria below and the thermal envelope requirements in Table R402.4.1.3 will be considered compliant when tested and verified as having an air leakage rate to not less than or equal to four air changes per hour when tested and reported in accordance with the testing standards and reporting criteria listed in Section R402.4.1.2. 
The compliance equivalency is limited as follows: 
1.  Limited to a conditioned floor area between 1,000 and 6,000 square feet, 
2.  Limited to between 2 to 6 bedrooms, 
3.  Assumes all ductwork and mechanical equipment is located in the unconditioned attic, 
4.  Assumes typical wood framing in the walls and roof, and 
5.  Assumes one of the following heating/cooling systems: 
a.  All electric system with a heat pump for heating, or 
b.  A system with electric cooling and natural gas heating. 
Dwellings using electric resistance strip heating do not qualify for this tradeoff. 
TABLE R402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3) a 
Envelope Component 	Option #1 	Option #2 
R402.4 Air Leakage 	=4 ACH50 	=4 ACH50 
Wall Insulation R -value 	R13 + R3 b 	R13 + R3 b 
Fenestration U -factor 	=0.32 	=0.32 
Fenestration SHGC 	=0.25 	=0.25 
Ceiling R -value 	=R49 	=R49 
Duct Insulation R -value 	R8 	R6 
Radiant Barrier Required 	No 	Yes 
 
a Except for the values listed in the table, all other mandatory code provisions are applicable. 
b The first value listed is the R -value of cavity insulation, the second value is the R -value of the continuous insulation or insulated siding. 
(j)  Section R403.3.3 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a paragraph at the end to read as follows: 
Section R403.3.3. Duct testing. (Mandatory). {Existing text unchanged}. 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform duct testing leakage testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individual must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
(k)  Section R405.6.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a sentence to the end of the paragraph to read as follows: 
Section R405.6.2. Specific approval. {Existing text unchanged}. Acceptable performance software simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM Rate TM , Energy Gauge, and IC3. Other performance software programs accredited by RESNET BESTEST and having the ability to provide a report as outlined in R405.4.2 may also be deemed acceptable performance simulation programs and may be considered by the building official. 
(l)  Table R406.4of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
TABLE R406.4 1 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	65 
 
1  This table is effective until August 31, 2019. 
TABLE R406.4 2 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	63 
 
2  The table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022. 
TABLE R406.4 3 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	59 
 
3  This table is effective on or after September 1, 2022. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 2, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 19-05, § 2, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 09-08, § 3, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 16-11, § 3, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 24-14, § 3, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 36-16 , § 3, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 32-19 , § 3, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 14-603. - Board of appeals. 
The members of the Flower Mound Board of Adjustment are hereby appointed as the board of appeals as provided by the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, and any changes in membership of said board of adjustment shall likewise be reflected in the membership of said board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 3, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 19-05, § 4, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 09-08, § 4, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 16-11, § 4, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 24-14, § 4, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 36-16 , § 4, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 32-19 , § 4, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 14-604. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. Each day any such violation or violations exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 6, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 16-11, § 7, 4-18-2011)  
Secs. 14-605—14-609. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - FENCES IN THE FLOODPLAIN PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 14-610. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fence means any structure intended for the use of confinement, prevention of intrusion, boundary identification or screening. 
Floodplain means any area defined as a floodplain within the FEMA 100-year floodplain, and shall include any area designated by FEMA as a floodway. 
Pre-existing fence means a fence that was in existence on the effective date of the ordinance that initially adopted this article. 
(Ord. No. 25-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 14-611. - Fences in the floodplain prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to construct or otherwise place a fence in a floodplain, except where an exception to this section has been approved by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 25-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 14-612. - Exception procedure. 
The town manager may grant an exception in writing to section 14-611 if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The fence must not adversely impact drainage or create debris build-up; 
(b)  The fence shall not be solid and shall be constructed in such manner as to allow the free flow of water through it, such as wrought iron or other appropriate construction materials; 
(c)  In the event approval of a fence in the floodplain requires approval from any other governmental entity, such approval shall be obtained prior to any exception under this article being authorized; 
(d)  The property owner must provide the town with an indemnification agreement acceptable to the town attorney, which agreement shall provide that the town has no liability for any damage and injury to any properties or persons, and fully releases the town from any damages, attorney's fees and all other liabilities; 
(e)  The indemnity agreement shall be filed in the real property records of Denton or Tarrant County, as appropriate, and shall be deemed to run with the land; 
(f)  In the event the fence which is subject to an exception under this section is removed, destroyed by flooding or otherwise replaced, a new fence shall be subject to this article unless an exception is received for such new fence. 
(Ord. No. 25-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 14-613. - Appeal to the town council. 
In the event an exception is not authorized by the town manager, the applicant for an exception may file a written appeal to the town council specifying the reasons why the determination of the town manager was erroneous. Such appeal must be filed in writing with the town secretary within five business days of the date of the town manager's determination that an exception to the terms of this article not be authorized. Within 45 days of the filing of an appeal, the town council shall determine whether the town manager's action was appropriate. The decision of the town council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 25-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 14-614. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of the person by this article, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued; however, no fine or penalty may be levied within the time period allowed for an appeal to be filed or while an appeal is pending. 
(b)  An offense under this article is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(c)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article and need not be proved. 
(d)  The penalties provided for in subsection (b) are in addition to any other enforcement remedies that the town may have under town ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 25-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 14-615. - Conflicts with Ordinance No. 42-09. 
In the event of any conflict between this article and Ordinance No. 42-09, as amended, this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 25-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 14-616. - Pre-existing fences. 
Pre-existing fences are not subject to the provisions of this article. A pre-existing fence may be repaired or replaced by the property owner without the need to apply for or obtain an exception under this article only if the repair or replacement fence is in the same location as the pre-existing fence, is the same height as the pre-existing fence, and is constructed of the same materials as the pre-existing fence. 
(Ord. No. 25-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency services, ch. 30; taxation, ch. 62; local sales and use tax, § 62-81 et seq.; utilities, ch. 70; O office district, § 98-541 et seq.; R-1 retail district-1, § 98-571 et seq.; R-2 retail district-2, § 98-601 et seq.; C-1 commercial district-1, § 98-631 et seq.; C-2 commercial district-2, § 98-661 et seq.; I-1 industrial district-1, § 98-691 et seq.; I-2 industrial district-2, § 98-721 et seq.; Pd planned development district, § 98-811 et seq.; CC campus commercial district, § 98-841 et seq.; CI campus industrial district, § 98-871 et seq.; amusement, commercial (indoor), § 98-973; asphalt or concrete batching plant (temporary), § 98-974; caretaker or guard residence, § 98-975; country club, § 98-978; farmer's market, § 98-980; fruit and vegetable stand, § 98-981; home occupation, § 98-984; keeping animals, § 98-985; kennel, § 98-986; food establishment fees, app. A. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt regulations under police powers for the good government, peace or order of the town or for the trade of commerce, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.001; authority to license any lawful business or occupation that is subject to the police power of the town, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONTRACTORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Registration. 
(a)  Issuance of permits. General, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, and irrigation contractors including backflow testers (referred to collectively as "contractors") shall not be eligible to receive a permit within the town or approve test reports for backflow prevention devices unless they are currently registered with the town. 
(b)  Requirements. Contractors must submit the required information to the town prior to receiving a registration permit. 
(1)  General contractor. General contractors are required to submit the following information: 
a.  A completed contractor registration application supplied by the town. 
b.  A valid driver's license of the owner or an officer of the company issued by his home state or if the owner or officer does not possess such a valid driver's license then such other identity card or document issued by the federal or state government containing the picture and signature of said person. 
(2)  Plumbing contractor. Plumbing contractors are required to submit the following information: 
a.  A completed contractor registration application supplied by the town. 
b.  A valid master plumber's license issued by the state. The master plumber must register or submit a notarized document allowing another person to register in his name. 
c.  A valid driver's license of the master plumber issued by his home state or if the master plumber does not possess such a valid driver's license then such other identity card or document issued by the federal or state government containing the picture and signature of said person. 
(3)  Irrigation contractor. Irrigation contractors are required to submit the following information: 
a.  A completed contractor registration application supplied by the town. 
b.  A valid irrigator's license issued by the state. The licensed irrigator must register or submit a notarized document allowing another person to register in his name. 
c.  A valid driver's license of the licensed irrigator issued by his home state or if the licensed irrigator does not possess such a valid driver's license then such other identity card or document issued by the federal or state government containing the picture and signature of said person. 
(4)  Backflow tester. Backflow testers are required to submit the following information: 
a.  A completed contractor registration application supplied by the town. 
b.  A valid backflow tester certification issued by the state. The certified backflow tester must register or submit a notarized document allowing another person to register in his name. 
c.  A valid driver's license of the certified backflow tester issued by his home state or if the certified backflow tester does not possess such a valid driver's license then such other identity card or document issued by the federal or state government containing the picture and signature of said person. 
(5)  Mechanical contractor. Mechanical contractors are required to submit the following information: 
a.  A completed contractor registration application supplied by the town. 
b.  A valid mechanical license issued by the state. The licensed mechanical contractor must register or submit a notarized document allowing another person to register in his name. 
c.  A valid driver's license of the licensed mechanical contractor issued by his home state or if the licensed mechanical contractor does not possess such a valid driver's license then such other identity card or document issued by the federal or state government containing the picture and signature of said person. 
(6)  Electrical contractor. Electrical contractors are required to submit the following information: 
a.  A completed contractor registration application supplied by the town. 
b.  A valid master electrician's license issued by the town. The master electrician must register or submit a notarized document allowing another person to register in his name. 
c.  A valid driver's license of the master electrician issued by his home state or if the master electrician does not possess such a valid driver's license then such other identity card or document issued by the federal or state government containing the picture and signature of said person. 
(Ord. No. 67-98, § 1(16.01), 12-7-1998; Ord. No. 18-07, § 2, 3-15-2007)  
Sec. 18-32. - Suspension of registration. 
A contractor's registration may be suspended by the building official for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The contractor fails to request and obtain a final inspection prior to the expiration of the permit; 
(2)  The contractor allows use or occupancy of the structure for which a permit was obtained without first obtaining the required authorization from the town; 
(3)  The contractor has been found by the building official to have been grossly negligent in the performance of his work; or 
(4)  The expiration, suspension or revocation of any license required by section 18.31. 
(Ord. No. 67-98, § 1(16.02), 12-7-1998)  
Sec. 18-33. - Appeal of suspension by building official. 
A contractor whose registration has been suspended may appeal the action to the building code appeals board. In the case of an appeal to the building code appeals board, the action of the building official shall stand until the final determination of the appeal is made by the building code appeals board. The appeal must be filed within ten business days of the suspension of the contractor's registration. After hearing the case, the building code appeals board may take the following action: 
(1)  Affirm the suspension; 
(2)  Overrule the suspension and reinstate the registration of the contractor; 
(3)  Affirm the suspension, but waive any or all of the reinstatement requirements set forth in section 18-34; or 
(4)  Affirm the suspension and require conditions for reinstatement in addition to those set forth in section 18-34 including, but not limited to, prohibiting reinstatement for up to six months. 
(Ord. No. 67-98, § 1(16.03), 12-7-1998)  
Sec. 18-34. - Reinstatement of registration. 
A contractor whose registration has been suspended may reapply for registration if: 
(1)  All circumstances leading to the suspension have been corrected; 
(2)  The contractor reapplies for registration; 
(3)  The registration fee is paid; and 
(4)  Any additional conditions set by the building code appeals board pursuant to section 18-33(4) have been met. 
(Ord. No. 67-98, § 1(16.04), 12-7-1998)  
Secs. 18-35—18-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Food and food establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 433.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 18-71—18-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Food service establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.001 et seq. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 18-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Followup inspection means any inspection, other than a routine inspection or full followup reinspection, conducted at permitted food establishment, after notice has been given to correct a violation, to ensure that the violation has been corrected. 
Full followup reinspection means a complete inspection of a permitted food establishment which is required to be conducted within seven days or as determined by the regulatory authority of a full routine inspection which resulted in a rating where the cumulative demerit value of the establishment exceeded 30 demerits, to ensure that all noted violations have been corrected. 
Routine inspection means an unannounced inspection conducted of a permitted food establishment for the purpose of determining the compliance of the establishment with the rules of this division and applicable law. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.02; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.02), 11-1-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-92. - State food establishment rules adopted. 
The town hereby adopts the Texas Department of State Health Services "Texas Food Establishment Rules," found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 228, as presently enacted or as amended hereafter from time to time. A certified copy of such rules shall be filed and maintained in the office of the town secretary, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section as if the same were copied in their entirety at this point and the provisions of such rules shall be controlling in the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.01; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.01), 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 11-16 , § 1, 2-15-2016)  
Sec. 18-93. - Enforcement of division provisions. 
The enforcement of the rules and the provisions of this division shall be by the town manager, or his duly appointed representative. Any references in the rules adopted in section 18-92 to "regulatory authority" shall mean the town manager, or his duly appointed representative. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.03; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.03), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-94. - Trash collection requirements for food establishments in certain buildings. 
Any permitted food establishment that is located in or constructed as part of a building or structure with more than one occupant and/or tenant and that shares the use of one or more trash dumpsters with other building occupants and/or tenants shall ensure that these trash dumpsters are emptied by a solid waste disposal company at least three times per week. If, at any time, the regulatory authority determines that the frequency is insufficient to maintain a dumpster area in a clean and sanitary condition, then the regulatory authority may require the food establishment to have these dumpsters emptied more frequently. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.12; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.12), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-95. - Additional offense; interfering with or hindering the regulatory authority. 
It shall be unlawful for any permit holder, owner, operator, manager, person-in-charge and/or other employee of a food establishment to interfere with or hinder the regulatory authority in the exercise of its duties under this division. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.13; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.13), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-96. - Penalty and enforcement provisions of division. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of this division may be enforced against the permit holder, owner, operator, manager, person-in-charge and/or other employee of a food establishment, all as the regulatory authority deems appropriate. Upon conviction, the guilty party shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day during or which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this division to the contrary, the regulatory authority is hereby granted the authority to issue citations immediately for violations of this division that are committed in their presence. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.14; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.14), 11-1-1999)  
Secs. 18-97—18-120. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Permit 
 
Sec. 18-121. - Required to operate. 
No individual, corporation, partnership or other entity shall sell, offer to sell, give away, trade or otherwise convey food to the public or operate a food establishment within the town without having first obtained a permit issued by the regulatory authority. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.04; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.04), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-122. - Issuance. 
(a)  As used in this division, the term "food establishment" shall mean any separate and distinct food handling facility, food service facility, food sales facility, mobile food establishment, central preparation facility, or temporary food establishment, as those terms are defined in the Texas Food Establishment Rules, adopted by section 18-92. 
(b)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. Such application shall include: the applicant's full name and post office address and whether such applicant is an individual, corporation, partnership or other entity. If the applicant is a partnership, the names of the partners, together with their addresses, shall be included. The application shall also include the location and type of the proposed food establishment, the signature of the applicant, or agents, and such other information as the regulatory authority deems necessary. 
(c)  Application for permits for mobile or temporary food establishments, which operate from a fixed facility or "commissary," located outside the town, shall include with their completed application a copy of the fixed facility's current, valid health permit (state and/or local) and the most recent facility inspection report (state and/or local), as well as a signed, notarized agreement between the central preparation facility owner/operator, and the owner of the mobile food establishment, on a form provided by the regulatory authority. 
(d)  Prior to approval of an application for an existing, proposed or remodeled food establishment, the regulatory authority shall review all available documentation for such establishment to ensure that such facility complies with the rules and regulations of this code. Applications for permits shall be denied if any part of the application is improperly or erroneously completed, or if any part of the required documentation is not properly submitted. 
(e)  If a single building or location contains multiple, separate, distinct food establishments, as noted above in subsection (a) of this section, regardless of whether one or all of the operations are owned or operated by one or more individuals or entities, a separate food permit shall be required for each operation and a separate permit fee shall be paid. 
(f)  Once approved, permits shall not be transferable from one individual, corporation, partnership or other entity, or location, to another. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.04; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.04(a)), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-123. - Fees. 
(a)  Each food establishment operating within the corporate limits of the town shall pay the permit fees as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. Permits granted under the provisions of this division, unless otherwise specified, shall remain in force for one year from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked for cause. 
(b)  No fee shall be charged to any food establishment owned and operated by a governmental agency, independent school district, institution of purely public charity, church, and/or other nonprofit organizations; however, such establishments may be operated only after a permit is issued by the regulatory authority and all other requirements of this division and applicable law are met. Proper documentation of tax-exempt status under federal or state law must be provided to the regulatory authority at the time of application in order to be exempt from the permit fee. 
(c)  All permits fees shall be paid to the regulatory authority. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.04; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.04(b)), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-124. - Suspension. 
(a)  Written notice for temporary suspension and opportunity for a hearing. Permits may be suspended temporarily by the regulatory authority for repeated failure to comply with the requirements of this division. Whenever a violation has not been corrected after two written notices for the same violation, whether noted during a routine inspection or reinspection, the regulatory authority may suspend the permit. The permit holder, owner, operator, manager, person-in-charge of the food establishment at the time of inspection, or other employees of the food establishment, shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the permit holder. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this division, whenever the regulatory authority finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a food establishment which constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, a written notice may be issued to the permit holder, owner, operator, manager, person-in-charge of the food establishment, at the time of inspection, or other employees of the food establishment citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and specifying the time period within which such action shall be taken. If necessary, such order may state that the permit is immediately suspended and all food operations are to be immediately discontinued. If the permit is suspended, a "Closed by Order of Town of Flower Mound Environmental Health Services Division" sign shall be placed on the entrance to the food establishment in plain view of the public. No person may remove, cover, alter, deface or otherwise make unreadable such sign. Any individual or entity to which such an order is issued shall comply immediately therewith, but, upon written request to the regulatory authority, shall be afforded a hearing before the town council as soon as possible. 
(b)  Reinstatement of suspended permits. Any permit holder whose food establishment permit has been suspended may, at any time, make written application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstating the permit. Within ten days following the receipt of a request, which shall include a statement signed by the permit holder that in his opinion the conditions causing suspension of the permit have been corrected, the regulatory authority shall perform a reinspection. If upon reinspection, the facility is found to be in compliance with these food establishment rules and other applicable law, then the permit shall be reinstated. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.08; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.08), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-125. - Revocation. 
(a)  Written notice. For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this division, or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties, the permit may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the regulatory authority. Prior to such action, the regulatory authority shall notify the permit holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the permit is subject to permanent revocation, and advising that the permit shall be permanently revoked at the end of five days following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the permit holder within such five-day period. A permit may be suspended pending its permanent revocation or a hearing relative thereto. 
(b)  Town council hearing and findings. The town council shall conduct the hearings provided for in this division at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the record of such hearing, the town council shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permit holder by the regulatory authority. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.09; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.09), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-126. - Requirements for snow cone-type seasonal refreshment stand food establishments. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any snow cone-type seasonal refreshment stand food establishment to operate out of a temporary building without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. 
(b)  Unless suspended or revoked under the provisions of this division, permits for snow cone-type seasonal refreshment stand food establishments shall be valid only for a period of six months from the date of issuance. 
(c)  All permits issued pursuant to this section are subject to revocation for violations of the food establishment rules of this division and other applicable law. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.10; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.10), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-127. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 52-19 , § 1, adopted Nov. 4, 2019, repealed former § 18-127 which pertained to permit to allow dogs on food establishment outdoor patio, and derived from Ord. No. 11-16 , § 2, adopted Feb. 15, 2016.  
Secs. 18-128—18-150. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Food Protection Manager 
 
Sec. 18-151. - Registration required. 
(a)  Employment. 
(1)  Within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, a food establishment shall employ at least one individual who is a full-time, on-site supervisory employee of that food establishment responsible for food preparation, presentation, sales and service, and who has a valid and current food protection manager registration issued by the regulatory authority, or the state. 
(2)  A food establishment is in compliance with the provisions of this division if there is one full-time registered food protection manager "person-in-charge" on duty during all times of operation. 
(3)  The regulatory authority may require additional registered food protection managers in sufficient number to ensure that all areas of food preparation, presentation, sales and service are under the direction of registered food protection managers during all times of food establishment operation. It shall be unlawful to own, operate or manage a food establishment with fewer than the required number of registered food protection managers on duty at the food establishment during all times of operation. 
(b)  Registered food protection manager replacement. 
(1)  A food establishment shall notify the regulatory authority, in writing, within seven days of the effective date of termination or permanent transfer of the registered food protection manager; and 
(2)  A food establishment shall employ another registered food protection manager within 30 days of the effective date of termination or permanent transfer of the previous registered food protection manager. 
(c)  Registration with the town. The regulatory authority shall issue a food protection manager registration to any individual who submits the required application, pays the required fee, and provides evidence of completion of an approved food protection manager certification course. An approved food protection manager certification course shall be accredited by the state department of health. 
(d)  Additional training required. The regulatory authority may require registered food managers to successfully complete additional training when: 
(1)  The employing food establishment has repeated or persistent violations of health code requirements and effective corrective action has not been instituted over a period of time as instructed by the regulatory authority; or 
(2)  The employing food establishment has been implicated by the regulatory authority as the source of foodborne illness. 
(e)  Renewal and evidence of registration. 
(1)  Unless sooner revoked by the regulatory authority, a food protection manager registration expires three years from the date of issuance. 
(2)  A food protection manager's registration certificate shall be prominently posted in the food establishment. 
(3)  A food protection manager's registration certificate is not transferable. 
(f)  Training and certification of food protection managers; responsibilities. Training and certification of food protection managers or persons-in-charge of food establishments shall be required so that persons-in-charge shall have proper knowledge of safe techniques for storage, preparation, display, handling and service of foods, with the underlying purpose of preventing foodborne illness and protecting the public health; and so that persons-in-charge shall have knowledge to train employees under their supervision regarding the same. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder, owner, operator, manager, person-in-charge and/or employee of the food establishment to maintain a clean and sanitary establishment and to train personnel in the safe and proper methods of handling food. 
(g)  Exemption from requirements. 
(1)  Food establishments that serve, sell or distribute only prepackaged foods, and/or open foods that are not potentially hazardous, may be exempted from these requirements by the regulatory authority. 
(2)  The regulatory authority may waive or modify the requirements of this division for temporary food establishments, special facilities and/or special events. 
(3)  Owners, operators, managers and persons-in-charge of exempted food establishments may be required by the regulatory authority to comply with the food protection manager's registration requirements if critical food safety violations are observed, or if, in the judgment of the regulatory authority, the nature of the operation requires such registration. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.05; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.05), 11-1-1999)  
Secs. 18-152—18-170. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Construction, Remodeling, Conversion Plans[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 18-171. - Submission and review required. 
(a)  When a food establishment is newly constructed or remodeled, when a food establishment has a change of ownership, or when an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion may begin. 
(b)  The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout of the food establishment, arrangement of all intended equipment, mechanical plans, types of construction materials and finish schedules for all areas, and the type and model of all proposed equipment to be installed. The regulatory authority shall review the plans and specifications to determine if they meet the requirements of this division. No food establishment shall be constructed, remodeled or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the regulatory authority. Food facility owners/operators, as well as all general contractors and subcontractors, shall ensure during plans review, construction and operation that their facilities comply with all applicable town plumbing, mechanical, electrical, building, zoning and fire prevention and protection codes. 
(c)  A permit to begin construction shall not be issued until properly prepared plans have been reviewed and approved by the regulatory authority. 
(d)  Only commercial quality equipment, utensils and materials that meet or exceed current accepted national sanitation foundation (NSF) standards, or their equivalent, will be approved for installation and use in food establishments. 
(e)  Final approval of all plans, materials, finishes, type and layout of all equipment is at the discretion of the regulatory authority. 
(f)  The regulatory authority shall conduct one or more inspections of the food establishment prior to the start of operations to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications, the requirements of this division, and the regulations of the department. 
(g)  If, upon inspection at any time, the food establishment is found not to be constructed in accordance with approved plans, and/or any fixed equipment has been added or removed without prior approval by the regulatory authority, the food establishment shall be ordered to replace or remove the equipment in question. 
(h)  An appropriate fee for plan review shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.06; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.06), 11-1-1999)  
Secs. 18-172—18-190. - Reserved.  
Subdivision V. - Inspections 
 
Sec. 18-191. - Followup inspection. 
Any time a followup inspection is required by the regulatory authority to verify correction of a violation, a reinspection fee shall be paid to the town before reinspection. This fee must be submitted along with a letter signed by the owner of the establishment, or his appointed representative, such as the person-in-charge of the facility, stating that the violation is corrected, prior to the date for the reinspection. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.07; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.07(a)), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-192. - Full followup reinspection. 
If a routine inspection reveals serious, multiple violations in food safety or overall level of sanitation, and/or the total cumulative demerit value on an inspection exceeds 30 demerits, a full followup reinspection of the food establishment will be conducted to verify correction of the violations. In this instance and before reinspection, a fee of 50 percent of the establishment's annual permit fee shall be paid to the town. In addition, the owner of the establishment, or his appointed representative shall submit a letter stating that each identified violation is corrected, and the method of correction, prior to the scheduled date of reinspection. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.07; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.07(b)), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-193. - Failure to pay reinspection fees. 
Failure to pay the required reinspection fees in sections 18-191 and 18-192 will result in the immediate suspension of the food establishment's permit to operate, and the facility ordered to cease operation immediately. The food establishment shall remain closed until the violations are corrected, all required fees are paid, and a reinspection is conducted to verify correction. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.07; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.07(c)), 11-1-1999)  
Secs. 18-194—18-210. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VI. - Snow Cone-Type Seasonal Refreshment Stands 
 
Sec. 18-211. - Generally. 
Only snow cones and commercially prepackaged nonpotentially hazardous foods shall be prepared or offered for sale at the food establishment. Snow cones and snow cone products shall be defined as crushed or shaved ice served in single-use articles and topped with flavored syrups. All products must come from an approved source. No potentially hazardous foods or flavorings as defined by this division shall be served at this type of establishment. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.11; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.11(a)), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-212. - Ice. 
Ice shall be obtained in chipped, crushed, cubed or blocked form and in single-service articles, filled and sealed at the point of manufacture from licensed approved manufacturers. The ice shall be held in these bags until dispensed in a way that protects it from contamination. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.11; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.11(b)), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-213. - Required equipment. 
(a)  A single three-compartment stainless steel sink with drain boards shall be provided and installed. Sink compartments shall be large enough to permit the accommodation of the largest piece of equipment and utensils to be washed. The single three-compartment sink must be provided with hot and cold water under pressure. 
(b)  A separate handwashing sink with hand-cleansing soap and sanitary single use towels shall be provided. The sink shall be provided with hot and cold water. 
(c)  All service and delivery openings shall be designed and function properly to prevent the entrance of flying insects. Service openings shall be closed except during actual service of food to the consumer. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.11; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.11(c)), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-214. - Water supply. 
(a)  All equipment used for a potable water supply system shall be listed for such use by an organization acceptable to the regulatory authority and shall be installed and operated according to law. 
(b)  All potable water not provided directly by pipe to the establishment from an approved source shall be transported in a bulk water transport system or individual containers and shall be delivered by direct connection to a self-contained water system, or be delivered to a self-contained water system by direct hose attachment from an approved water source. All potable water containers or hoses shall be used only for water supply purposes. 
(c)  A self-contained water system of sufficient capacity to furnish an adequate quantity of potable water for cleaning and handwashing purposes shall be provided (minimum 15 gallons). If at any time the town determines that 15 gallons is not adequate to meet the meet the cleaning and handwashing needs of the operation, the capacity must be increased to a volume approved by the town. 
(d)  A water heater system capable of producing water of 110 degrees Fahrenheit interconnected with the potable water supply shall be provided. 
(e)  The water system shall be capable of delivering a water supply under pressure of at least 15 pounds per square inch (psi) at all times. If such water pressure cannot be provided by gravity flow, then a tank and a pump or other means, which will provide such 15 psi, shall be installed. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.11; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.11(e)), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-215. - Liquid waste. 
(a)  Where snow cone-type seasonal refreshment stand food establishments are not connected to a public sewer system, all liquid waste from the operation shall be held in an approved, installed liquid waste retention tank. The liquid waste retention tank shall have a capacity at least 50 percent greater than the potable water tank. All waste lines shall be properly installed and connected to the liquid waste tank with watertight seals. 
(b)  All liquid waste from the retention tank shall be transported and disposed of in accordance with applicable law. There shall be an approved liquid waste disposal facility conveniently located and accessible for use by the food establishment employees at all times. If the facility is not located within the food establishment, it must be located within a 300-foot radius of the food establishment to be considered conveniently located. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.11; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.11(e)), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-216. - Employee restrooms. 
Snow cone-type seasonal refreshment stand food establishments shall have adequate, conveniently located and accessible toilet and lavatory facilities available at all times. If these facilities are not located within the establishment, they must be located within a 300-foot radius of the food establishment to be considered conveniently located. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.11; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.11(f)), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-217. - Agreement for use of facilities. 
If liquid waste disposal facilities and toilet and lavatory facilities are located off-site, a notarized letter signed by the owners/operators of the establishment where the facilities are located, must be submitted with the permit application giving written permission for the food establishment personnel to use such facilities and that the facilities will be available for use at all times during the food establishment's hours of operation. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.11; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.11(g)), 11-1-1999)  
Sec. 18-218. - Garbage. 
An easily cleanable, covered trash container shall be provided on the outside of the establishment if outside seating is provided. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 2.11; Ord. No. 65-99, § 2(2.11(h)), 11-1-1999)  
Secs. 18-219—18-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 18-251. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means a person who undertakes to transact some business or manage some affair for another person by the authority and on the account of the latter. 
Badge means photographic identification permit issued by the police department of the town. 
Canvasser means a person who engages in canvassing activities. 
Canvassing or canvassing activity means the act of: 
(1)  Traveling either by foot or vehicle, going door-to-door, house-to-house, building-to-building; or 
(2)  Occupying space in or traveling on or through any public place in the city; 
Personally contacting persons to communicate in any manner, whether orally, by written or printed materials including, but not limited to, handbills, leaflets, hand signing or by any other method, direct or implied, for any purpose other than selling or taking orders for goods, wares, merchandise or services or collecting money. 
Charitable purpose shall mean philanthropic or other nonprofit objectives, including the benefit of poor, needy, sick or handicapped persons; the benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the benefit of any fraternal, social or civic organization; or the benefit of any educational institution. 
Consumer means an individual who seeks or acquires real property, service, money or credit for personal, family or household purposes. 
Consumer transaction means a sales transaction in which one or more of the parties is a consumer. 
Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any manner. 
Handbill distribution means traveling either by foot or vehicle, going door-to-door, house-to-house or building-to-building without personally contacting persons to distribute or leave on or at each premises handbills for any purpose. 
Home solicitation transaction means a consumer transaction for the purpose of goods, services, or realty, payable in installments, or in cash, in which the merchant engages in a personal solicitation of the sale to the consumer at a residence, and the consumer's agreement or offer to purchase is given at the residence to the merchant. A home solicitation transaction shall not include a sale made pursuant to a preexisting revolving charge account or retail charge agreement, or a sale made pursuant to prior negotiations between the parties at a business establishment at a fixed location where goods or services are offered or exhibited for sale, or a sale of realty in which transaction the purchaser is represented by a licensed attorney or in which the transaction is being negotiated by a licensed real estate broker. 
Individual permit means a permit issued under the authority of this article to each individual working under a master permit, who engages in the business of solicitation. 
Local business means a business located and operated within the corporate limits of the town. 
Master permit means the permit required under the authority of this article to engage in the business of solicitation. 
Merchant means a party to a consumer transaction other than the consumer. 
Person means an individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association or other legal entity. 
Police department means the police department of the town. 
Political purpose shall mean any form of communication related to a political issue, a particular candidate to a position or nonpartisan office, a political committee, as defined by state law, or to a political party. 
Religious purpose shall mean the use of money or property for the support of a church, religious society or other religious sect, group, or order. 
Residence means any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Solicitation shall mean engaging in or attempting to engage in home solicitation transactions. This term does not include solicitation or fundraising of any sort by a political, religious or charitable institution or group, unless indicated otherwise. 
Solicitor means all persons, as well as their agents and employees, engaged in or attempting to engage in solicitation. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.01; Ord. No. 03-03, § 2, 1-23-2003; Ord. No. 34-14, § 1, 7-21-2014) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-252. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon the door, or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence for the purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in a home solicitation transaction without first obtaining a permit from the town. 
(b)  Each person engage in or attempting to engage in a home solicitation transaction must have a permit issued under the terms of this section, and such permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be reproduced, assigned, or transferred to any other person. Any such attempted transfer or reproduction shall render the permit void. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.02; Ord. No. 03-03, § 3, 1-23-2003)  
Sec. 18-253. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to public utility companies or others operating under franchises granted by the town, insurance sales people, real estate sales people, and others licensed by the state, political groups or organizations which are subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to commercial agents dealing with local business establishments in the usual course of business. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.03; Ord. No. 34-14, § 2, 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 18-254. - Master permit application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to make home solicitation transactions within the town shall make written application, on a form provided by the town, to the police department for a master permit. The application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, social security number, date of birth and address of the person applying and desiring to make home solicitations; 
(2)  Whether the master permit is for an individual (natural person), a partnership, or a corporation; and 
a.  If an individual, the individual's business or residence address and telephone number; 
b.  If a partnership, the name of all partners, the principal business address, and telephone number of each partner; 
c.  If a corporation, the person registering must state whether the corporation is organized under the laws of the state or is a foreign corporation, the mailing address, business location, telephone number, names of all officers and directors or trustees of such corporation, and, if a foreign corporation, the place of incorporation and registered agent for the state; 
(3)  The approximate time period within which the solicitation is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of the solicitation and its projected conclusion and how often the applicant will solicit in the town during the year; 
(4)  Names of other communities in the state in which the applicant has made home solicitations during the last six months; 
(5)  The nature of the merchandise to be sold or offered for sale or the nature of the services to be furnished; 
(6)  Whether such applicant, upon any order obtained, will demand, accept or receive payment or the deposit of money in advance of final delivery; 
(7)  Whether the applicant or any person employed by the applicant to solicit, has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the past five years; 
(8)  Names, addresses, telephone numbers and social security numbers of the adults who shall be responsible for supervising any solicitor; 
(9)  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of two persons as references, excluding relatives and persons living with the applicant; 
(10)  Valid state driver's license number or a state-approved identification card number with a photograph; 
(11)  All applications shall be on a form provided by the town and shall be sworn to or affirmed. The application shall be filed for public inspection. 
(b)  The application must be signed by the applicant if the person is an individual; if the person applying is a partnership, by a general partner; if the person applying is a corporation, by an officer. The individual signing the application will sign a statement that he has carefully read the application and that all the information contained therein is true and correct upon penalty of perjury. 
(c)  If a person applying for a master permit intends to contract with, employ or otherwise retain individuals to engage in solicitations, the person must identify all such individuals, along with their addresses and telephone numbers, and obtain an individual permit for each such individual. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.04; Ord. No. 03-03, § 4, 1-23-2003)  
Sec. 18-255. - Investigation by the police department. 
(a)  The police department is authorized to investigate the affairs of any person soliciting either before or after the filing of an application for a permit for solicitation. 
(b)  The police department may deny a permit to any applicant for good cause, which shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A fugitive from justice. 
(2)  Upon submission of an incomplete application for a solicitor's permit; 
(3)  Providing false and/or misleading statements on the application for a solicitor's permit. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.05)  
Sec. 18-256. - Bond. 
Each holder of a master permit requiring cash deposits or taking orders on delivery purchases (COD) or who requires a contract of agreement to finance the sale of any goods, services or merchandise for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, shall furnish the town a bond in the amount of $5,000.00 by the master permit holder as principal, and by a security company authorized and licensed to do business in the state. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.06)  
Sec. 18-257. - Damages. 
Any person aggrieved or damaged by the action of a solicitor shall have the right of acting on the bond set forth in section 18-256 for recovery of money or damages, or both. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.07)  
Sec. 18-258. - Application fee. 
A nonrefundable fee, as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code, for investigation and administration of the application shall be charged. Such fee shall not be prorated and shall be paid at the time the application is made and shall not be returned to the applicant, regardless of whether a permit is issued. All fees are subject to change upon resolution of the town council. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.08)  
Sec. 18-259. - Issuance of a photographic permit (badge). 
After review of a permit application to determine its compliance with this article, and within ten working days of the receipt of the same, the police department shall either issue a master permit, and any associated individual permits, in the form of a badge, or notify the person applying that the application does not comply with this article, and specifically point out what information or explanation has not been furnished that is required before a permit can be issued. Permits shall expire after one year from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.09)  
Sec. 18-260. - Requirement that badge be displayed. 
Upon issuance of the badge by the police department, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  The badge issued shall be in such form and requirement so as to fully identify the person soliciting and will bear a photographic likeness of the solicitor and shall contain an expiration date. 
(2)  The badge shall be valid only for the person to whom it is issued (nontransferable). Each solicitor is also required to carry a state approved picture identification card or a state driver's license as proof of identification. 
(3)  The badge issued shall be carried/displayed by the solicitor in plain sight while he is engaged in soliciting. 
(4)  The badge is and shall remain the property of the town and may be revoked and required to be surrendered at any time for any false or misleading information on the permit application, for violation of any town ordinance, including the provisions set forth in this article, and for violation of any state or federal law. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.10)  
Sec. 18-261. - Regulations. 
(a)  Every solicitor shall identify himself as a solicitor upon approaching a citizen at a residence and explain his purpose, whether it be direct sales, solicitation of orders, or the demonstration of goods or merchandise, or any combination of such purposes. 
(b)  Solicitors shall conduct solicitation activities, canvassers shall conduct canvassing activities, and handbill distributors shall distribute handbills only on Monday through Saturday. Solicitors, canvassers, and handbill distributors shall not conduct solicitation or canvassing activities, or distribute handbills: (i) before 9:00 a.m. or (ii) after 9:00 p.m. or after dark on any day, whichever is earlier. "Dark" means the time of day identified by the United States Naval Observatory as being the end of civil twilight on a particular day in the town. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation activities, canvassing activities or handbill distribution at any time on a Sunday, New Year's Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve Day or Christmas Day. 
(d)  Subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply to a visit on the premises as a result of a request or an appointment made by the occupant. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation activities - including solicitation or fundraising activities by any institution or group organized for a political, religious or charitable purpose, canvassing activities, or handbill distribution at a premises with a posted notice that such activity is not welcomed or invited. It shall be presumed that there is notice that solicitation, canvassing activity, or handbill distribution is not welcomed or invited when there is exhibited in a conspicuous place on or near the main entrance to the residence, a weatherproof sign or card containing the words "No Solicitors," "No Trespassing," or words of similar meaning in letters not less than two-thirds of one inch in height. 
(f)  No person engaged as a solicitor, canvasser, or handbill distributor shall remain or linger at a residence after having been verbally informed by the resident that they are not welcome. 
(g)  No person may engage in solicitation activities, canvassing activities, or handbill distribution in an aggressive or intimidating manner. The term "aggressive or intimidating manner" means: 
(1)  Blocking the path of a person who is the object of the activity; or 
(2)  Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away from the solicitor, canvasser, or handbill distributor after being solicited, approached, accosted or offered a handbill, leaflet or any other item. 
(h)  A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation activities, canvassing activities, or handbill distribution and distributes, deposits, places, throws, scatters, or casts a handbill at a residence except by: 
(1)  Handing or transmitting the handbill directly to the owner or occupant then present in or upon the premises; or 
(2)  Without using adhesive or tape, placing or depositing the handbill in a manner that secures the handbill and prevents it from being blown away, except that mailboxes may not be used when the use is prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations. 
(i)  A person commits an offense if the person secures a handbill at a residence in the manner described by subsection (h)(2) of this section: 
(1)  In a place that is more than five feet from the front door of the residence; or 
(2)  When another handbill has already been left or secured at the residence and has not been removed from the outside of the residence. 
(j)  No solicitor, or any person working on his behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn or whistle, ring a bell, or use any sound device, including any loud-speaking radio or sound amplifying system, upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places of the town, or upon any private premises of the town where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable to be plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other places, for the purpose of attracting attention to the location or to any goods, wares or merchandise which any person permitted pursuant to this article proposes to sell. This subsection also prohibits the use of any audio device for the purpose of attracting customers to retail establishments or merchants. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.11; Ord. No. 03-03, §§ 5, 6, 1-23-2003; Ord. No. 34-14, § 3, 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 18-262. - Consumer's right to cancel. 
(a)  In addition to other consumer rights to revoke an offer or to rescind a transaction, or to any other remedy for a merchant's breach, the merchant shall provide to the consumer the right to cancel a home solicitation transaction made in person in which the consideration exceeds $5.00, until midnight of the third business day after the day on which the consumer signs an agreement or offer to purchase in a home solicitation transaction. 
(b)  Every merchant in a home solicitation transaction made in person in which the consideration exceeds $5.00, shall furnish the consumer with a fully completed receipt or copy of any contract pertaining to the home solicitation transaction at the time of its execution, which is in the same language as that principally used in the oral sales presentation and which shows the date of the transaction and contains the name, address and telephone number of the merchant, and in immediate proximity to the space reserved in the contract for the signature of the consumer or on the front page of the receipt if a contract is not used, and in bold face type of a minimum size of ten points, a statement in substantially the following form: 
"YOU, THE BUYER, MAY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION AT ANY TIME PRIOR TO MIDNIGHT OF THE THIRD BUSINESS DAY AFTER THE DATE OF THIS TRANSACTION. SEE THE ATTACHED NOTICE OF CANCELLATION FORM FOR AN EXPLANATION OF THIS RIGHT." 
(c)  A merchant in a home solicitation transaction made in person in which the consideration exceeds $5.00, shall furnish each consumer, at the time he signs the home solicitation transaction contract or otherwise agrees to buy realty, consumer goods or services from the merchant, a completed form in duplicate, captioned "Notice of Cancellation," which shall be attached to the contract or receipt and easily detachable, and which shall contain in bold face type of a minimum size of ten points the following information and statements in the same language as that used in the contract: 
NOTICE OF CANCELLATION 
(enter date of transaction) 
YOU MAY CANCEL MS TRANSACTION, WITHOUT ANY PENALTY OR OBLIGATION, WITHIN THREE BUSINESS DAYS FROM THE ABOVE DATE. 
IF YOU CANCEL, ANY PROPERTY TRADED IN, ANY PAYMENTS MADE BY YOU UNDER THE CONTRACT OR SALE, AND ANY NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT EXECUTED BY YOU WILL BE RETURNED WITHIN TEN BUSINESS DAYS FOLLOWING RECEIPT BY THE MERCHANT OF YOUR CANCELLATION NOTICE, AND ANY SECURITY INTEREST ARISING OUT OF THE TRANSACTION WILL BE CANCELED. 
IF YOU CANCEL, YOU MUST MAKE AVAILABLE TO THE MERCHANT AT YOUR RESIDENCE, IN SUBSTANTIALLY AS GOOD CONDITION AS WHEN RECEIVED, ANY GOODS DELIVERED TO YOU UNDER THIS CONTRACT OR SALE; OR YOU MAY IF YOU WISH, COMPLY WITH THE INSTRUCTIONS OF THE MERCHANT REGARDING THE RETURN SHIPMENT OF THE GOODS AT THE MERCHANT'S EXPENSE AND RISK. 
IF YOU DO NOT AGREE TO RETURN THE GOODS TO THE MERCHANT AND IF THE MERCHANT DOES NOT PICK THEM UP WHEN 20 DAYS OF THE DATE OF YOUR NOTICE OF CANCELLATION, YOU MAY RETAIN OR DISPOSE OF THE GOODS WITHOUT ANY FURTHER OBLIGATION. 
TO CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION, MAIL OR DELIVER A SIGNED AND DATED COPY OF THIS CANCELLATION NOTICE OR ANY OTHER WRITTEN NOTICE, OR SEND A TELEGRAM, TO (Name of merchant) AT (Address of merchant's place of business) NOT LATER THAN MIDNIGHT OF (Date). 
I HEREBY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION. 
(Date) 
(Buyer's Signature) 
(d)  Notification by mail shall be considered given at the time mailed as evidenced by the postmark; notification by telegram shall be considered given at the time filed for transmission; and notification by any other writing shall be considered given at the time delivered to the merchant's designated place of business. 
(e)  Before furnishing copies of the notice of cancellation to the consumer, a merchant shall complete both copies by entering the name of the merchant, the address of the merchant's place of business, the date of the transaction, and the date, not earlier than the third business day following the date of the transaction, by which the consumer may give notice of cancellation. 
(f)  A merchant shall not include in any home solicitation transaction contract or receipt any confession of judgment or any waiver of any of the rights to which the consumer is entitled under this article including specifically his right to cancel the transaction in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(g)  A merchant in a home solicitation transaction in which the consideration exceeds $5.00, shall inform each consumer orally, at the time the consumer signs the contract or purchases the goods or services, of the consumer's right to cancel. 
(h)  A merchant shall not misrepresent in any manner the consumer's right to cancel. 
(i)  A merchant shall honor any valid notice of cancellation by a consumer and, within ten business days after the receipt of the notice, a merchant shall: 
(1)  Refund all payments made under the contract or sale; 
(2)  Return any goods or property traded in, in substantially as good condition as when received by the merchant; 
(3)  Cancel and return any negotiable instrument executed by the consumer in connection with the contract of sale and take any action necessary or appropriate to terminate promptly any security interest created in the transaction; and 
(4)  Restore improvements on real property to the condition in which he found them unless requested otherwise by the consumer. 
(j)  No merchant shall negotiate, transfer, sell or assign any note or other evidence of indebtedness to a finance company or other third party prior to 12:00 midnight of the fifth business day following the day the contract was signed or the goods or services were purchased. 
(k)  No merchant shall fail, within ten business days of receipt of the consumer's notice of cancellation, to notify the consumer whether the licensee intends to repossess or to abandon any shipped or delivered goods. 
(l)  This section shall not apply to a home solicitation transaction in which the consideration does not exceed $25.00 if. 
(1)  The consumer may within a reasonable time: 
a.  Cancel the order; 
b.  Refuse to accept the goods when delivered without obligation to pay for them; or 
c.  Return the goods to the seller and receive a full refund for any amount the consumer has paid; and 
(2)  The consumer's right to cancel the order, refuse delivery or return the goods without obligation or charge is clearly and legibly printed on the face or reverse side of the sales ticket or clearly and legibly printed in or on the package. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.12) 
State Law reference— Cancellation of certain consumer transactions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 39.001 et seq.  
Sec. 18-263. - Exhibiting card prohibiting solicitors. 
(a)  A person, desiring that no merchant or other person engage in a home solicitation, canvassing activity or handbill distribution at his residence, shall exhibit in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the residence, a weatherproof sign or card, not less than three inches by four inches in size, containing the words, "NO SOLICITORS," "NO TRESPASSING," or words of similar meaning in letters not be less than two-thirds of an inch in height. 
(b)  Every merchant, canvasser, or handbill distributor upon going onto any premises upon which a residence is located shall first examine the residence to determine if any notice prohibiting soliciting, canvassing, or handbill distribution is exhibited upon or near the main entrance to the residence. If such notice is exhibited, the merchant, canvasser, or handbill distributor shall immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the occupant, unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant. 
(c)  No person shall go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon the door, or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in or attempting to engage in a home solicitation transaction, canvassing activities or handbill distribution, if a card as described in subsection (a) of this section is exhibited in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the residence, unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant. 
(d)  No person, other than the occupant of the residence, shall remove, deface or render illegible, a sign or card placed by the occupant pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Any merchant, canvasser, or handbill distributor who has gained entrance to a residence, or audience with the occupant, whether invited or not shall immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the occupant further when requested to leave by the occupant. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.13; Ord. No. 34-14, § 4, 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 18-264. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this article may be revoked by the police department for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for a permit; 
(2)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting solicitation activities; 
(3)  Conducting solicitation activities contrary to the conditions of the permit; 
(4)  Conducting solicitation activities in such a manner as to create or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Upon revocation, the police department shall deliver written notice to the permit holder stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such action. The written notice shall be delivered to the permit holder's place of business or mailed to the permit holder's last known address. The chief of police or his designee shall have the authority to seize any and all permit badges possessed by persons conducting business as a solicitor while the official notification process is underway. At such time, any and all solicitation activities conducted under the authority of that permit shall cease. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.14)  
Sec. 18-265. - Appeal if permit denied or revoked. 
If the police department refuses to issue a permit, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the town council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the town secretary within ten days from the date of the refusal. The same procedure of appeal shall apply to a permit revoked under this article. Thereafter, the town council shall set a reasonable time and place for a hearing on such an appeal and notice of such hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.15)  
Sec. 18-266. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.16)  
Sec. 18-267. - Solicitation on public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, hawk, sell, solicit, distribute or take orders for any services, wares, merchandise, or goods, including, but not limited to, magazines, encyclopedias, tools, photographs, flowers, candy, plants, or statues, on the streets, street rights-of-way, or medians of the town. This prohibition shall apply to and include any institution or group organized for a political, religious or charitable purpose, or individuals engaging in such activities on behalf of any such institution or group. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ask or communicate in any such manner, whether orally, by written and/or printed material including, but not limited to, handbills or leaflets, hand signing or by any other method, direct or implied, for any purpose which includes receiving or obtaining money, alms, gifts or items of value on the streets, street rights-of-way, or medians of the town. This prohibition shall apply to and include any institution or group organized for a political, religious or charitable purpose, or individuals engaging in such activities on behalf of any such institution or group. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor retail sale or outdoor commercial promotion in the town except where such sale or promotion is in connection with or adjacent to an existing permanent business operated in the town except for the sale of Christmas trees between November 15 and December 26. 
(d)  No permit provided for herein shall be issued for selling in the above manner. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 2.17; Ord. No. 03-03, § 7, 1-23-2003)  
Secs. 18-268—18-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 98; sexually oriented business, § 98-994. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate location of sexually oriented businesses and to require a permit, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 243. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-301. - Findings. 
(a)  The following are found to be true and correct: 
(1)  V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075 authorizes home rule cities to license any lawful business, occupation or calling that is susceptible to the control of the police power. 
(2)  V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.004 authorizes home rule cities to enforce all ordinances necessary to protect health, life and property, and to preserve the good government, order and security of such cities and their inhabitants. 
(3)  Sexually oriented businesses require special supervision from public safety agencies of cities in order to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such businesses as well as the citizens of such cities. 
(4)  Sexually oriented businesses are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities, including prostitution and sexual liaisons of a casual nature. 
(5)  The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of cities which demands reasonable regulation of sexually oriented businesses in order to protect the health and well-being of its citizens. 
(6)  Licensing is a legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to ensure that operators of sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations, and operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation. 
(7)  There is convincing documented evidence that sexually oriented businesses, because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing increased crime and the downgrading of property values. 
(8)  Police in numerous other jurisdictions have made a substantial number of arrests for sexually related crimes in sexually oriented business establishments. 
(9)  It is recognized that sexually oriented businesses, due to their nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics particularly when they are located in close proximity to each other, thereby contributing to urban blight and downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent areas. 
(b)  The town council desires to: 
(1)  Minimize and control these adverse effects and thereby preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods; 
(2)  Deter the spread of urban blight; 
(3)  Protect the citizens from increased crime; 
(4)  Preserve the quality of life; and 
(5)  Protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizenry. 
(c)  With regard to the licensing of sexually oriented business establishments, the town council makes the following findings: 
(1)  It is in the interest of the public safety and welfare to prohibit persons convicted of certain crimes from engaging in the occupation of operating a sexually oriented business. 
(2)  The town council, in accordance with Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-13c, has considered the following criteria: 
a.  The nature and seriousness of the crimes; 
b.  The relationship of the crimes to the purposes for requiring a license to engage in the occupation; 
c.  The extent to which a license might offer an opportunity to engage in further criminal activity of the same type as that in which the person previously had been involved; and 
d.  The relationship of the crimes to the ability, capacity or fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the licensed occupation and has determined that the crimes listed in section 18-332(a)(9) are serious crimes which are directly related to the duties and responsibilities of the occupation of operating a sexually oriented business. The town council has further determined that the very nature of the occupation of operating a sexually oriented business brings a person into constant contact with persons interested in sexually oriented materials and activities, thereby giving the person repeated opportunities to commit offenses against public order and decency or crimes against the public health, safety or morals should the person be so inclined. Thus, it is the opinion of the town council that the listed crimes render a person unable, incompetent and unfit to perform the duties and responsibilities accompanying the operation of a sexually oriented business in a manner that would promote the public safety and trust. 
(3)  The town council has determined that no person who has been convicted of a crime listed in section 18-332(a)(9), is presently fit to operate a sexually oriented business until the respective time period designated in that section has expired. 
(4)  It is the intent of the town council to disqualify a person from being issued a sexually oriented business license by the town if the person has been convicted within the designated time period of any of the crimes listed in section 18-332(a)(9). 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.01)  
Sec. 18-302. - Purpose and intent of article. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the town, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the town. The provisions of the sections have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexual oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(b)  It is the intent of the town council that the locational regulations of section 18-361 are promulgated pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 243, the town Charter and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.072. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.02)  
Sec. 18-303. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as such terms are defined in this section. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which as one of its business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity, including topless dancers, nude dancers or strippers, male or female; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the town or his designated agent. 
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration. 
Establishment means any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to a sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or seminudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or areola of the female breast. 
Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner or licensee of the business. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, trust, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
Residential district means a single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple-family or mobile home zoning district or designation as defined in this Code. 
Residential use means a single-family, duplex, multiple-family, or mobile home park, mobile home subdivision and campground use as defined in this Code. 
School means any public or private nursery, preschool, day care center, learning center, elementary or secondary school. 
Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminudity. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical area means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling of or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in this definition. 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 20 percent, as the floor area existed on April 27, 1987. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.03) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-304. - Classifications. 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.04)  
Sec. 18-305. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 17 years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film or video cassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  In this section the term "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an agent or employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover, outside packaging on the item or contents of the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.21)  
Sec. 18-306. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating section 18-361, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs. 
(b)  If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation of section 18-331(a) or section 18-361 is punishable as a class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating a provision of this article other than section 18-361, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 18-331, section 18-361 or section 18-382(d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity or seminudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the state, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure; 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 18-331(a) or section 18-361 that each item of descriptive, printed, film or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.22)  
Sec. 18-307. - Injunctive relief. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license, or in violation of section 18-361, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.23)  
Sec. 18-308. - Amendment of article provisions. 
Sections 18-361 and 18-362 may be amended only after compliance with the procedure required to amend a zoning ordinance. Other sections of this article may be amended by vote of the town council. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.24)  
Secs. 18-309—18-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 18-331. - Required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the town for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application form shall be sworn to and shall: 
(1)  Include the name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  State whether the applicant meets each of the requirements set forth in section 18-332; 
(3)  Include the name and address of each person required to sign the application pursuant to section 18-331(d), and the name, address and type of entity, if applicable, of each person or entity owned or controlled by such person which owns or controls an interest in the business to be licensed; and 
(4)  Such other matters, consistent with this article, as may be specified in the application form. 
The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 18-385 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of section 18-385. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the health department, fire department and building official. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign an application for a license as the applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as the applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 18-332, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.05)  
Sec. 18-332. - Issuance. 
(a)  The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license by the director of community development to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(6)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(7)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with section 18-305, 18-334, 18-339, 18-361, 18-381, 18-382, 18-383, 18-384, or 18-385. 
(8)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business are not in compliance with applicable zoning laws or are not in compliance with all applicable town laws and ordinances. 
(9)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43: 
i.  Prostitution; 
ii.  Promotion of prostitution; 
iii.  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
iv.  Compelling prostitution; 
v.  Obscenity; 
vi.  Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; 
vii.  Sexual performance by a child; 
viii.  Possession of child pornography; 
2.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21: 
i.  Public lewdness; 
ii.  Indecent exposure; 
iii.  Indecency with a child; 
3.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22; 
4.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; or 
5.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses. 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.06)  
Sec. 18-333. - Fees. 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.07)  
Sec. 18-334. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, community development department and building inspection division to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business, or his agent or employee, commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.08)  
Sec. 18-335. - Expiration. 
Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 18-331. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.09)  
Sec. 18-336. - Suspension. 
The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an agent or employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with section 18-305, 18-334, 18-339, 18-361, 18-381, 18-382, 18-383, 18-384 or 18-385; 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.10)  
Sec. 18-337. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 18-336 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an agent or employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an agent or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 18-332(a)(9)a.5 for which the time period required in section 18-332(a)(9)a.5 has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 18-332(a)(9), for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person was an agent or employee of the sexually oriented business at the time the offense were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.01; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the town for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or agent or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted anther license until the appropriate number of years required under section 4.06(a)(9)a.5 have elapsed. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.11)  
Sec. 18-338. - Appeal. 
If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the chief of police shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension or revocation, the licensee whose application for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the chief of police. The licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.12)  
Sec. 18-339. - Transfer. 
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.13)  
Secs. 18-340—18-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LOCATION 
 
Sec. 18-361. - Of businesses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 2,640 feet of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district as defined by the zoning ordinance of the town; 
(4)  A public park; or 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to residential use. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business located within 2,640 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or its portion, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure or its portion containing another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure uses as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district or residential lot. 
(e)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(f)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this section, that is in violation of subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed six months, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 2,640 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use, and the later-established business is nonconforming. 
(g)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, school, public park, residential district or residential lot within 2,640 feet of the sexually oriented business. This subsection applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.14)  
Sec. 18-362. - Exemption from location restrictions. 
(a)  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of section 18-361, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the town secretary a written request for an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 18-361. 
(b)  If the written request is filed with the town secretary within the ten-day limit, then town council shall consider the request. The town secretary shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is received. 
(c)  A hearing by the town council may proceed if a quorum is present. The town council shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
(d)  The town council may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 18-361 if it makes the following findings: 
(1)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare. 
(2)  The granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this article. 
(3)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values of quality of life the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight. 
(4)  The location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration. 
(5)  All other applicable provisions or this article will be observed. 
(e)  The town council shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the permit and license appeal council is final. 
(f)  If the town council grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the town council's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of section 18-361 until the applicant applies for an receives another exemption. 
(g)  If the town council denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the town council's action. 
(h)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this article other than the locational restrictions of section 18-361. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.15)  
Secs. 18-363—18-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-381. - Escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.16)  
Sec. 18-382. - Nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or seminudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. If is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or seminudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity or seminudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.17)  
Sec. 18-383. - Adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity or seminudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (b) and (c) of this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.18)  
Sec. 18-384. - Adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in section 18-303. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.19)  
Sec. 18-385. - Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan specifying the location of one or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and switches, which lights are controlled by such switches, and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Only agents or employees shall have access to light switches. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration for the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises have two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present on the premises, and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle, as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described in this subsection (a) is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(8) of this section, commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 4.20)  
Secs. 18-386—18-420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NEWSRACKS 
 
Sec. 18-421. - Purposes of article. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through the regulation of the location of newsracks on public rights-of-way so as to: 
(1)  Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience; 
(2)  Restrict unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles; 
(3)  Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of poles, posts, traffic control devices, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes and access to locations used for public transportation purposes; 
(4)  Relocate and/or replace newsracks which result in a visual blight and/or excessive space allocation on the public rights-of-way; 
(5)  Maintain and protect the values of surrounding property; 
(6)  Reduce unnecessary exposure of the public to personal injury or property damage; 
(7)  Treat all newspapers, news periodicals and commercial literature equally regardless of their size, content, circulation or frequency of publication; 
(8)  Maintain and preserve freedom of the press; and 
(9)  Maintain and to the maximum extent possible cooperate with newspaper, news periodical and commercial literature distributors. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 7.01)  
Sec. 18-422. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director means the director of community development for the town. 
Newsracks means any type of unmanned device for the vending or free distribution of newspapers, news periodicals or commercial literature. 
Public right-of-way means any street, highway, alley, sidewalk, bridge, park, public place or other real property owned or controlled by the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 7.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-423. - Prohibitions on location. 
(a)  No newsracks shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
(1)  Within ten feet of any marked crosswalk; 
(2)  Within ten feet of any unmarked crosswalk; 
(3)  Within ten feet of any fire hydrant, fire or police alarm box, or other emergency facilities; 
(4)  Within six feet of any driveway; 
(5)  Within ten feet ahead of, and 15 feet to the rear of, any sign marking a designated bus stop, measured along the back of any curb or edge of pavement; 
(6)  Within ten feet of any bus bench; 
(7)  Within 20 feet of any street or highway traffic intersection, measured along the back of any curb or the edge of pavement; 
(8)  Within three feet of any street or highway, measured from the back of any curb or the edge of pavement; however, if the measurement of three feet results in any part of the newsrack being placed on a public sidewalk or pedestrian passageway, then the newsrack may be placed along the edge of any such public sidewalk or pedestrian passageway; 
(9)  On any handicap access ramp; 
(10)  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than three feet; 
(11)  On or within two feet of signs, traffic control devices, parking meters, streetlights or utility poles; or 
(12)  On the public right-of-way of any street or highway where parking is prohibited on both sides for all or any portion of the day or within 50 feet of such street on the right-of-way of any intersecting street. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict between this section or any provision of chapter 98, zoning, the provisions of the zoning ordinance shall apply. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 7.03)  
Sec. 18-424. - Removal. 
(a)  Whenever the director finds any newsrack located upon or maintained in any prohibited area, the director shall send by certified mail, with return receipt requested, a written notice to the owner or user of the newsrack, if known, or if such address is not known, then the director shall post such notice on or next to the newsrack for a period of ten days. The notice shall state the address and telephone number of the director, that the newsrack is in violation of the requirements of this article; that the owner or user is ordered to cause immediate removal of the newsrack from the public right-of-way; that the newsrack will be removed by the town after a date designated in the notice, which date shall be ten days after the notice was mailed or first posted; and that the owner or user may request a hearing before the town council by filing a written appeal with the director on or before the designated removal date. If the newsrack remains on a public right-of-way after the ten-day period, or if an appeal is made and denied after the date of the town council hearing thereon, the director shall cause the removal of the newsrack. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the director may cause immediate removal of any newsrack on a public right-of-way where its location unreasonably endangers the safety of persons or property or unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No later than three business days of the town after the director has caused such removal, he shall give the notice referred to in subsection (a) of this section. Within ten days after removal of the newsrack, the owner or user of the newsrack may appeal the removal to the town council by filing an appeal with the town secretary. The town council thereafter shall determine whether the director's action was proper. If the town council determines that the director improperly caused removal of a newsrack, the director shall cause such newsrack to be restored to its location prior to such removal. 
(c)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall, without exception, be fined the maximum amount provided in section 1-13 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a separate violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur and shall be punishable as such; however, no fine or penalty may be levied within the time period allowed for an appeal to be filed or while an appeal is pending. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 7.04)  
Secs. 18-425—18-460. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Fee schedule, app. A; franchises, app. B. 
 
Sec. 18-461. - Adoption of FCC rules. 
The rules promulgated by the FCC pursuant to the Cable Act of 1992, published at 47 CFR 76.900 et seq., as may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference in their entirety. The provisions set forth in section 18-462 are intended to be consistent with such rules and shall be interpreted to that effect. A copy of the FCC rules shall be retained at the office of the town secretary. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 8.00(a))  
Sec. 18-462. - Information to be provided to the town. 
A provider of cable television service shall provide all information requested by the town in the exercise of its regulatory authority to set just and reasonable rates pursuant to this article within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the request for information by the provider. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 8.00(b))  
Sec. 18-463. - Application for certification to regulate rates and charges. 
The town manager is hereby directed to apply for certification for the town to regulate rates and charges for basic cable television services in accordance with the Federal Communication Commission's rules. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 8.00(c))  
Secs. 18-464—18-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PREPAYMENT FOR GASOLINE AND DIESEL FUEL AT RETAIL FUEL BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 18-500. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means the person(s), other than the owner or manager/supervisor, employed to perform services on the premises of a retail fuel business and who have no supervisory responsibilities. 
Manager/supervisor means the person(s) granted authority or responsibility by the owner for the operations of the retail fuel business. 
Owner means the individual, group, corporation, partnership, joint venture or other group or entity that owns a retail fuel business. 
Payment means payment by any legal means, including cash, credit card, debit card, check or otherwise. Presenting a form of payment to be finalized at the conclusion of the transaction shall be considered payment in full. 
(Ord. No. 55-06, § 2, 9-5-2006)  
Sec. 18-501. - Offenses. 
It shall be an offense for a retail fuel business owner, manager/supervisor, or employee to: 
(1)  Activate any gasoline or diesel fuel pumping device prior to receiving payment in full for the gasoline or diesel fuel; or 
(2)  Allow or permit any person to dispense gasoline or diesel fuel from a pumping device at a retail fuel business unless the person has first made payment in full. 
(Ord. No. 55-06, § 2, 9-5-2006)  
Sec. 18-502. - Defense. 
It shall be a defense if the owner, manager/supervisor or employee of a retail fuel business allows the dispensing of gasoline or diesel fuel for repair and/or testing of the dispensing devices used by the retail fuel business. 
(Ord. No. 55-06, § 2, 9-5-2006)  
Sec. 18-503. - Exception. 
It is an exception to the application of this article if merchants enter into a civil agreement with customers, pursuant to which customers may activate a fuel pump prior to payment through the use of a card or similar device, issued by the merchant that activates the pump. Such an agreement shall include identifying information of the customer that may be used by the merchant for seeking compensation in the appropriate civil court should the customer fail to pay for fuel after activating the pump with such a card. 
(Ord. No. 55-06, § 2, 9-5-2006)  
Secs. 18-504—18-509. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; GENERALLY  
DIVISION 1. - SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 53-10, § 2, adopted Sept. 7, 2010, enacted provisions codified herein as Art. IX, Div. 2, §§ 18-521—18-527. To facilitate indexing, Art. IX, §§ 18-510—18-512 has been redesignated as Art. IX, Div. 1, §§ 18-510—18-512. 
 
Sec. 18-510. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be to acknowledge and codify that the voters of the Town of Flower Mound approved two propositions at an election on May 12, 2007: 
(1)  The town shall be allowed to permit the legal sale of beer and wine for off-premise consumption only; and 
(2)  The town shall be allowed to permit the legal sale of mixed beverages in restaurants by food and beverage certificate holders only. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed or interpreted to conflict with the V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 2-15-2010)  
Sec. 18-511. - Business hours. 
It is unlawful for any person or dealer to sell or deliver any alcoholic beverage except within those hours as prescribed by state law. The holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit issued by the state (or any equivalent late hours permit/license issued by the state) may offer alcoholic beverages for sale on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. and on any other day between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 2-15-2010)  
Sec. 18-512. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates or fails to comply with this article or the provisions of the state rules, and any person who is the alcoholic beverage permit holder or otherwise operates an alcoholic beverage establishment that does not comply with the requirements of this article, and any responsible officer of that alcoholic beverage permit holder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $500.00. Each day any violation or noncompliance continues constitutes a separate offense. The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violation of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 2-15-2010)  
Secs. 18-513—18-520. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 53-10, § 2, adopted Sept. 7, 2010, enacted provisions intended for codification as Art. X, §§ 18-600—18-606. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. IX, Div. 2, §§ 18-521—18-527. 
 
Sec. 18-521. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. 
Ale means a malt beverage containing more than four percent of alcohol by weight. 
Beer means a malt beverage containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and not more than four percent of alcohol by weight, and does not include a beverage designated by label or otherwise by a name other than beer. 
Malt liquor means a malt beverage containing more than four percent of alcohol by weight. 
Mixed beverage means one or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or in part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a mixed beverage permit, the holder of a daily temporary mixed beverage permit, the holder of a caterer's permit, the holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit, the holder of a private club registration permit, or the holder of a private club late hours permit. 
Off-premises means locations other than those described in the definition of "premises" in this section. 
Premises means the grounds and all buildings, vehicles, and appurtenances pertaining to the grounds, including any adjacent premises if they are directly or indirectly under the control of the same person. 
Town manager means the town manager of the Town of Flower Mound and his/her designee. 
Wine and vinous liquor means the product obtained from the alcoholic fermentation of juice of sound ripe grapes, fruits, berries or honey, and includes wine coolers. 
(Ord. No. 53-10, § 2(18-600), 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 18-522. - Permit required; procedures. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distill, brew, import, transport, store for purposes of sale, distribute or sell any beer, wine or mixed beverages within the town unless such person has obtained a town permit from the office of the town manager. 
(b)  Any person wishing to manufacture, distill, brew, import, transport, store for purposes of sale, distribute or sell any beer, wine or mixed beverages must complete a town permit application and pay the application fee as set forth in section 18-523 of this division. 
(c)  The town manager shall submit each application to the appropriate town departments, as determined by the town manager, to ensure that the application complies with all town ordinances and regulations, including this article. 
(d)  After approval by all necessary town departments, the application shall be deemed approved and the town manager shall issue a town permit upon payment by the applicant of the initial permit fee as set forth in section 18-523 of this division. 
(e)  Applications and permits shall be kept on file in the town manager's and/or the town secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 53-10, § 2(18-601), 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 18-523. - Application fee; initial permit fee. 
(a)  An application fee as determined from time to time by town council shall be charged by the town manager for accepting any permit application or permit renewal application. No permit application or permit renewal application may be accepted unless accompanied by the application fee. 
(b)  The town's initial permit fee shall be equal to one-half of the state fee required by the state alcoholic beverage commission of every person that may be issued any state permit or license for the manufacture, distilling, brewing, importing, transporting, storing, distributing or sale of any beer, wine or mixed beverage, unless a different fee is allowed or required by state law. No town permit may be issued unless the initial permit fee is received. 
(c)  The town manager shall issue a receipt for the application fee and initial permit fee and keep a record of the same in the town manager's and/or town secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 53-10, § 2(18-602), 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 18-524. - Permit renewal; permit renewal fee. 
(a)  All permits shall be renewed annually. All permits shall terminate at midnight on the day before the anniversary date of their issuance and no permit shall be issued covering a term longer than one year. 
(b)  The town shall require payment of an annual permit renewal fee by all establishments selling alcoholic beverages within the town. The permit renewal fee shall be equal to one-half of the state fee required by the state alcoholic beverage commission of every person that may be issued any state permit or license for the manufacture, distilling, brewing, importing, transporting, storing, distributing or sale of any beer, wine or mixed beverage, unless a different fee is allowed or required by state law. 
(c)  The town manager may cancel a permit if a permittee fails to pay the permit renewal fee. The town manager shall send notice of such cancellation to the address on file with the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 53-10, § 2(18-603), 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 18-525. - Violations. 
A permittee who sells an alcoholic beverage without first having paid the permit fee or permit renewal fee under this section commits a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $200.00. In addition, the town manager shall report such failure to pay to the state alcoholic beverages commission. 
(Ord. No. 53-10, § 2(18-604), 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 18-526. - Hours of operation. 
The hours of sales of alcoholic beverages in the town shall comply with state law provisions regarding the hours of sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 53-10, § 2(18-605), 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 18-527. - Development standards. 
(a)  The storage, possession, sale, serving or consumption of any alcoholic beverages, when permitted by the laws of the State of Texas pursuant to the issuance of a permit thereunder and under the town's ordinances, shall be regulated and governed by the regulations and requirements in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code and this chapter. 
(b)  The storage, possession, sale, serving or consumption of any alcoholic beverages, to be sold or served by the holder of a mixed beverage permit issued by the State of Texas, in bottles or any other container direct to the customer or person for consumption on the premises of the holder of a mixed beverage permit shall be permitted only in a restaurant as defined in section 98-2. 
(c)  The holder of a mixed beverage permit with a food and beverage certificate shall on a quarterly basis, no later than on the 10th day of the month following each quarter, file with the town secretary an affidavit on an officially approved form provided by the town secretary that reflects gross sales for the preceding three months and gross sales for the preceding 12-month period, or since the restaurant began its operation, whichever is shorter, breaking down the sales between the sale of food and the sale of alcoholic beverages. The holder of a mixed beverage permit with a food and beverage certificate shall on a quarterly basis file with the town secretary a copy of the filings supplied to the State of Texas for sales tax and mixed beverage (alcoholic beverages) tax purposes. The town reserves the right to request holders of a mixed beverage permit with a food and beverage certificate to submit an annual audit of the gross sales broken down between food sales and mixed beverage sales at the person's expense. All filings including all sales and beverage tax filings shall remain confidential. The holder of a mixed beverage permit with a food and beverage certificate shall permit the town manager to view the books, records and receipts relative to sale of food and alcoholic beverages at any time after four hours' notice. The town attorney, town manager, town council, town treasurer, mayor or town secretary may examine said records. Said records may be introduced in court for the purpose of establishing a prima facie case that the holder of a mixed beverage permit with a food and beverage certificate is in violation of this section. 
(d)  The storage, possession, and sale of beer and/or wine in bottles or any other container shall be permitted to be sold only by the holder of a permit issued by the State of Texas direct to the customer or person for consumption off the premises of the permit holder. 
(e)  The sale of alcoholic beverages within 300 feet of a church, public school or public hospital is hereby prohibited. No permit for the sale, serving and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be granted by the town council within 300 feet of any church, public school or public hospital. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door and in a direct line across intersections. The measurement of distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public school shall be: 
(1)  In a direct line from the property line of the public school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or 
(2)  If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
(f)  As authorized by V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33, the town council may allow a variance to the provisions of subsection 18-527(e) if it determines that the enforcement of the regulations in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land and resources, creates an undue hardship on the applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason the town council determines, after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, that the variance is in the best interest of the community. 
(1)  No variance may be granted hereunder except after a public hearing for which notice has been given to any church, public school or public hospital within 300 feet of the location of the place of business seeking a variance. The notice must be provided, not less than ten days before the date set for hearing. 
(Ord. No. 53-10, § 2(18-606), 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 13-15 , § 1, 3-2-2015; Ord. No. 36-15 , § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Secs. 18-528, 18-529. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - REGULATION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-10, §§ 2—4, adopted Feb. 15, 2010, enacted provisions intended for use as Ch. 18, Art. IX. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, the former Art. IX was renumbered as Art. X. 
 
Sec. 18-530. - Definitions. 
Electronic vaping device means any electronically powered or battery powered device designed to simulate the smoking of tobacco, cigarettes, pipes or cigars. An electronic vaping device includes personal vaporizers, electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes), electronic pipes (e-pipes), electronic cigars (e-cigars) and any other type of electronic nicotine delivery system or any part thereof. 
Minor means a person younger than 18 years of age. 
Person means an individual, corporation, sole proprietorship, and any other type of business entity recognized under Texas law. 
Place of employment means any enclosed indoor area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference rooms and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility. 
Public building or place means any building, place and/or enclosed indoor area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted or that serves as a workplace other than a building or structure for which the primary use is that of a private residence. 
Smoke, smokes or smoking means: 
(1)  Carrying or holding a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, weed, plant or combustible material in any manner or in any form or of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment or device; 
(2)  A lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, weed, plant or combustible material in any manner or in any form or of any kind or any other smoking equipment or device; or 
(3)  Inhaling, emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar, cigarette, weed, plant or combustible material in any manner or in any form or of any kind or any other smoking equipment or device. 
(Ord. No. 71-08, § 2, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 05-14, § 1, 2-3-2014)  
Sec. 18-531. - Places where smoking is prohibited. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all public places and enclosed places of employment within the town, including, but not limited to, the following places: 
(1)  Within any places of employment and/or within any enclosed area available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses or to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to retail stores, offices, banks, food establishments, bars, restaurants, warehouses, manufacturing facilities, hospitals, and medical facilities; 
(2)  In or within 25 feet of any door, operable window/vent or other opening to a public building, place of employment or place where smoking is prohibited; 
(3)  In public parks, including but not limited to public recreation fields, pools, playgrounds, concession stands, restrooms, trails and any seating or observation areas abutting and immediately adjacent thereto; 
(4)  Hotels and motels, except as provided for in section 18-532, below. 
(Ord. No. 71-08, § 2, 11-3-2008)  
Sec. 18-532. - Places where smoking is not prohibited. 
(a)  The following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this article: 
(1)  Private residences, including porch and yard areas, except when the residence is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility; 
(2)  Personal automobiles; 
(3)  Outdoor places of employment, except as prohibited in section 18-531, above; 
(4)  Parking lots within public parks, except within 25 feet of any recreation field or other protected area identified in subsection 18-531(a)(3), or any door, operable window/vent or other opening to a public building, place of employment or place where smoking is prohibited; 
(5)  Public sidewalks, except within 25 feet of any door, operable window/vent or other opening to a public building, place of employment or place where smoking is prohibited; 
(6)  Hotel or motel. Not more than ten percent of hotel and motel rooms rented to guests and designated as smoking rooms. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(Ord. No. 71-08, § 2, 11-3-2008)  
Sec. 18-533. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  The owner, manager or other person having control of any public building or place, place of employment, or premise where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have a conspicuously posted sign clearly stating "No Smoking" at each entrance, whether for the public, employees or deliveries, and at all restroom entrances. 
(b)  Such "No Smoking" signs shall have bold lettering of not less than one inch in height. The international "No Smoking" symbol may also be used (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with red bar across it). 
(c)  Any owner, manager, or other person having control of any establishment regulated by this article shall be responsible for posting appropriate signage in accordance with paragraphs in this subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 71-08, § 2, 11-3-2008)  
Sec. 18-533.1. - Sale or distribution of electronic vaping devices to minors prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person sells, gives or causes to be sold or given an electronic vaping device to a minor or to a person who intends to deliver it to a minor. 
(b)  If the offense under this section occurs in connection with a sale of an electronic device at a business by an employee of the business, the employee who committed the offense is subject to prosecution. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) that at the time of the sale, the minor presented the person with an apparently valid proof of identification showing the minor was at least 18 years of age. 
(d)  A proof of identification satisfies the requirements of subsection (c) if it contains the name of the minor, a photograph resembling the appearance of the minor and was issued by a state or federal government agency. 
(e)  It is not a defense under this section that the minor purchased the electronic vaping device from a vending machine or other self-service merchandising mechanism if the machine or mechanism was located on the premises of the person. 
(Ord. No. 05-14, § 2, 2-3-2014)  
Sec. 18-534. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the town manager or his/her designee. Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this article to the contrary, the town manager or designee is hereby granted the authority to issue citations to persons violating any provision of this article. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner, manager, operator or person-in-charge of any public building or place, place of employment, premise or establishment regulated by this article to: 
(1)  Post signs in accordance with section 18-533 of this article; 
(2)  Not provide ashtrays, matches, lighters or other smoking related paraphernalia in a public building or place, place of employment, premise or establishment where smoking is prohibited; 
(3)  Advise a person who is smoking in violation of this article that smoking is not allowed; and 
(4)  Request a person remove themselves from this location after that person has been advised that smoking is not allowed and that person willfully continues to smoke. 
(Ord. No. 71-08, § 2, 11-3-2008)  
Sec. 18-535. - Penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any public building or place, place of employment, premise or establishment subject to regulation under this article to fail to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 71-08, § 2, 11-3-2008)  
Secs. 18-536—18-549. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-550. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the welfare of the citizens of the Town of Flower Mound by monitoring credit access businesses in an effort to reduce abusive and predatory lending practices. To this end, this article establishes a registration program for credit access businesses, imposes restrictions on extensions of consumer credit made by credit access businesses, and imposes recordkeeping requirements on credit access businesses. 
(Ord. No. 26-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 18-551. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certificate of registration means a certificate of registration issued by the director under this article to the owner or operator of a credit access business. 
Consumer means an individual who is solicited to purchase or who purchases the services of a credit access business. 
Credit access business has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.601, as amended. 
Deferred presentment transaction has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.601, as amended. 
Director means the director of the department or other designated unit by the town manager to enforce and administer this article and includes any representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director. 
Extension of consumer credit has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.001, as amended. 
Motor vehicle title loan has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.601, as amended. 
Person means any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, financial institution, or any other legal entity. 
Registrant means a person issued a certificate of registration for a credit access business under this article and includes all owners and operators of the credit access business identified in the registration application filed under this article. 
State license means a license to operate a credit access business issued by the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 393, subch. G, as amended. 
Town means the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 26-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 18-552. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of the person by this article, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued. 
(b)  An offense under this article is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(c)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article and need not be proved. 
(d)  The penalties provided for in subsection (b) are in addition to any other enforcement remedies that the town may have under town ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 26-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 18-553. - Defense. 
It is a defense to prosecution under this article that at the time of the alleged offense the person was not required to be licensed by the state as a credit access business under V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 393, subch. G, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 26-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION OF CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 18-554. - Registration required. 
A person commits an offense if the person acts, operates, or conducts business as a credit access business without a valid certificate of registration. A certificate of registration is required for each physically separate credit access business. 
(Ord. No. 26-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 18-555. - Registration application. 
(a)  To obtain a certificate of registration for a credit access business, a person must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the director. The application must contain the following: 
(1)  The name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The business or trade name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and telephone number of the credit access business. 
(3)  The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of the credit access business and other persons with a financial interest in the credit access business, and the nature and extent of each person's interest in the credit access business. 
(4)  A copy of a current, valid state license held by the credit access business. 
(5)  A copy of a current, valid certificate of occupancy showing that the credit access business is in compliance with the town's Code of Ordinances, including the town's land development regulations. 
(6)  A nonrefundable application fee of $50.00. 
(b)  An applicant or registrant shall notify the director within 45 days after any material change in the information contained in the application for a certificate of registration, including, but not limited to, any change of address and any change in the status of the state license held by the applicant or registrant. 
(Ord. No. 26-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 18-556. - Issuance and display of certificate of registration; presentment upon request. 
(a)  The director shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration upon receiving a completed application under section 18-554. 
(b)  A certificate of registration issued under this section must be conspicuously displayed to the public in the credit access business. The certificate of registration must be presented upon request to the director or any peace officer for examination. 
(Ord. No. 26-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 18-557. - Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration. 
(a)  A certificate of registration expires on the earlier of: 
(1)  One year after the date of issuance; or 
(2)  The date of expiration, revocation, or other termination of the registrant's state license. 
(b)  A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in accordance with section 18-554. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the expiration of the registration. 
(Ord. No. 26-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 18-558. - Nontransferability. 
A certificate of registration for a credit access business is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 26-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
DIVISION 3. - LOCATION OF CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 18-559. - Location of credit access businesses. 
Any lot containing a credit access business establishment shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any lot containing another credit access business establishment, as measured in a straight line between the nearest points of one lot to the other lot. 
(Ord. No. 26-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
DIVISION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS FOR CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 18-560. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  A credit access business shall maintain a complete set of records of all extensions of consumer credit made by the credit access business, which must include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the consumer; 
(2)  The principal amount of cash actually advanced; 
(3)  The documentation used to establish a consumer's income under section 18-559. 
(b)  A credit access business shall maintain a copy of each written agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer). 
(c)  A credit access business shall maintain copies of all quarterly reports filed with the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.627, as amended. 
(d)  The records required to be maintained by a credit access business under this section must be retained for at least three years and made available for inspection by the town upon request during the usual and customary business hours of the credit access business. 
(Ord. No. 26-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 18-561. - Restrictions on extensions of consumer credit. 
(a)  The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a deferred presentment transaction may not exceed 20 percent of the consumer's gross monthly income. 
(b)  The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a motor vehicle title loan may not exceed the lesser of: 
(1)  Three percent of the consumer's gross annual income; or 
(2)  Seventy percent of the retail value of the motor vehicle. 
(c)  A credit access business shall use a paycheck or other documentation establishing income to determine a consumer's income. 
(d)  An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for repayment in installments may not be payable in more than four installments. Proceeds from each installment must be used to repay at least 25 percent of the principal amount of the extension of consumer credit. An extension of consumer credit that provides for repayment in installments may not be refinanced or renewed. 
(e)  An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for a single lump sum repayment may not be refinanced or renewed more than three times. Proceeds from each refinancing or renewal must be used to repay at least 25 percent of the principal amount of the original extension of consumer credit. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, an extension of consumer credit that is made to a consumer within seven days after a previous extension of consumer credit has been paid by the consumer will constitute a refinancing or renewal. 
(Ord. No. 26-13, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 26; emergency services, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the town in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this section without prior approval by the town council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the town by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the town council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the town when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 11.07)  
Sec. 22-32. - Offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the town, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 11.08)  
Secs. 22-33—22-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 22-51. - Emergency management organization. 
(a)  The mayor shall serve as the emergency management director for the town. 
(b)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(c)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the town and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this division. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(d)  The operational emergency management organization of the town shall consist of the officers and employees of the town so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 11.01)  
Sec. 22-52. - Emergency management director; powers and duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the town and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the town, and shall recommend for adoption by the town council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the town council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the town secretary. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the town secretary. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the town. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the town to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the town is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of an necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the town. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the town attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for in this article. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 11.02) 
Cross reference— Offices, departments and employees, § 2-206 et seq.  
Secs. 22-53—22-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM, PLAN AND PROCEDURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local and interjurisdictional emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-71. - Emergency management plan. 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of disaster. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 11.03)  
Sec. 22-72. - Interjurisdictional program. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in such county in the formation of any emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as such program may affect the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 11.04)  
Sec. 22-73. - Override; limitations. 
(a)  At all times when the order, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 11.05)  
Sec. 22-74. - Liability. 
(a)  This article is an exercise by the town of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the town, the agents and representatives of the town, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the town a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the town to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 11.06) 
State Law reference— Compensation for services and property, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.152; liability, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.174.  
Chapter 26 - COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 22; offenses, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, § 4.04; judge of the municipal court, § 4.04.1; clerk of the court, § 4.04.2; absence of judge, § 4.04.3; court fines, § 4.04.4. 
State Law reference— Municipal court of record, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 30.01751. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Creation and name. 
(a)  The town council hereby creates a municipal court of record to be known as the "Municipal Court of Record No. 1 in the Town of Flower Mound, Texas" (hereafter, "court of record"). 
(b)  The town council hereby adopts state law regarding municipal courts of record, as amended, and to the extent that this article conflicts with state law, state law shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 2.01, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-32. - Jurisdiction. 
Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 30.00004, as amended, the court of record shall have jurisdiction as provided by general law for municipal courts. The court of record shall have jurisdiction over criminal cases arising under town ordinances authorized by V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 215.072, 217.042, 341.903 and 401.002, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 2.02, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-33. - Law governing procedures. 
Except as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 30, as amended, the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure and the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure shall govern cases proceeding before the court of record. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 2.03, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-34. - Seal of the court. 
The town council shall provide the court of record with a seal. The seal's appearance and use shall substantially conform to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.02. The seal shall include the following phrase: "Municipal Court of Record No. 1 in the Town of Flower Mound, Texas." 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 2.04, 12-20-1999)  
Secs. 26-35—26-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL JUDGE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Offices, departments and employees, § 2-206 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-51. - Appointment; duties generally. 
The court of record shall be presided over by one or more municipal judges, who shall be appointed by the town council. If more than one judge is appointed, the town council shall appoint one of the judges to serve as the presiding judge. The presiding judge shall: 
(1)  Maintain a central docket for cases filed in the town over which the court of record has jurisdiction; 
(2)  Provide for the distribution of cases from the central docket to the individual municipal judges to equalize the distribution of business in the court of record; 
(3)  Request the jurors needed for cases that are set for trial by jury; 
(4)  Temporarily assign judges or substitute judges to exchange benches and to act for each other in a proceedings pending in the court if necessary for the expeditious disposition of business in the court of record; and 
(5)  Supervise and control the operation and clerical functions of the administrative department of the court of record, including the court's personnel, during the proceedings of the court of record. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 3.01, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 60-14 , § 1, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 26-52. - Qualifications. 
An individual appointed to serve as municipal judge shall be: 
(1)  A resident of the state; 
(2)  A citizen of the United States; 
(3)  A licensed attorney in good standing; and 
(4)  Have two or more years of experience in the practice of law in the state. 
An individual may not serve as municipal judge if he is otherwise employed by the town. A municipal judge who accepts other employment with the town vacates the judicial office. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 3.02, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-53. - Term. 
All individuals appointed to serve as municipal judge for the court of record shall serve a term of two years. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 3.03, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-54. - Salary. 
The municipal judge is entitled to a salary, the amount of which shall be determined by the town council. The amount of the municipal judge's salary shall not be based directly or indirectly on fines, fees or costs collected by the court of record. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 3.04, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-55. - Devotion to officer; notice of law. 
The municipal judge shall devote as much time to the office as necessary and shall take judicial notice of state law, the town's ordinances and the corporate limits of the town. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 3.05, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-56. - Powers. 
The municipal judge shall have all powers assigned by state law, including the power to grant writs of mandamus, attachment and other writs necessary to the enforcement of the jurisdiction of the court of record and to issue writs of habeas corpus in cases in which the offense charged is within the jurisdiction of the court of record. The municipal judge is a magistrate and may issue administrative search warrants. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 3.06, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-57. - Filling vacancy in office. 
If a vacancy occurs in the office of municipal judge, the town council shall appoint a qualified individual, as provided in section 26-52 of this chapter, to fill the office for the remainder of the unexpired term. The town council may appoint one or more qualified individuals to serve for a municipal judge who is temporarily absent due to illness, family death, continuing legal or judicial education programs, or any other reason. The presiding judge, or the municipal judge if there is no presiding judge, shall select one of the qualified persons appointed by the town council to serve during the absence of the municipal judge. The substitute judge, while serving as the municipal judge, shall have all of the powers and shall discharge all of the duties of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 3.07, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 60-14 , § 2, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 26-58. - Removal. 
The municipal judge shall serve at the pleasure of the town council. The town council may remove the municipal judge from office at the council's discretion. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 3.08, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 60-14 , § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Secs. 26-59—26-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CLERK OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT AND OTHER PERSONNEL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Offices, departments and employees, § 2-206 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-81. - Clerk of court. 
(a)  Appointment; duties generally. The town manager shall appoint a qualified individual to serve as the clerk of court for the court of record. The clerk of court shall keep the records of the court of record, issue process and generally perform the duties that a clerk of a county court at law exercising criminal jurisdiction performs for that court. In addition, the clerk of court shall maintain an index of all court judgments in the same manner as county clerks are required by law to prepare for criminal cases arising in county courts. The clerk of court shall perform his duties under the direction and control of the presiding judge during times when court is in session. At all times, however, the clerk of court shall remain under the supervision of the town manager. 
(b)  Removal. The clerk of court may be removed pursuant to the town's personnel and administrative regulations manual. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, §§ 4.01, 4.02, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-82. - Other court personnel. 
The town manager may provide deputy clerks, warrant officers and other personnel, as needed, for the proper operation of the court of record. Such individuals shall perform their duties under the direction and control of the presiding judge during times when court is in session. Such individuals, however, shall at all times remain under the supervision of the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 4.03, 12-20-1999)  
Secs. 26-83—26-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RULES OF PROCEDURE  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 26-101. - Recording of court proceedings. 
All proceedings before the court of record, to the extent requested, shall be recorded by use of a good quality electronic recording device. This shall be the primary method for the recording of proceedings utilized by the court of record. No recording shall be made unless the municipal judge, or one of the parties to the proceedings, requests a record. As an alternative to the electronic recording device, proceedings shall be recorded by an official court reporter appointed by the town council. The record of the proceedings shall be kept by the clerk of court if an electronic recording device is used, or the court reporter in cases where the court reporter records the proceedings, for the 20-day period beginning the day after the last day of the court proceeding, trial or denial of motion for new trial, whichever occurs last. If a case is appealed, the proceedings shall be transcribed from the recording by the town's official court reporter. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 5.01, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-102. - Court reporter; duties; compensation. 
The town council shall appoint one or more court reporters to preserve a record in cases tried before the court of record in which the proceedings are not recorded by a good quality recording device. The court reporter must meet the qualifications provided by law for official court reporters. The court reporter may use written notes, transcribing equipment, video or audio recording equipment, or a combination of those methods to record the proceedings of the court. The court reporter shall keep the record for the 20-day period beginning the day after the last day of the proceeding, trial or denial of motion for new trial, or until any appeal is final, whichever occurs last. The court reporter shall not be required to record testimony or any proceeding in a case unless the municipal judge or one of the parties requests a record. The party requesting the services of the official court reporter shall bear the cost of those services. When an electronic recording device is being used to record the proceedings, it is not necessary to have a court reporter present to record the proceedings nor to certify the statement of facts. The town council shall set the compensation of the court reporter. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 5.02, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-103. - Transcript preparation fee. 
The town council hereby establishes a transcript preparation fee in the amount found in appendix A of this Code. This fee does not include the fee for an actual transcript of the proceedings. The party requesting an actual transcript must pay the transcript preparation fee and the fee for an actual transcript of the proceedings. The fee for a transcript shall include the actual cost, as invoiced by the court reporter, for transcribing the recorded proceedings and the cost for copies of the transcript at an amount per page as found in appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 5.03, 12-20-1999)  
Secs. 26-104—26-120. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Appeals 
 
Sec. 26-121. - Generally. 
A defendant has the right to appeal from a judgment or conviction in the court of record, as provided by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 30.00014, as amended. The state has the right to appeal from a judgment in the court of record in manner provided for by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 44.01, as amended. The appropriate county court of Denton County, Texas, shall have jurisdiction of appeals from the court of record. All appeals shall be conducted in the manner provided for by V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 30, as amended. Upon the enactment of this article, all cases for offenses alleged to have been committed on or after September 1, 1999, shall be appealed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 30, as amended. An offense committed before September 1, 1999, shall be appealed in accordance with the law in effect before such date. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 6.01, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-122. - Perfecting right to appeal. 
(a)  State law adopted. The town council specifically adopts state law, as amended, relative to appeals. 
(b)  Requirements. In order to perfect a right to appeal, the appellant must file a written motion for new trial with the clerk of court and must also give notice of the appeal to the appellee and to the court. 
(c)  Motion for new trial. The written motion for new trial must be filed with the clerk of court not later than the tenth day after the date on which judgment is rendered. The motion must set forth the points of error of which the appellant complains. The motion or amended motion may be amended with leave of court at any time before action on the motion is taken, but may not be amended later than the 20th day after the date on which the original or amended motion is filed. The court may for good cause extend the time for filing or amending, but the extension may not exceed 90 days from the original filing deadline. If the court does not act on the motion before the expiration of the 30 days allowed for determination of the motion, the original or amended motion is overruled by operation of law. 
(d)  Notice of appeal. If the appellant requests a hearing on the motion for new trial, the appellant may give the notice of appeal orally in open court after the motion is overruled. If there is no hearing, the appellant must file the notice with the court not later than the tenth day after the date on which the motion is overruled. The court may for good cause extend the time period for providing notice; however, the extension shall not exceed 90 days from the original filing deadline. If the defendant is in custody, the appeal is perfected when the notice of appeal is given as provided by Vernon's Ann C.C.P. art. 44.13, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 6.02, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-123. - Appeal bond. 
If the defendant is not in custody, the defendant may not take an appeal until the defendant files an appeal bond with the court of record. The bond must be approved by the court and must be filed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the motion for new trial is overruled. The appeal bond must be in the amount of $100.00 or double the amount of the fines and costs adjudged against the defendant, whichever is greater. The bond must state that the defendant was convicted in the case and has appealed and must be conditioned on the defendant's immediate and daily personal appearance in the court to which the appeal is taken. If the defendant is in custody, the defendant shall be committed to jail unless the defendant posts the appeal bond. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 6.03, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-124. - Record. 
(a)  Conformance to state rules. The record on appeal must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a record on appeal in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. 
(b)  Transfer. Not later than the 60th day after the date on which the notice of appeal is given or filed, the parties must file with the clerk of court the statement of facts; a written description of material to be included in the transcript in addition to the required material; and any material to be included in the transcript that is not in the custody of the clerk of court. Upon completion of the record, the municipal judge shall approve the record in the manner provided for record completion, approval and notification in the court of appeals. After the municipal judge approves the record, the clerk of court shall promptly send the record to the appellate court clerk for filing. V.T.C.A., Government Code § 30.00020, as amended, charges the appellate court clerk with the responsibility of notifying the defendant and the prosecuting attorney that the record has been filed. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, §§ 6.04, 6.05, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-125. - Statement of facts. 
The statement of facts must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a statement of facts in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. The appellant shall pay for the statement of facts. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 6.06, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-126. - Transcript. 
The transcript must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a transcript in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 6.07, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-127. - Bills of exception. 
Bills of exception must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of bills of exception in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 6.08, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-128. - Brief. 
(a)  Generally. Both the appellant and the appellee are required to file briefs with the appellate court clerk. Each party, on the filing of the party's brief with the appellate court clerk, shall deliver a copy of the brief to the opposing party and to the municipal judge. The record and the brief, on appeal, shall be limited as far as possible to the questions relied on for reversal. The municipal judge shall decide from the briefs of the parties whether the appellant should be permitted to withdraw the notice of appeal and be granted a new trial by the court of record. The court of record may grant a new trial at any time before the record is filed with the appellate court. 
(b)  Appellant's. The appellant must file a brief with the appellate court clerk not later than the 15th day after the date on which the transcript and statement of facts are filed with that clerk. The appellant or the appellant's attorney must certify that the brief has been properly mailed to the appellee. 
(c)  Appellee's. The appellee must file its brief with the appellate clerk not later than the 15th day on which the appellant's brief is filed. 
(Ord. No. 79-99, § 6.09, 12-20-1999)  
Secs. 26-129—26-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FUNDS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Secs. 26-151—26-170. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Municipal Court Technology Fund[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal court technology fund, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172. 
 
Sec. 26-171. - Created. 
There is hereby created a municipal court technology fund in accordance with Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172. This fund shall be administered by, or under the direction of, the town council. 
(Ord. No. 71-99, § 2(1), 11-15-1999; Ord. No. 31-15 , § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 26-172. - Fee established. 
(a)  All defendants convicted in municipal court for a misdemeanor offense committed shall be required to pay a technology fee as found in appendix A of this Code as a cost of court. 
(b)  A person is considered convicted for purposes of this subdivision if a sentence is imposed on the person, the person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision, or the court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(c)  The municipal court clerk shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the municipal treasurer, or to any other official who discharges the duties commonly delegated to the municipal treasurer, for deposit in the municipal court technology fund. 
(Ord. No. 71-99, § 2(2), 11-15-1999; Ord. No. 31-15 , § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 26-173. - Purpose. 
The municipal court technology fund may be used only to finance the purchase of the following technological enhancements for the municipal court of the town: 
(1)  Computer systems; 
(2)  Computer networks; 
(3)  Computer hardware; 
(4)  Computer software; 
(5)  Imaging systems; 
(6)  Electronic kiosks; 
(7)  Electronic ticket writers; 
(8)  Docket management systems; and 
(9)  Any other item or service permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 71-99, § 2(3), 11-15-1999; Ord. No. 31-15 , § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 26-174. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 31-15 , § 2, adopted June 1, 2015, repealed § 26-174, which pertained to expiration and derived from Ord. No. 71-99, § 2(4), adopted Nov. 15, 1999.  
Secs. 26-175—26-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - BUILDING SECURITY FUND[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Building security fund authorized, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017. 
 
Sec. 26-191. - Established. 
There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017. 
(Ord. No. 6-96, 2-19-1996)  
Sec. 26-192. - Assessment of fee. 
The municipal court is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee in the amount provided in appendix A of this Code against all defendants convicted in a trial of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(Ord. No. 6-96, 2-19-1996)  
Sec. 26-193. - Collection of fees. 
The municipal court administrator is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay it to the treasury of the town. All fees collected and paid over to the town treasury shall be placed in the municipal court building security fund. 
(Ord. No. 6-96, 2-19-1996)  
Sec. 26-194. - Purpose. 
The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase and/or maintenance of security devices and/or services for the buildings housing the municipal court of the town. The term "security devices and/or services" shall include any and all items in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017(d). 
(Ord. No. 6-96, 2-19-1996)  
Sec. 26-195. - Administration. 
The municipal court building security fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 6-96, 2-19-1996)  
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm site means a premises served by an alarm system or CATV alarm system. 
Alarm system means a device or system which transmits a signal which summons an emergency service of the town. For the purposes of this section, the categories of alarm systems are robbery, burglary and emergency assistance. The term "alarm system" does not mean an alarm installed on a vehicle, unless used for a habitation at a permanent site, or an alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants within the premises, but does include a local alarm as defined in this section. 
Alarm system company means any person or company that sells, installs, services, monitors or responds to burglar alarm signal devices, burglar alarms, television cameras, still cameras or any other electronic device used: 
(1)  To prevent or detect burglary, theft, shoplifting, pilferage or other losses of that type; 
(2)  To detect or prevent intrusion; or 
(3)  Primarily to detect and summon aid for other emergencies, and includes persons relaying alarm notifications. 
Appeal hearing official means the town manager or his designee. 
Burglar alarm notification means a notification that summons the police, which was initiated or triggered by an alarm system designed to respond to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. 
CATV alarm system means a device or system that transmits or relays a signal by community antenna television cable, or indirectly, intended to summon emergency police services of the town. 
Commercial unit means any business establishment. 
Director means the chief of police of the town or his authorized representative. 
False burglar alarm notification means an alarm dispatch request to a law enforcement agency when a response is made by the law enforcement agency within 30 minutes of the alarm dispatch request and the responding law enforcement officer finds from an inspection of the interior and/or exterior of the alarm site no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense. 
False robbery alarm notification means a robbery alarm notification to the police when the responding police officer reasonably finds there is no evidence of a robbery or an attempted robbery. 
Financial institution means an institution required to have an alarm system by the provisions of the Bank Protection Act of 1968 (12 USC 1882, as amended). 
Governmental unit means any agency of the federal or state government or a political subdivision of the state. 
Local alarm means any alarm system, other than an alarm system monitored by an alarm system company, that results in notification to and response by members of the police department due to activation of audible and/or visual signaling devices. 
Panel alarm means an alarm that is directly monitored by the public safety communications section of the police department. 
Permit holder means the person who has received an alarm permit and is directly responsible for management and control of the alarm site. In any multiple-family dwelling unit (more than four dwelling units per building), the permit holder shall be the owner of the premises or his representative. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 3.01; Ord. No. 61-97, § 1, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 2-2-1998; Ord. No. 62-10, § 2, 10-4-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-32. - Responsibilities of alarm system companies. 
(a)  A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the town shall: 
(1)  Send notification of an alarm to the town by an individual. (The reporting of alarms by means of a recorded message is prohibited); 
(2)  Keep his business premises locked and secured at all times; 
(3)  Allow an inspection of his business premises by authorized agents of the director; 
(4)  Notify the town when a permit holder has: 
a.  Initiated, disconnected or transferred service; 
b.  A new person is listed as permit holder; 
(5)  Report alarms only to a telephone number designated by the town; 
(6)  Send alarm notifications to the town in a manner and form determined by the town; 
(7)  Maintain a sufficient staff to ensure that valid alarms are relayed immediately to the town; 
(8)  Inform their customers of permit requirements; and 
(9)  Relay current permit numbers with all alarms. 
(b)  An alarm system company may be assessed a service fee as listed in appendix A of this Code for each incorrect permit number relayed to the town with an alarm notification. Any service fee assessed under the provisions of this section must be paid within 30 days of receipt of notice that it has been assessed by the director. If the assessed fee becomes 90 days delinquent, a ten percent late charge will be added. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 3.08; Ord. No. 61-97, § 1, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 2-2-1998)  
Sec. 30-33. - Service fees for excessive false alarm notifications. 
(a)  The following service fees shall be assessed for excessive false alarm notifications: 
(1)  False burglar alarm notifications . If the permit holder has had three false burglar alarm notifications in the 12-month period immediately preceding any false robbery alarm, he shall be assessed a service fee as listed in appendix A of this Code as set forth therein. 
(2)  False robbery alarm notifications . If the permit holder has had three false robbery alarm notifications in the 12-month period immediately preceding any false robbery alarm notification, he shall be assessed a service fee as listed in appendix A of this Code as set forth therein. 
(b)  A permit holder shall pay assessed fees for any false alarm notification within ten days after notification from the director, by certified mail, that such fees have been assessed. Failure to pay fees may result in revocation of the alarm permit. 
(c)  No service fee shall be assessed against a governmental unit. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 3.09; Ord. No. 61-97, § 1, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 2-2-1998; Ord. No. 01-07, § 2, 1-18-2007)  
Sec. 30-34. - Protection of financial institutions. 
(a)  A financial institution may install, with the permission of the director, a panel alarm in the police department for the purpose of reporting burglaries and robberies. If such installation is made, all other provisions of this article must be met. The financial institution shall execute a letter of agreement with the town permitting the installation of all necessary equipment on an indicator panel located in the communications section of the police department. The installation must be accomplished at the institution's expense. 
(b)  The letter of agreement shall contain provisions granting a right of inspection to the director, requiring payment of an annual nonrefundable fee as listed in appendix A of this Code for each indicator installed. The rights of a Financial Institution under such a letter of agreement with the town are not transferable. In addition to the matters set forth in the subsection, the letter of agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The director annually may inspect the alarm system at the alarm site and shall require necessary repairs or improvements. If the director finds that the signaling device fails to comply with the requirements of this section, he may terminate the letter of agreement and require the removal of equipment and indicators from the police department. Such removal shall be at the expense of the financial institution. 
(2)  The financial institution shall, at its expense, provide service for the alarm system at the request of the financial institution or the director. In no event shall the town become liable for service charges for repairs and maintenance for any such alarm system. 
(3)  The financial institution may cancel its letter of agreement with the town at any time by giving written notice to the director. Upon giving such notice, the financial institution shall promptly remove its equipment and indicators from the monitor panel in the police department. Such removal shall be at the expense of the financial institution. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 3.10; Ord. No. 61-97, § 1, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 2-2-1998)  
Secs. 30-35—30-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 30-51. - Required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system or a CATV alarm system without a valid alarm permit issued by the director. An alarm permit is not valid if it has been denied or revoked, has not been renewed or has expired. An alarm permit must be obtained by the person directly responsible for management and control of the alarm site. A separate permit is required for each alarm site. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, governmental units are exempt from all permit requirements. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 3.02; Ord. No. 61-97, § 1, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 2-2-1998; Ord. No. 62-10, § 3, 10-4-2010)  
Sec. 30-52. - Application. 
(a)  Required information. Each application for a permit required under this article must contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the general alarm system or CATV system and payment of the fees assessed under this article. 
(2)  The street address of the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated. 
(3)  Classification of the alarm site as either residential, commercial, multifamily or governmental unit. 
(4)  Any business name or title used for the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed or operated. 
(5)  The name of two other persons who have agreed to respond to an alarm if the permit holder is not available. 
(6)  Any other information required by the director which is necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Grant of approval. Application for a permit under the provisions of this article constitutes a grant of approval for members of the police department to conduct a search for intruders or the fire department to conduct a search for injured or ill persons on the interior of any building on the alarm site found to be unsecured when responding to the alarm site as a result of an alarm notification. 
(c)  False statements; consequences. Any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit or renewal, or while making a change thereto, shall be sufficient cause of refusal to grant, or revocation of, a permit under this article. 
(d)  Issuance; exceptions. Upon receipt of a completed application form for a permit, the director shall issue a permit unless there is cause to believe the equipment responsible for initiating an alarm will not be maintained or operated in accordance with this article or the applicant will not comply with each provision of this article. Burglary/robbery panel alarms will be limited to financial institutions. 
(e)  Transfer. An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. However, the individuals designated to respond to an alarm or relay an alarm may be changed. A permit holder must inform the director of any change that alters information listed on the permit application. No fee will be assessed for such changes. 
(f)  Refusal for particular systems. The director may refuse to permit particular systems which in his discretion have a history of unreliability. 
(g)  Utilization of application contents. For purposes of this article, information contained in the permit application will be used for law enforcement purposes and will become part of the town's utility records. Therefore, all information contained in any permit application shall be deemed confidential, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552 and House Bill No. 859 (73rd Texas Legislature), and such information contained in the permit application shall not be subject to public disclosure. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 3.03; Ord. No. 61-97, § 1, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 2-2-1998)  
Sec. 30-53. - Application fee. 
A nonrefundable fee for a residential permit or for a commercial permit, as listed in appendix A of this Code, is required for issuance or renewal of an alarm permit and shall be charged for each alarm permit operated under this article. Alarm permits granted under the provisions of this article, unless otherwise specified, shall remain in force for one year from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked in accordance with the terms of this article. It is the permit holder's responsibility to renew the alarm permit prior to the expiration date. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 3.04; Ord. No. 61-97, § 1, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 2-2-1998; Ord. No. 62-10, § 3, 10-4-2010)  
Sec. 30-54. - Denial or revocation. 
If the director denies the issuance of a permit, or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action setting forth the reason for such action and advising the applicant or permit holder of the right of an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the director to the appeal hearing official by filing a written request for a hearing, setting forth his objections to the action of the director, within ten days after receipt of the notice from the director. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the appeal hearing official shall stay the action of the director in denying the issuance of or revocation of a permit until a final decision on the appeal is made by the appeal hearing official. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 3.05; Ord. No. 61-97, § 1, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 2-2-1998)  
Sec. 30-55. - Penalty for operation without. 
A person commits an offense if he operates any alarm system without having a valid permit in accordance with the provisions of this article and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the town, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each offense. Each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that, prior to any resultant court date for the violator, the violator obtains an alarm permit from the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 3.06; Ord. No. 61-97, § 1, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 2-2-1998)  
Sec. 30-56. - Responsibilities of permit holder. 
(a)  A permit holder must adjust or modify the sensory mechanism of his alarm system to suppress false indications of force so that the alarm system will not be activated by impulses due to: 
(1)  Transient pressure changes in water pipes; 
(2)  Flashes of light; 
(3)  Wind noise caused by the vibrating or rattling of doors or windows; 
(4)  Vehicular noise adjacent to the installation; 
(5)  Other forces unrelated to actual emergencies. 
(b)  A permit holder must maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of the alarm system. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to properly maintain the alarm system to prevent false activations. 
(c)  A permit holder must ensure that an alarm system that includes a local alarm, with an audible signaling device mounted on the exterior of a structure, is installed in such a manner whereby the audible signaling device may not be falsely activated and/or continuously reactivated for a period longer than a total of 30 minutes after initial activation. The occurrence of more than three such false activations in any 12-month period will result in revocation of the alarm permit until such time as the director has determined that the audible signaling device has either been rendered inoperable or repaired so as to comply with the provisions of this subsection. If the director suspends a permit under these circumstances, the permit holder may appeal the suspension as provided in section 30-54. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 3.07; Ord. No. 61-97, § 1, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 6-98, § 1, 2-2-1998)  
Secs. 30-57—30-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of public and private emergency medical services, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Attendant means a person trained and qualified who is responsible for the care of the patients transported by transfer ambulance. An attendant may also serve as driver of a transfer ambulance when trained and qualified to do so. 
Charged-off means to financially relieve the balance of an account based upon a set of conditions provided by the town. 
Driver means a person trained and qualified to drive a transfer ambulance. 
Emergency means any circumstances that calls for immediate action and in which the element of time in transporting the sick, wounded or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of the person. Such circumstances include, but are not limited to, accidents generally, traffic accidents and acts of violence resulting in personal injury and sudden illness. 
Emergency call means any request for emergency medical service that is made by telephone or other means of communication in circumstances which are, or have been represented to be, an emergency and requiring immediate emergency medical service. 
Emergency medical vehicle means any motor vehicle especially designed, constructed, equipped and used for transporting the injured or sick in answer to an emergency call. 
Emergency run means the emergency medical trip to the place where the emergency exists, or from the place of such emergency to a hospital, medical clinic or medical office, or other appropriate destination for the patient. 
Operator means any individual, firm or corporation engaged in the business of transporting the injured, wounded, sick or dead and using the streets of the town for such purpose. 
Street means any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, drive or highway commonly used for the purpose of travel within the corporate limits of the town. 
Transfer ambulance means any motor vehicle constructed, equipped and used for transferring the injured or sick under circumstances which do not constitute an emergency and which have not been represented as an emergency. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 5.01; Ord. No. 49-16 , § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-92. - To be provided by fire department. 
(a)  The fire and emergency services departments shall provide emergency medical service. 
(b)  A fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code shall be charged per trip for the transportation by emergency medical vehicle of a person to a hospital providing emergency medical aid, in response to a call received by the fire department for emergency medical vehicle service, when an emergency run is made within the town. 
(c)  The person receiving emergency medical service and any person contracting for the service shall be responsible for payment of the fee. In the case of service received by a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be responsible for payment of the fee. 
(d)  The fire and emergency service departments of the town shall transport the injured or sick to the nearest hospital providing emergency medical aid, in accordance with the injury and/or location. 
(e)  Expenses for emergency medical services received by any resident of the town, employee of the town, or member of a political subdivision that has contracted with the town to receive emergency medical service, will be billed to the individual's health insurance company. Any balance remaining will be charged-off by the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 5.02; Ord. No. 49-16 , § 2, 9-6-2016)  
Sec. 30-93. - Permitted emergency vehicle operations. 
(a)  It shall not be unlawful for any person operating a state licensed transfer ambulance in the town, who is performing the service of maintaining an emergency medical vehicle at a particular location for a sporting event, to operate such emergency medical vehicle under emergency conditions, using emergency equipment, after notifying the dispatcher and requesting permission to make an emergency run, when a determination is made by the transfer ambulance attendant that an emergency exists requiring the sick or injured person to be transported with all practical speed to a hospital. 
(b)  It shall not be unlawful for any person to operate an emergency medical vehicle to a hospital within the town, if the place of emergency at which the sick or injured was picked up by such emergency medical vehicle is outside the corporate limits of the town, and the emergency medical vehicle making the emergency run is licensed and operated in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.001 et seq. 
(Code 1989, ch. 4, § 5.03((2), (3))  
Chapter 32 - ENGINEERING DESIGN CRITERIA AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 70. 
 
Sec. 32-1. - North Central Texas Council of Governments October 2004 Edition of the Public Works Construction Standards - North Central Texas (as amended) and Volumes I and II of the Flower Mound Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual, entitled "Design Criteria (Volume I of II)" and "Construction Standards (Volume II of II)," adopted. 
The North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG) October 2004 Edition of the Public Works Construction Standards - North Central Texas (as amended) (the "NCTCOG Specifications") and the two-volume Flower Mound, Texas, Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual entitled "Design Criteria (Volume I of II)" and "Construction Standards (Volume II of II)," as they may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted as the engineering standards governing plans and specifications for improvement upon subdivisions of land within the jurisdiction of the town. The two-volume Flower Mound, Texas, Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual adopted hereby may be referred to collectively as "Volumes I and II of the Flower Mound, Texas, Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual" or the "Design Criteria and Construction Standards" and each volume may be referred to in the singular, as appropriate—The "design criteria" or the "construction standards." The NCTCOG Specifications and Design Criteria and Construction Standards are hereby incorporated herein by reference as if fully set out herein. The provisions of Volumes I and II of the Flower Mound, Texas, Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual shall control and prevail in all instances where conflicting with the provisions of the NCTCOG specifications. 
A true and correct copy of the Design Criteria and the Construction Standards adopted by this section are on file in the town secretary's office. Copies of the Design Criteria and the Construction Standards may be acquired, upon payment of the fee(s) established therefor, from the department of infrastructure services. 
(Ord. No. 22-10, § 2, 4-5-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22-10, § 2, adopted Apr. 5, 2010, repealed the former § 32-1, and enacted a new § 32-1 as set out herein. The former § 32-1 pertained to NCTCOG's Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction and Flower Mound Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual adopted and derived from Code 1989, ch. 3, § 8.01; Ord. No. 15-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 53-02, § 2, 8-29-2002.  
Sec. 32-2. - Town manager authorized to modify standards. 
The town manager, or his authorized designee, shall be authorized to modify the standards set forth in the NCTCOG specifications during review of the construction of improvements provided any plans and specifications comply with the standards set forth in Volumes I and II of the Flower Mound Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual. 
(Ord. No. 22-10, § 3, 4-5-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22-10, § 3, adopted Apr. 5, 2010, repealed the former § 32-2, and enacted a new § 32-2 as set out herein. The former § 32-2 pertained to town engineer authorized to modify standards and derived from Code 1989, ch. 3, § 8.02; Ord. No. 15-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 53-02, § 2, 8-29-2002.  
Sec. 32-3. - Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual—Amendments. 
(a)  The town manager, or his authorized designee, may from time to time make administrative modifications to the construction standards upon the recommendation and advice of the town engineer to address technological advances, changes and improvements to sound engineering practices, and to conform to applicable best management practices. Any and all such administrative modifications to the construction standards shall be enforced as if included in and adopted with the original adoption of this chapter or the most recent amendments to this chapter and shall from time to time be submitted to the town council for ratification and approval. 
The fact that any part or portion of the construction standards have been revised or amended administratively under this provision shall not affect any other portion or provision of the construction standards. Any challenge to an administrative modification shall be raised promptly by the party challenging such modification at which time the administrative modification in question shall be presented to the town council for its review and consideration and, if appropriate, ratification and approval. Any such ratification and approval shall relate back to the date of the administrative modification and shall be as binding as if initially adopted by the town council on such date. 
(b)  All other amendments to the construction standards and all amendments to the design criteria shall be presented to the town's planning and zoning commission for consideration and recommendation to the town council and final action by the town council. A listing of the ordinances that amend the Design Criteria and Construction Standards in whole or in part shall be recorded by ordinance number and date of adoption, or effective date if earlier than the adoption date, in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  The following identified ordinances amend the Design Criteria and Construction Standards in whole or in part: 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [15-13], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending Section VII, "Town of Flower Mound Access Management Policy and Criteria," by amending the paragraph entitled "Deviation and Dispute Resolution Process," on Page B-VII-7, thereof, by deleting said paragraph in its entirety and replacing it with a new paragraph also entitled "Deviation and Dispute Resolution Process" to read as follows: 
"Deviation and Dispute Resolution Process 
Deviations to these criteria may be approved by the Town Engineer as described in the previous sections. In addition, the Town Engineer is hereby authorized to grant an exception to the access spacing criteria when one property is being developed or redeveloped and the adjacent property is not then being developed or redeveloped and the property not being developed contains an access point that is too close to the access point being proposed on the property being developed or redeveloped provided that the ultimate access points for both properties when they develop or redevelop have already been determined by the Town. The Town Engineer is also hereby authorized to grant an exception to the access spacing criteria in situations where a large physical obstruction, which cannot be reasonably relocated, exists on property being developed or redeveloped and such physical obstruction prevents compliance with the access spacing requirements and the requested deviation therefrom is twenty percent (20%) or less of the standard spacing. 
Disputes will be deferred to and resolved by the Town Council. All access management disputes must be accompanied by a Traffic Impact Analysis paid for by the developer per Town of Flower Mound development procedures." 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [51-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending Section I, "Street Improvements," by amending Subsection A, "Street Classification," by amending Paragraph No. 1, entitled "Definitions," by inserting a definition for the phrase "Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking" as Subparagraph f, and by re-lettering existing Subparagraphs f through j as Subparagraphs g through m, respectively, with the definition of "Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking" to read as follows: 
f.  Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking. 
Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking, means an urban minor arterial with on-street parking. Minor arterial streets are designed to serve traffic originating in or destined for locations within town and are intended to serve traffic traveling through the town. This street type is intended to be used in Mixed Use type environments. It will have two 10' travel lanes provided in each direction with a 16-foot median and 18-foot angled parking on the outside curbs. Curbs would extend to limit parking near intersections to provide better operations and visibility at these locations and reduce the pedestrian crossing distance. This roadway section will typically have large sidewalks to accommodate pedestrians." 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [51-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending Section I, "Street Improvements," by amending Subsection A, "Street Classification," by amending Paragraph No. 2, entitled "Standard Design Criteria," by adding the criteria for "Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking" in the embedded table such that said table shall hereafter be and read as follows: 
Street Classification 	Minimum 
ROW 	No. of 
Lanes and 
Width 	Pavement 
Width 	Median 
Width 	Parkway 
Width 
Major (Principal) Arterial 	120' 	6 - 12' lanes 	(2) 36' 	18' 	13' 
Greenway Urban Arterial 	120' 	4 - 12' lanes 	(2) 24' 	42' 	13' 
Greenway Rural Arterial 	120' 	4 - 11' lanes 	(2) 29' 	40' 	11' 
Urban Minor Arterial Divided 	90' 	4 - 12' lanes 	(2) 24' 	16' 	11' 
Urban Minor Arterial with Bike Lane 	100' 	4 - 12' lanes 	(2) 29' 	16' 	11' 
Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking 	120' 	2 - 10' lanes in each direction with 2 - 18' parking lanes 	(2) 38' 	16' 	14' 
Urban Minor Arterial Undivided 	70 	4-12' 	48 	None 	10' 
Urban Collector 	60' 	2 - 12' lanes 	36' 	None 	12' 
Rural Collector 	80' 	2 - 12' lanes 	34' 	None 	23' 
Local Residential Urban 	50' 	2 - 15' lanes 	30' 	None 	10' 
Local Residential Estate 	*26' 	2 - 13' lanes 	26' 	None 	None 
Local Commercial 	60' 	2 - 12' lanes 	36' 	None 	12' 
Local Conservation or Rural Development 	*26' 	2 - 12' lanes 	24' 	None 	None 
Alley 	Varies 	Varies 	Varies 	None 	2.5' 
 
*With a fire hydrant minimum is 26' wide, with 2-13' lanes. 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [51-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby further amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending Section I, "Street Improvements," by amending Subsection C, "Geometric Design Urban Collector," by amending Paragraph No. 1, entitled "Roadway Design Parameters," by adding the criteria for "Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking" streets in the embedded table such that said table shall hereafter be and read as follows: 
Design 
Feature 	Major (Principal) 
Arterial 	Greenway Urban 
Arterial 	Greenway Rural 
Arterial 	Urban Minor 
Arterial Divided 	Urban Minor 
Arterial with Bike Lane 	Urban Minor 
Arterial with On-Street Parking 	Urban Minor 
Arterial Undivided 	Urban Collector 	Rural Collector 	Local Res. 
Urban 	Local Res. 
Estate 	Local Commercial 	Local Conservation 	Alley 
Minimum 
Design Speed 	45 	45 	40 	40 	40 	30 	35 	40 	40 	30 	30 	40 	30 	15 
Minimum 
Stopping Sight 	360 	360 	305 	305 	305 	200 	250 	305 	305 	200 	200 	305 	200 	80 
Minimum Centerline 
Radius 	800 	800 	640 	640 	640 	275 	475 	640 	640 	275 	275 	640 	275 	50 
Minimum Grade 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7%* 	0.7%* 	0.7% 	0.7%* 	0.7% 
Maximum Grade 	5% 	5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	8% 	8% 	7.5% 	8% 	8% 
 
*0.5% is acceptable for residential streets for a distance less than 200' 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [51-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby further amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending Section VII, "Access Management Policy and Criteria," by amending Table 1, "Access Spacing Criteria," to include the "Urban Minor Arterial With On-Street Parking" classification in the column under the heading "Functional Classification" with the "Locals" classification such that said table shall be and read as follows: 
Table 1. Access Spacing Criteria 
Functional 
Classification 	Assumed Operating Speed (mph) 	Access Spacing Distance 
Major & Greenway Arterials 	45 	360' 
Minor Arterials & Collectors 	35 	250' 
Locals & Urban Minor Arterial With On-Street Parking 	30 	200' 
 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [51-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby further amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending Section VII, "Access Management Policy and Criteria," by amending Table 2, "Turn Lane Design Criteria," to include the "Urban Minor Arterial With On-Street Parking" classification in the column under the heading "Functional Classification" with the "Local Roads" classification such that said table shall be and read as follows: 
Table 2. Turn Lane Design Criteria 
Functional 
Classification 	Minimum Storage 	Deceleration Length 	Taper Length 	Turn-Lane Length 
Major & Greenway 
Arterials 	50' 	215' 	100' 	265' 
Minor Arterials 
& Collectors 	50' 	110' 	100' 	160' 
Local Roads 
& Urban Minor 
Arterial With 
On-Street 
Parking 	50' 	75' 	50' 	125' 
 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [51-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby further amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending Section VII, "Access Management Policy and Criteria," by amending the provision entitled "Auxiliary Lanes Required" by adding a new paragraph at the end of the existing provision to read as follows: 
"Urban Minor Arterials shall be treated differently from other Minor Arterials. Due to the Mixed Use nature and pedestrian friendly environment, turn lanes for Urban Minor Arterials will be determined on a case by case basis where they are deemed appropriate." 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [51-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby further amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending the index of standard pavement details entitled "Streets Construction Standards" immediately following the conclusion of Subsection H, "Pavement Construction," to insert the standard paving detail for the "Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking" street section as ST-1, Sheet No. 6, with the following information and re-numbering existing Sheet Nos. 6 through 12 listed under Detail No. ST-1 as Sheet Nos. 7 through 13, respectively: 
"Title: Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking 
Detail No.: ST-1 
Sheet No. 6 
Revision Date October, 2012" 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [51-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby further amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending the index of standard pavement details entitled "Streets Construction Standards" immediately following the conclusion of Subsection H, "Pavement Construction," and "Intersection Joint Spacing" detail sheets with a revision date of "October, 2012". 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [51-12], Volume II, entitled "Construction Standards," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby amended by amending the index of standard pavement details, entitled "Streets Construction Standards," to add the reference to the sheet reflecting the standard paving detail for the "Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking" street section as ST-1, Sheet No. 6, with the following information and re-numbering existing Sheet Nos. 6 through 12 listed under Detail No. ST-1 as Sheet Nos. 7 through 13, respectively: 
"Title: Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking 
Detail No.: ST-1 
Sheet No. 6 
Revision Date October 2012" 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [51-12], Volume II, entitled "Construction Standards," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby amended by amending the index of standard pavement details, entitled "Streets Construction Standards," to amend the Revision Dates for the "Intersection Joint Spacing" detail sheets with a revision date of "October, 2012". 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [51-12], Volume II, entitled "Construction Standards," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby amended through the amendment of the "Streets Construction Standards Details" by adding the street section for an "Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking" as ST-1, Sheet No. 6, containing the following diagram. 
 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [51-12], Volume II, entitled "Construction Standards," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby amended through the amendment of the "Streets Construction Standards Details" by adding the standard pavement detail sheets for the "Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking" and "Intersection Joint Spacing" detail sheets with new standard pavement detail sheets for the "Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking," to be identified as ST-1, Sheet No. 6, "Urban Minor Arterial with On-Street Parking, and "Intersection Joint Spacing," to be identified as ST-3, Sheet No. 4, of which new detail sheet will have a revision date of "October 2012" containing the following respective diagrams. 
 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [21-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending Section I, "Street Improvements," by amending Subsection A, "Street Classification," by amending Paragraph No. 1, entitled "Definitions," by inserting definitions for the phrases "Urban Minor Arterial with Bike Lane" and "Urban Minor Arterial Undivided" as Paragraphs e and f, respectively, and by re-lettering existing Paragraphs e through j as Paragraphs g through l, respectively, with the definitions being so added to read as follows: 
e.  Urban Minor Arterial with Bike Lane. 
Urban Minor Arterials with Bike Lane serve traffic originating in or destined for locations within Flower Mound and are not intended to serve traffic traveling through the Town. Roadway drainage is provided with curb and gutter. The outside 5' of pavement is to be designated as a 5' marked bike lane for bicycle traffic. 
f.  Urban Minor Arterial Undivided. 
Urban Minor Arterial Undivided roadways are generally located in neighbor-hoods where the ROW is limited and traffic volumes require more than two lanes. Urban Minor Arterial Undivided roadways are intended to serve as the bridge between major arterials and collector streets. 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [21-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending Section I, "Street Improvements," by amending Subsection A, "Street Classification," by amending Paragraph No. 2, entitled "Standard Design Criteria," by adding the criteria for "Urban Minor Arterial with Bike Lane" streets in the embedded table such that said table shall hereafter be and read as follows: 
Street Classification 	Minimum 
ROW 	No. of 
Lanes and 
Width 	Pavement 
Width 	Median 
Width 	Parkway 
Width 
Major (Principal) Arterial 	120' 	6-12' lanes 	(2) 36' 	18' 	13' 
Greenway Urban Arterial 	120' 	4 - 12' lanes 	(2) 24' 	42' 	13' 
Greenway Rural Arterial 	120' 	4 - 11' lanes 	(2) 29' 	40' 	11' 
Urban Minor Arterial Divided 	90' 	4 - 12' lanes 	(2) 24' 	16' 	11' 
Urban Minor Arterial with Bike Lane 	100' 	4 - 12' lanes 	(2) 29' 	16' 	11' 
Urban Minor Arterial Undivided 	70' 	4 - 12' 	48 	None 	10' 
Urban Collector 	60' 	2 - 12' lanes 	36' 	None 	12' 
Rural Collector 	80' 	2 - 12' lanes 	34' 	None 	23' 
Local Residential Urban 	50' 	2 - 15' lanes 	30' 	None 	10' 
Local Residential Estate 	*26' 	2 - 13' lanes 	26' 	None 	None 
Local Commercial 	60' 	2 - 12' lanes 	36' 	None 	12' 
Local Conservation or Rural Development 	*26' 	2 - 12' lanes 	24' 	None 	None 
Alley 	Varies 	Varies 	Varies 	None 	2.5' 
 
*With a fire hydrant minimum is 26' wide, with 2-13' lanes. 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [21-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby further amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending Section I, "Street Improvements," by amending Subsection C, "Geometric Design Urban Collector," by amending Paragraph No. 1, entitled "Roadway Design Parameters," by adding the criteria for "Urban Minor Arterial with Bike Lane" streets in the embedded table such that said table shall hereafter be and read as follows: 
Design 
Feature 	Major (Principal) 
Arterial 	Greenway Urban 
Arterial 	Greenway Rural 
Arterial 	Urban Minor 
Arterial Divided 	Urban Minor 
Arterial with Bike Lane 	Urban Minor 
Arterial Undivided 	Urban 
Collector 	Rural 
Collector 	Local Res. 
Urban 	Local Res. 
Estate 	Local 
Commercial 	Local 
Conservation 	Alley 
Minimum Design Speed 	45 	45 	40 	40 	40 	35 	40 	40 	30 	30 	40 	30 	15 
Minimum Stopping Sight 	360 	360 	305 	305 	305 	250 	305 	305 	200 	200 	305 	200 	80 
Minimum Centerline Radius 	800 	800 	640 	640 	640 	475 	640 	640 	275 	275 	640 	275 	50 
Minimum Grade 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7%* 	0.7%* 	0.7% 	0.7%* 	0.7% 
Maximum Grade 	5% 	5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	8% 	8% 	7.5% 	8% 	8% 
 
*0.5% is acceptable for residential streets for a distance less than 200' 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [21-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby further amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending the index of standard pavement details entitled "Streets Construction Standards" immediately following the conclusion of Subsection H, "Pavement Construction," to insert the standard paving detail for the "Urban Minor Arterial with Bike Lane" street section as ST-1, Sheet No. 5, with the following information and re-numbering existing Sheet Nos. 5 through 11 listed under Detail No. ST-1 as Sheet Nos. 6 through 12, respectively: 
"Title: Urban Minor Arterial with Bike Lane 
Detail No.: ST-1 
Sheet No. 5 
Revision Date April, 2012" 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [21-12], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby further amended through the amendment of Part B, "Technical Standards," by amending the index of standard pavement details entitled "Streets Construction Standards" immediately following the conclusion of Subsection H, "Pavement Construction," to amend the Revision Date for the "Greenway Rural Arterial," "Rural Collector," and "Intersection Joint Spacing" detail sheets with a revision date of "April, 2012." 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [21-12], Volume II, entitled "Construction Standards," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby amended by amending the index of standard pavement details, entitled "Streets Construction Standards," to add the reference to the sheet reflecting the standard paving detail for the "Urban Minor Arterial with Bike Lane" street section as ST-1, Sheet No. 5, with the following information and re-numbering existing Sheet Nos. 5 through 11 listed under Detail No. ST-1 as Sheet Nos. 6 through 12, respectively: 
"Title: Urban Minor Arterial with Bike Lane 
Detail No.: ST-1 
Sheet No. 5 
Revision Date April, 2012" 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [21-12], Volume II, entitled "Construction Standards," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby amended by amending the index of standard pavement details, entitled "Streets Construction Standards," to amend the Revision Dates for the "Greenway Rural Arterial," "Rural Collector" and "Intersection Joint Spacing" detail sheets with a revision date of "April, 2012." 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [21-12], Volume II, entitled "Construction Standards," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby amended through the amendment of the "Streets Construction Standards Details" by adding the street section for an "Urban Minor Arterial with Bike Lane" as ST-1, Sheet No. 5, containing the following diagram. 
 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [21-12], Volume II, entitled "Construction Standards," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby amended through the amendment of the "Streets Construction Standards Details" by replacing the existing standard pavement detail sheets for the "Greenway Rural Arterial," "Rural Collector" and "Intersection Joint Spacing" detail sheets with new standard pavement detail sheets for the "Greenway Rural Arterial," to be identified as ST-1, Sheet No. 3, "Rural Collector," to be identified as ST-1, Sheet No. 8, and "Intersection Joint Spacing," to be identified as ST-3, Sheet No. 1, all of which new detail sheets have a revision date of "April, 2012" containing the following respective diagrams. 
 
 
 
 
 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [57-11], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby amended through the amendment of Part B "Technical Standards" by amending Section I "Street Improvements" by amending Subsection A "Street Classification" by amending Paragraph 1 entitled "Definitions" to delete Paragraph k entitled "Gated (Private) Small Scale Green Residential" in its entirety. 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [57-11], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby also amended through the amendment of Part B "Technical Standards" by amending Section I "Street Improvements" by amending Subsection A "Street Classification" by amending Paragraph 2 entitled "Standard Design Criteria" by deleting the criteria for "Gated (Private) Small Scale Green Residential" streets in the embedded table such that said table shall hereafter be and read as follows: 
Street Classification 	Minimum 
ROW 	No. of 
Lanes and 
Width 	Pavement 
Width 	Median 
Width 	Parkway 
Width 
Major (Principal) Arterial 	120' 	6-12' lanes 	(2) 36' 	18' 	13' 
Greenway Urban Arterial 	120' 	4 - 12' lanes 	(2) 24' 	42' 	13' 
Greenway Rural Arterial 	120' 	4 - 11' lanes 	(2) 29' 	40' 	11' 
Urban Minor Arterial Divided 	90' 	4 - 12' lanes 	(2) 24' 	16' 	11' 
Urban Minor Arterial Undivided 	70 	4-12' 	48 	None 	10' 
Urban Collector 	60' 	2 - 12' lanes 	36' 	None 	12' 
Rural Collector 	80' 	2 - 12' lanes 	34' 	None 	23' 
Local Residential Urban 	50' 	2 - 15' lanes 	30' 	None 	10' 
Local Residential Estate 	*26' 	2 - 12' lanes 	24' 	None 	None 
Local Commercial 	60' 	2 - 12' lanes 	36' 	None 	12' 
Local Conservation or Rural Development 	*26' 	2 - 12' lanes 	24' 	None 	None 
Alley 	Varies 	Varies 	Varies 	None 	2.5' 
 
*With a fire hydrant minimum is 26' wide, with 2-13' lanes. 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [57-11], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby further amended through the amendment of Part B "Technical Standards" by amending Section I "Street Improvements" by amending Subsection C "Geometric Design Urban Collector" by amending Paragraph 1 entitled "Roadway Design Parameters" by deleting the criteria for "Gated (Private) Small Scale Green Residential" streets in the embedded table such that said table shall hereafter be and read as follows: 
Design 
Feature 	Major (Principal) 
Arterial 	Greenway Urban 
Arterial 	Greenway Rural 
Arterial 	Urban Minor 
Arterial Divided 	Urban Minor 
Arterial Undivided 	Urban 
Collector 	Rural 
Collector 	Local Res. 
Urban 	Local Res. 
Estate 	Local 
Commercial 	Local 
Conservation 	Alley 
Minimum 
Design 
Speed 	45 	45 	40 	40 	35 	40 	40 	30 	30 	40 	30 	15 
Minimum 
Stopping 
Sight 	360 	360 	305 	305 	250 	305 	305 	200 	200 	305 	200 	80 
Minimum 
Centerline 
Radius 	800 	800 	640 	640 	475 	640 	640 	275 	275 	640 	275 	50 
Minimum 
Grade 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7%* 	0.7%* 	0.7% 	0.7%* 	0.7% 
Maximum 
Grade 	5% 	5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	7.5% 	8% 	8% 	7.5% 	8% 	8% 
 
*0.5% is acceptable for residential streets for a distance less than 200' 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [57-11], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria And Construction Standards" is hereby further amended through the amendment of Part B "Technical Standards" by amending Section I "Street Improvements" by amending Subsection G "Pavement Design" by deleting Subparagraph 5 regarding the design of "Gated (Private) Small Scale Green Residential" streets in its entirety and by re-numbering existing Subparagraphs 6, 7, 8, and 9 as subparagraphs 5, 6, 7, and 8, respectively, to read as follows. 
5.  For fire lanes, the minimum pavement and subgrade requirements is 6" of reinforced concrete pavement on 6" of lime or cement stabilized subgrade as recommended by a geotechnical engineer, or 8" of reinforced concrete pavement on 6" of untreated subgrade compacted to 95 percent density. Fire lanes must support a vehicle load of 85,000 pounds. 
6.  Pavement designs should be included for all streets & fire lanes. All pavement subgrade shall be treated so that the treated soil liquid limit does not exceed 35 and the plasticity index does not exceed 15. 
7.  Driveway approaches shall be of the same thickness as the road it abuts to. 
8.  All concrete pavement that is to be installed abutting existing concrete pavement, shall require headers. 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [57-11], Volume I, entitled "Design Criteria," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby further amended through the amendment of Part B "Technical Standards" by amending the index of standard pavement details entitled "Streets Construction Standards" immediately following the conclusion of Subsection H "Pavement Construction" to delete and remove the reference to the sheet reflecting the standard paving detail for the "Gated (Private) Small Scale Green Residential" street section. 
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance [57-11], Volume II, entitled "Construction Standards," of the "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards" is hereby amended by amending the index of standard pavement details entitled "Streets Construction Standards" to delete and remove the reference to the sheet reflecting the standard paving detail for the "Gated (Private) Small Scale Green Residential" street section, and by further amending said Volume II, "Construction Standards," by deleting and removing therefrom the street section for a "Gated (Private) Small Scale Green Residential" street that is designated as Detail No. 1, Sheet No. 12, with a revision date of October 2008, in its entirety. 
Ord. No. 15-19 , §§ 1—4, adopted April 15, 2019 states the following: 
That Section IV, "Storm Water System Improvements," of Part B, "Technical Standards," of Volume I, "Design Criteria" of the Town of Flower Mound Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards adopted pursuant to chapter 32 of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Flower Mound, Texas, is hereby amended and replaced in its entirety as set out in Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated as if fully set out herein. 
That the table titled "Runoff Coefficient Values for "C"" on page B-V-Append A- 3 of Appendix A, "Hydrology Tables and Figures," of Section V, "Drainage Appendices," of Part B, "Technical Standards," of Volume I, "Design Criteria" of the Town of Flower Mound Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards adopted pursuant to chapter 32 of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Flower Mound, Texas, is hereby amended and replaced in its entirety as set out in Exhibit "B" attached hereto and incorporated as if fully set out herein. 
That the table titled "Flower Mound IDF Curve" of Appendix A, "Hydrology Tables and Figures," of Section V, "Drainage Appendices," of Part B, "Technical Standards," of Volume I, "Design Criteria" of the Town of Flower Mound Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards adopted pursuant to chapter 32 of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Flower Mound, Texas, is hereby amended and replaced in its entirety as set out in Exhibit "C" attached hereto and incorporated as if fully set out herein. 
That Section VI, "General Site Requirements," of Part B, "Technical Standards," of Volume I, "Design Criteria" of the Town of Flower Mound Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards adopted pursuant to chapter 32 of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Flower Mound, Texas, is hereby amended and replaced in its entirety as set out in Exhibit "D" attached hereto and incorporated as if fully set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 22-10, § 4, 4-5-2010; Ord. No. 57-11, §§ 5—10, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 21-12, §§ 4—12, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 51-12, §§ 4—15, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 15-13, § 6, 4-1-2013; Ord. No. 15-19 , §§ 1—4, 4-15-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22-10, § 4, adopted Apr. 5, 2010, repealed the former § 32-3, and enacted a new § 32-3 as set out herein. The former § 32-3 pertained to engineering design criteria and construction standards—amendments and derived from Ord. No. 77-03, §§ 2, 3, 11-17-2003; Ord. No. 80-05, § 2, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 104-07, § 2, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 105-07, § 2, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 70-08, §§ 5—10, 11-5-2008; Ord. No. 42-09, § 2, 10-5-2009; Ord. No. 43-09, §§ 3, 4, 10-5-2009. 
Editor's note— Exhibits A—D to Ord. No. 15-19 , §§ 1—4, adopted April 15, 2019 are not set out herein, but are on file with the town.  
Chapter 33 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 33-1. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. The Texas Legislature has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Flower Mound, Texas are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(d)  Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 06-18 , § 2, 3-5-2018)  
Sec. 33-2. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appeal board means the town council. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map ("FIRM") with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodway. See regulatory floodway. 
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area. See area of special flood hazard. 
Start of construction , for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the national Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 06-18 , § 2, 3-5-2018)  
Sec. 33-3. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
(b)  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Tarrant County, Texas and Incorporated areas," dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated September 25, 2009, and "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Denton County, Texas and Incorporated areas," dated April 18, 2011, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated April 18, 2011 and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer or liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 06-18 , § 2, 3-5-2018)  
Sec. 33-4. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of the floodplain administrator. The town floodplain manager is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 33-3(b) the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 33-4. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12 [of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations]. 
(c)  Permit procedures. 
(1)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
a.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be flood-proofed; 
c.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood-proofed structure shall meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsection 33-5(b)(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
e.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 33-4(b)(1). 
(2)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
b.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
c.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
d.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
e.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
f.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
g.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
h.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
i.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
j.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(d)  Variance procedures. 
(1)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 33-4(c)(2) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter. 
(8)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(9)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(10)  Prerequisites for granting variances. 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(11)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria outlined in subsections 33-4(d)(1)—(9) are met; and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 06-18 , § 2, 3-5-2018)  
Sec. 33-5. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 42-37, 33-4(b)(8) or 33-5(c)(3), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated 18 inches above the 100-year flood elevation established by a fully developed watershed, or the FEMA elevation, using whichever is higher. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in subsection 33-4(c)(1)a., is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated 18 inches above the 100-year flood elevation established by a fully developed watershed, or the FEMA elevation, using whichever is higher or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood-proofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (d) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated 18 inches above the 100-year flood elevation established by a fully developed watershed, or the FEMA elevation, using whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of subsection 33-4(c)(1) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (b)(4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(c)  Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with subsections 33-1(b)—(d) of this chapter. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of subsections 33-3(c), 33-4(c) and the provisions of section 33-5. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to subsections 33-3(b) or 33-4(b)(8). 
(4)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(d)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 33-3(b) are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated 18 inches above the 100-year flood elevation established by a fully developed watershed, or the FEMA elevation, using whichever is higher or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated 18 inches above the 100-year flood elevation established by a fully developed watershed, or the FEMA elevation, using whichever is higher or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in subsection 33-4(c) are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(e)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 33-3(b) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection 33-5(d)(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 33-5. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12 [of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations]. 
(Ord. No. 06-18 , § 2, 3-5-2018)  
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6; rabies control, § 6-81 et seq.; dangerous animals, § 6-161 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; dangerous building code, § 14-211 et seq.; moving buildings or structures, § 14-411 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; land development regulations general provisions, ch. 74; development standards, ch. 82; landscaping and screening, § 82-211 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 90; vegetation, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 98; odorous matter, § 98-1054; fire and explosive hazard material, § 98-1055; toxic and noxious matter, § 98-1056; floodplain, § 98-1081 et seq. 
State Law reference— Soil and water conservation, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 201.001 et seq.; common and public nuisances, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 125.001 et seq.; air quality, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 382 et seq.; oil and gas hazardous waste, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 91.601 et seq.; water quality control, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.001 et seq.; waste disposal and control of stormwater, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 51.331 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS AND GRASS AND UNSIGHTLY OR UNSANITARY MATTER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate weeds and grass, V.T.C.A, Health and Safety Code § 342.004; littering prohibited, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq.; regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brush means scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth. 
Carrion means the dead and putrefying flesh of any animal, fowl or fish. 
Dump means to dispose, discharge, place, deposit, throw, leave, sweep, scatter, unload or toss. 
Filth means any matter in a putrescent state. 
Garbage means any kitchen refuse, foodstuffs or related material, including all decayable waste. 
Impure or unwholesome matter means any putrescible or nonputrescible condition, object or matter which tends, may or could cause injury, death or disease to human beings. 
Junk means all wornout, worthless or discarded material including, but not limited to, any of the following materials, or parts of such materials, or any combination thereof: new or used iron, steel or nonferrous metallic scrap, brass or waste materials; used and/or inoperative household appliances, household electrical or plumbing fixtures, floor coverings and/or window coverings not currently in use; used lumber, brick, cement block, wire, tubing and pipe, tubs, drums, barrels, and/or roofing material not currently in use; air conditioning and heating equipment not currently in use; used vehicle components and parts not currently in use; used furniture other than that designed for outdoor use or that which would normally be considered as antique furniture; used and/or inoperative residential lawn care equipment and machinery not currently in use; used pallets, windows or doors not currently in use; new or used sheet metal, structural steel and/or chain not currently in use; used and/or inoperable vending machines, radios and/or televisions not currently in use; and any other type of used and/or inoperable machinery or equipment not currently in use. 
Matter means that of which any physical object is composed. 
Nuisance means any condition, object, material or matter that is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health; or that renders the ground, the water, the air or food a hazard or likely to cause injury to human life or health; or that is offensive to the senses; or that threatens to become detrimental to the public health; and shall include, but not be limited to, any abandoned wells, shafts or basements, abandoned refrigerators, stagnant or unwholesome water, sinks, privies, filth, carrion, rubbish, junk, trash, debris or refuse, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, and objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature. 
Objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter means any matter, condition or object which is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary to a person of ordinary sensitivities. 
Owner means any person or entity shown as the property owner on the latest property tax assessment rolls or any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in the property, including any agent who is responsible for managing, leasing or operating the property. 
Private swimming pool or spa means a pool or spa serving only a single-family residence regardless of whether the pool/spa is permanently or temporarily installed in the ground, on the ground or above the ground, the use of which is limited to members of the homeowner's or tenant's family or invited guests. 
Property means all privately owned occupied or unoccupied property, including vacant land, and/or a building designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial or religious purposes. The term "property" shall also include a yard, ground, wall, driveway, fence, porch, steps or other structure appurtenant to the property. 
Putrescible means the decomposition of organic matter with the formation of foul-smelling, incompletely oxidized products. 
Refuse means a heterogeneous accumulation of wornout, used, broken, rejected or worthless materials including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, paper or litter, and other decayable or nondecayable matter. 
Rubbish means junk, trash, debris, rubble, stone, useless fragments of building materials, and other miscellaneous, useless waste or rejected matter. 
Stump means the part of a plant and especially a tree remaining attached to the root after the trunk is cut, or is severed by natural causes. 
Trash and debris means all manner of refuse including, but not limited to, mounds of dirt, piles of leaves, grass and weed clippings, paper trash, useless fragments of building material, rubble, furniture other than furniture designed for outside use, useless household items and appliances, items of salvage, such as scrap metal and wood, old barrels, old tires, objects that hold water for an extended time, tree and brush trimmings, and other miscellaneous wastes or rejected matter. 
Turf grass means grass commonly used in regularly-cut lawns or play areas, such as, but not limited to Bermuda grass, fescue, St. Augustine, zoysia, and ryegrass blends. 
Unwholesome water means any condition that exists in water and is characterized by bacterial growth, algae, insect infestation, the remains of litter, trash, debris, garbage, refuse, rubbish, or any other foreign matter which, because of its nature or location, constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe or unsightly condition. 
Vegetative growth means any grass, weeds, shrubs, trees, brush, bushes or vines. 
Weeds means any vegetation that, because of its height and listing on the Texas Department of Agriculture noxious plant list, Texas Agriculture Extension Service common weeds of the northern blackland prairie, and Texas Invasives Invaders Program list is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary, excluding: shrubs; bushes and trees; cultivated flowers and gardens, including, but not limited to, native plantings used for aesthetic and/or wildlife promotion, drought tolerance and/or water conservation, to attract and aid wildlife, and/or to offset and control any soil loss problems either occurring or predicted; and cultivated crops. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 1.01; Ord. No. 57-07, § 2, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 10-13, § 2, 3-18-2013) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-32. - Weeds and brush over 12 inches high. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the town, to permit weeds, turf grass, brush, or any objectionable or unsightly matter to grow to a height greater than 12 inches. All vegetation not regularly cultivated and which exceeds 12 inches in height shall be presumed to be objectionable and unsightly matter. 
(b)  With respect to lots, tracts or parcels of land of five or more acres and under single ownership, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any area greater than 100 feet from any open public street or thoroughfare, as measured from the right-of-way line of such street or thoroughfare, and greater than 100 feet from any adjacent property under different ownership and on which any building is located or on which any improvement exists, as measured from the property line. 
(c)  Property designated as and/or required by an ordinance to be maintained in its natural state shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Property included as part of a conservation easement shall be exempt from these provisions. 
(e)  Property that is part of a designated floodplain shall be exempt from these provisions. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 1.02; Ord. No. 79-01, § 1, 11-19-2001; Ord. No. 57-07, § 3, 8-6-2007)  
Secs. 34-33—34-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WEEDS, GRASS AND OTHER VEGETATION 
 
Sec. 34-51. - Duties of owner/occupant. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, as described in section 34-32, to cut and remove all such weeds, brush, vegetative growth, and other objectionable or unsightly matter as often as may be necessary to comply with section 34-32. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the town, to keep the area adjacent to his or her property line, including the front or side parkway and rear, between the property line or sidewalk and curb and the rear or side parkway between the property line and alley pavement or traveled way, or if there is no curb, then within ten feet outside such property line, free and clear of the matter referred to in subsection (a) of this section. Provided, however, that where the alleyway is not open to traffic, that the parkway in such cases shall be deemed to be between the property line and the centerline of the alley. Specifically, sidewalks must have an unobstructed vertical clearance of eight feet and must be unobstructed within the width of the sidewalk. Road access shall be unobstructed as outlined in the fire code, as amended. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any such real property, as described in this section, to maintain all rights-of-way adjacent or next to their real property in compliance with this section. All vegetative growth not regularly cultivated and which exceeds 12 inches in height shall be presumed to be objectionable and unsightly and shall be kept mowed. Furthermore, regularly cultivated crops allowed to grow within the right-of-way of any public street or easement shall also be kept mowed in compliance with this section. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 1.03(b), (c); Ord. No. 82-01, § 1, 12-3-2001)  
Sec. 34-52. - Public medians and rights-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity that has contracted with the town or otherwise agreed to provide for the maintenance of landscaping in any public median or right-of-way within the corporate limits of the town to permit weeds, turf grass, brush or any objectionable or unsightly matter to grow to a height greater than six inches. All vegetation not regularly cultivated and which exceeds six inches in height shall be presumed to be objectionable and unsightly. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not affect, supersede or otherwise interfere with the obligations of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property to maintain parkways, as defined in section 34-51(b) of this Code, or rights-of-way, as referenced in section 34-51(c) of this Code. 
(c)  In the event that any person or entity that has contracted with the town or otherwise agreed to provide for the maintenance of landscaping in any public median or right-of-way within the corporate limits of the town fails to comply with the provisions of this section, the town manager or his duly appointed representative shall give a minimum of seven days' written notice to such person or entity violating the terms of this section. The notice shall describe the violation and the location of the violation and inform the person or entity that failure to comply with this section within seven days may result in the town without further notice correcting the violation at that person's or entity's expense and assessing the expenses against that person or entity, and may include the filing of a written statement of such charges with the county land and deed records. No further notice is necessary and to the extent of any conflict between this section and sections 34-92, 34-93, 34-94 or 34-95 of this Code, this section controls relative to public medians and rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 14-09, § 2, 5-4-2009)  
Sec. 34-53. - Residential landscape maintenance. 
(a)  Tree stumps. It is unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any platted real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the town, to permit or allow any dead tree as determined by the town arborist or other certified arborist, or to permit or allow a stump higher than 12 inches above grade from the front building line to the curb, edge of street or pavement, or to permit or allow a stump higher than 36 inches above grade behind the front building line to the rear property line. 
(b)  It is unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the town, to permit or allow the landscaping and any vegetation, including but not limited to, trees, shrubbery, bushes and vines to grow on the premises so as to physically obstruct the doors, garage doors, or windows of any structure on the premises which obstruction prevents ingress or egress from the structure(s). 
(Ord. No. 10-13, § 2, 3-18-2013)  
Secs. 34-54—34-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - UNSIGHTLY OR UNSANITARY MATTER 
 
Sec. 34-71. - Dumping, stagnant water, trash, and other unsightly or unsanitary matter declared a nuisance. 
It is unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the town, to permit or allow any stagnant or unwholesome water, refuse, rubbish, trash, debris, filth, carrion, junk, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind or other objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever kind to remain upon any such real property or within any public easement on or across such real property or upon any adjacent public street or alley right-of-way between the property line of such real property and where the paved surface of the street or alley begins. Notwithstanding any other notice provision in this chapter, a violation of this section immediately subjects the person to the enforcement and/or penalty provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 1.04(a); Ord. No. 10-13, § 2, 3-18-2013)  
Sec. 34-72. - Sidewalks, grounds and buildings to be kept clear. 
It shall be the duty of all such persons to keep the sidewalks in front of their property free and clear of all such matter, and to fill up, drain or grade any lots, ground or yards which shall have stagnant water thereon, and to cleanse and disinfect any house, building or establishment and to clean any lot, yard or ground of refuse, rubbish, trash, filth, carrion, or objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of any kind, or other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 1.04(b))  
Sec. 34-73. - Dumping. 
It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person to dump, or permit to be dumped, knowingly or intentionally, upon any sidewalk, alley, street, into or adjacent to water, or any other public or private property, any unwholesome water, refuse, rubbish, trash, debris, filth, carrion, junk, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind or other objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever kind. Notwithstanding any other notice provision in this chapter, a violation of this section immediately subjects the person to the enforcement and/or penalty provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 6, § 1.04(c); Ord. No. 10-13, § 2, 3-18-2013)  
Sec. 34-74. - Digital electronic signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and declared an offense for any person to allow a digital electronic sign to operate when the sign is malfunctioning, including, but not limited to, one or more broken, burned-out or malfunctioning light(s) (LED). 
(b)  Each day a digital electronic sign is in violation of subsection (a) constitutes a separate offense. 
(c)  A sign owner or operator who voluntarily turns off a digital electronic sign shall not receive a citation for a violation of this section if the digital electronic sign is repaired and no longer in violation of subsection (a) within 14 days of notice of violation. 
(d)  A digital electronic sign that is not repaired so that it is no longer in violation of subsection (a) within 30 days of a notice of violation shall be considered an illegal or unlawful sign as defined by subsection 86-3(9) and must be removed in compliance with section 86-5. 
(Ord. No. 19-07, § 2, 3-15-2007)  
Sec. 34-75. - Private swimming pool or spa. 
(a)  Any private pool or spa located within the town shall not remain in a condition so as to create a public health or safety hazard or a nuisance to the general public. Any time a private pool or spa contains any amount of water, the owner or occupant of the premises must: 
(1)  Maintain water clarity so that all parts of the bottom can be seen; 
(2)  Maintain the pool or spa in such a manner so that the water in the pool does not become unwholesome water; 
(3)  Maintain proper fencing as required under this Code; 
(4)  Maintain pool free of all foreign matter; 
(5)  Secure and lock all access gates to any pool located on unoccupied property; and 
(6)  Prevent harborage or breeding places for insects or rodents. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, that contains a private pool or spa on said real property to permit or allow a condition to exist that is not in compliance with the conditions set forth in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 57-07, § 4, 8-6-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 57-07, § 4, adopted Aug. 6, 2007, added § 34-74 to the Code. Inasmuch as said section already existed, the new provisions were redesignated as 34-75 at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 34-76—34-80. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-81. - Placement time of waste and recycling receptacles. 
It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, to place waste and recycling receptacles at the designated pickup location for solid waste or recycling collection prior to 8:00 a.m. on the day before pickup or to fail to remove waste and recycling receptacles by 8:00 a.m. on the day following the designated pickup day. Notwithstanding any other notice provision in this chapter, a 24-hour notice to abate the violation shall be issued for violating this section, and the failure of the person to correct the violation within that time period subjects the person to the enforcement and/or penalty provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 57-07, § 5, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 10-13, § 2, 3-18-2013)  
Sec. 34-82. - Placement time of bulk waste. 
It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, to place bulk waste at the designated pickup location for bulk waste prior to 8:00 a.m. on the day before pickup or, in the event such waste is not retrieved, to fail to remove such waste by 8:00 a.m. on the day following the designated pickup day. Notwithstanding any other notice provision in this chapter, a 24-hour notice to abate the violation shall be issued for violating this section, and the failure of the person to correct the violation within that time period subjects the person to the enforcement and/or penalty provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 57-07, § 6, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 10-13, § 2, 3-18-2013)  
Secs. 34-83—34-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ABATEMENT PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 34-91. - Failure of owner to comply with article provisions; issuance of notice. 
If any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the town, fails to comply with the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the town manager or his duly appointed representative to give a minimum of seven days' written notice to such person violating the terms of this article, except where such shorter notice time period or no notice time period may be otherwise specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 82-01, § 2(a), 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 10-13, § 2, 3-18-2013)  
Sec. 34-92. - Service of notice. 
The notice shall be in writing and may be served on such person violating the terms of this article by: 
(1)  Delivering it to him in person; 
(2)  Letter or written notice addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located and delivered by regular United States mail. If the letter or written notice is returned by the United States Postal Service as refused or unclaimed, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained, by: 
a.  Publication at least once in the town's official newspaper; 
b.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(Ord. No. 82-01, § 2(b), 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 72-08, § 2, 12-1-2008) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.006(b), (c).  
Sec. 34-93. - Contents of notice. 
In a notice provided under this article the town may inform the owner by regular mail and by posting on the property, or by personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the town without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the town has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the town without notice may take any action permitted and assess expenses as provided by section 34-94. 
(Ord. No. 82-01, § 2(c), 12-3-2001) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.006(d).  
Sec. 34-94. - Removal by the town upon failure of owner to comply with article provisions. 
If the owner of the property fails or refuses to comply with the demand for compliance contained in the notice, within seven days after the date of notice as provided in section 34-92 the town may go upon such property and do or cause to be done the work necessary to obtain compliance with this section. All costs, charges and expenses (referred to in this article as "charges") incurred in doing or in having such work done shall be a charge to and a personal liability of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 82-01, § 3(a), 12-3-2001)  
Sec. 34-95. - Assessment of expenses, lien. 
(a)  In addition to a charge to and personal liability of the owner, the town may assess the charges incurred in section 34-94 against the real estate on which the work was done, and obtain a privileged lien upon and against such real property. In order to perfect such lien, the town manager, or his duly appointed representative, shall first give such owner written notice of demand for payment of such charges. Such written notice may be given by any one of the methods provided in section 34-92 for the giving of the initial notice demanding compliance with the terms of this section. 
(b)  If such owner fails or refuses to make complete payment of such charges within twenty days of his or her receipt of such notice, the town manager, or his duly appointed representative, shall file a written statement of such charges with the county clerk of the county in which such real property is located for filing in the county land and deed records. Such statement shall be deemed sufficient if it contains the following minimum information; however, it may also contain such other information deemed appropriate by the town manager, or his duly appointed representative: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the real property; 
(2)  A sufficient description of the real property; 
(3)  An itemized statement of the charges incurred by the town in doing or in having such work done as necessary to bring the real property into compliance with this section; and 
(4)  A notarized affidavit executed by the town manager or his duly appointed represent-ative, stating that all prerequisites required by this section for the imposition of the charges and the affixing of the lien have been met and that all statements and/or representations made therein are true and correct. 
All such charges shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date the owner of the real property receives the notice of demand for payment of such charges. The town may bring suit to collect the charges, institute foreclosure proceedings, or both. The written statement of such charges provided for in this section, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the town's claim for charges or right to foreclose the lien. The owner of the real property or any other person claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of the real property shall be jointly and severally liable for such charges. 
(Ord. No. 82-01, § 3(b), (c), 12-3-2001)  
Sec. 34-96. - Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds. 
(a)  The town manager, or his duly appointed representative may go upon property and do or cause to be done the work necessary to obtain compliance with section 34-32 without notice when: 
(1)  Weeds have grown higher than 48 inches; and 
(2)  Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person. 
(b)  No later than the tenth day after the date the town causes the work to be done under this section, the town shall give notice to the property owner in the manner required by section 34-92. 
(c)  The notice shall contain: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property; 
(2)  A description of the violations of the article that occurred on the property; 
(3)  A statement that the town abated the weeds; 
(4)  An itemized statement of the charges incurred by the town in doing or in having such work done as necessary to bring the real property into compliance with section 34-32; and 
(5)  An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the town's abatement of the weeds. 
(d)  The municipal court judge shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of the weeds under this section if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with environmental health services/code enforcement division a written request for a hearing. 
(e)  An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to the town's abatement of the weeds. 
(f)  The town may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens as provided in section 34-95. 
(Ord. No. 82-01, § 4, 12-3-2001)  
Sec. 34-97. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the town manager, and his duly appointed representatives, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder the town manager and his duly appointed representatives in the exercise of their duties under this article. Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this article to the contrary, the town manager and his duly appointed representatives are hereby granted the authority to issue immediate citations to persons violating any provision of this article in their presence. 
(Ord. No. 82-01, § 5, 12-3-2001)  
Sec. 34-98. - Penalty upon failure to comply with article provisions. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this article who continues to violate or fails to comply with such after seven days after notice is given and received as set forth in section 34-92, shall also be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-13. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, any violation of any provision of this article which constitutes an immediate danger or threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the town for such purpose. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained in this article, the town may enforce the provisions of this article pursuant to the applicable provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, which chapter provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(d)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this section. 
(Ord. No. 82-01, § 6, 12-3-2001)  
Secs. 34-99—34-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Noise from animals, § 6-43; noise, § 98-1052. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All terminology used in this article not defined in this section, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or its successor body. 
Ambient (background) sound pressure level means the all-encompassing sound associated with a given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive sound, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive sound is to be made. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action excluding demolition, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Cyclically varying noise means any sound which varies in sound level such that the same level is obtained repetitively at relatively uniform intervals of time. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter), denoted as dB. 
Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
Device means any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which actually produces, noise when operated or handled. 
Director means the town manager or his duly appointed representative. 
Emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Energy equivalent sound level (leq) means the sound level corresponding to the average sound energy during a specified period of time. Its calculation involves the conversion of decibels (a logarithmic quantity) to corresponding intensities (a linear quantity), performing the averaging, and finally changing the average back to decibels. 
Impulsive sound means sound characterized by a peak less than one second in length, an abrupt onset, a rapid decay, and a peak sound level which exceeds the ambient sound level by 20dB(A) or more. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle propelled by mechanical power, such as, but not limited to, any passenger car, truck, truck-trailer, semitrailer, camper, motorcycle, minibike, go-cart, dune buggy or racing vehicle. 
Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Noise disturbance means any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise which is offensive to an adult person within the town, which noise renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and comfort. 
Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
Property boundary means an imaginary line exterior to any enclosed structure, at the ground surface and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person. 
Public property means any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Pure tone means any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a set of single pitches. For the purposes of this article, a pure tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands by five dB for center frequencies of 500 Hz and above and by eight dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hz and by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz. 
Quiet zone means property on which a school, hospital, clinic or other noise sensitive facility is operated. 
Repetitive impulsive sound means any sound which is composed of impulsive sounds that are repeated at sufficiently slow rates such that a sound level meter set at "fast" meter characteristic will show changes in sound pressure level greater than ten dB(A). 
Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B or C, as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters. If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
Sound level meter means an instrument for the measurement of sound, including a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector and integrator, time averager, output meter and weighted networks, that is sensitive to pressure fluctuations. The instrument reads sound pressure levels when properly calibrated and is of type H or better so specified in ANSI publication S1.4-1971 or its successor body. 
Sound pressure level means expressed in decibels, 20 times the logarithm to the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. 
Stationary sound source means any device, fixed or movable, which is located or used on property other than a public right-of-way. 
Use districts means those districts established by chapter 98, zoning. Planned development districts, for the purposes of this section, shall be considered as residential, commercial or industrial districts according to the primary use. 
Vibration means an oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic or random nature described by displacement, velocity or acceleration with respect to a given reference point. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 10.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-132. - Town department and contractors to comply with article regulations. 
It is the policy of the town, that all its departments shall comply with the provisions and intent of this article, and that contractors and subcontractors shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article in their operations. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 10.01)  
Sec. 34-133. - Exemptions. 
The following sources of potentially excessive sound shall be exempt from noise control regulation: 
(1)  Safety signals, storm warning sirens or horns and the testing of such equipment, emergency vehicle sirens or horns used when responding to an emergency, and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(2)  Sound caused in the performance of emergency or public service work, including public utility operations, acting to protect the health, safety or welfare of the community. 
(3)  Sounds caused by natural phenomena. 
(4)  Activities conducted on public parks, public playgrounds and public or private school grounds including, but not limited to, school athletic and school entertainment events. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 10.06)  
Secs. 34-134—34-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 34-151. - Enforcement responsibility. 
The town manager or designated representative will have enforcement responsibility for this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 10.10)  
Sec. 34-152. - Proposed developments. 
Any person who makes application for a certificate of occupancy or a building permit that may result in the creation of noise or may create a violation of any provision of this article shall consult with the director prior to any such application. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 10.09)  
Sec. 34-153. - Implementation and enforcement of article provisions. 
(a)  The noise control program required by this article shall be administered by the director of the town. 
(b)  In order to implement and enforce this article and for the general purpose of sound and vibration abatement and control, the director or his duly appointed representative shall have the power to, upon presentation of the proper credentials, make necessary inspections and tests with the proper authorization or permission from the owner on any private property or place. 
(c)  Sound level measurement shall be made with a sound level meter Type II or better using the A-weighting network in accordance and conforming with the noise measurements standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute or its successor body. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 10.03)  
Sec. 34-154. - Permits of variance. 
The director is authorized to grant permits for relief of any provision in this article on the basis of undue hardship in cases where: 
(1)  The sound source will be of short duration and the activity cannot be conducted in a manner as to comply with this article. 
(2)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify their activity or operation to comply with this article. 
(3)  No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
(4)  An automatic variance will be granted without the payment of permit fees for the purpose of conducting parades or other public events, provided that any noise disturbance created by such activity will be abated when such request is made by a town official authorized to enforce this article. 
(5)  The town manager or designated representative may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects and may suspend any permit issued for violating any provisions prescribed in the permit of variance. 
A nominal fee shall be charged to each applicant for processing permit applications. Fee schedules shall be approved by town council resolution. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 10.07)  
Sec. 34-155. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any applicant who has been denied a permit of variance or any permittee whose permit has been suspended shall have the right to a hearing before the town council. 
(b)  Requests for a hearing shall be made in writing and received by the director within ten days of the date of the denial or the issuance date of the notice on suspension. The director shall schedule a hearing before the town council within 20 days of receipt of the request. 
(c)  The town council shall have the authority to review all pertinent files and information regarding the applicant/permittee which are in the custody of the director. Additionally, the town council shall have the authority to accept written and verbal testimony from the director, applicant and interested citizens. 
(d)  The town council shall have the authority to assess whether the director acted properly within its powers under this article in its denial or suspension of a permit. The majority vote of the town council shall determine whether to uphold or reject the director's action. Upholding the action of the director shall affirm the denial or suspension. Rejection of the director's action shall automatically reinstate a suspended permit. 
(e)  No person whose permit has been denied or suspended, shall create or allow the creation of the noise in dispute prior to final determination by the town council. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 10.08)  
Sec. 34-156. - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to and accumulative of all other penalties, the town shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any and all violations of this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 10.11)  
Secs. 34-157—34-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 34-181. - Noise standards. 
(a)  The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all property with a designated land use district: 
TABLE 34-1 
LIMITING SOUND LEVELS FOR LAND USE DISTRICTS 
Land Use District 	Time of Day 	Energy Equivalent Sound Levels (Leq) 
Residential 	10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 	52 dB(A) 
	7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 	62 dB(A) 
Office, retail 	10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 	62 dB(A) 
Commercial 	7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 	67 dB(A) 
Industrial 	Anytime 	70 dB(A) 
 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any location in the town to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level when measured on or beyond the boundaries of the property on which the noise is produced, or measured within any other residential dwelling unit or commercial space, to exceed: 
(1)  The noise standard in any measurement period not less than 30 minutes. 
(2)  The noise standard, plus 15 dB(A) in any one minute average of a measurement period. 
(3)  The noise standard, plus 20 dB(A) at any time in a measurement period. 
(c)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section, a measurement period shall not be less than 30 minutes. 
(d)  The sound level limits established in Table 34-1 as set out in subsection (a) of this section for residential districts shall be applicable to all quiet zones. 
(e)  If the ambient sound level exceeds the resulting standards, the ambient level shall be the standard. 
(f)  If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient sound level can be determined, the measured sound level obtained while the source is in operation shall be compared directly to the applicable standard in the receiving land use district on which the sound is measured. 
(g)  Correction for character of sound. For any stationary source of sound which emits a pure tone, cyclically varying sound or repetitive impulsive sound, the limits set forth in Table 34-1 which is set out in subsection (a) of this section shall be reduced by five dB(A). Notwithstanding compliance with this subsection, it shall be a violation of this article for any person to operate or permit to be operated any stationary source of sound which emits a pure tone, cyclically varying, or repetitive impulsive sound which creates a noise disturbance. 
(h)  When the land use district design of the property on which the source of sound originates differs from the designation of the property on which the sound is measured, the maximum permissible sound level of the more restrictive land use district designation shall apply. 
(i)  For sound emitted on public property, the measurement distance shall be 50 feet (15 meters), and the sound level limit for the appropriate land use district shall apply. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 10.04)  
Sec. 34-182. - Prohibited noise. 
(a)  No person shall allow, make or cause to be made any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise in the town which is offensive to an adult person within the town, which noise renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and comfort, nor shall any person allow, make or cause to be made any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise in the town. 
(b)  The following activities, among others but not to exclude other such acts, are declared to create unreasonably loud or disturbing noises in violation of this article, unless a permit of variance as provided in section 34-154 is first obtained, namely: 
(1)  Animals. Owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any animals which, by noise making, disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of neighboring residents, or cause a noise disturbance. The provisions of this article shall apply to all public and private facilities, including any animal shelter or commercial kennel, which hold or treat animals. 
(2)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments, loud speaking amplifiers and similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to violate section 34-181 or cause a noise disturbance. The operation of any such radio, instrument, phonograph, television set, machine, loudspeakers or similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise so as to attract customers to any place of business when such use is done in a manner which violates section 34-181 or causes a noise disturbance. The use of mechanical devices, loudspeakers, sound amplifiers or other instruments or devices on trucks or other moving vehicles for the purpose of attracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or for advertising any show, sale or display of merchandise when such use is done in a manner which violates section 34-181 or causes a noise disturbance. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling and singing. The yelling, shouting, crying, hooting, whistling or singing of peddlers, hawkers or any other person in a manner that causes a noise disturbance. 
(4)  Loading operations. The loading or unloading of any vehicle between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on any premises in a residential district, or within 500 feet of any residence in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(5)  Construction work. Operating or permitting to be operated in a nonresidential district any equipment used in commercial construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys or appurtenances thereto which exceed the sound level limits for an industrial land use as set forth in section 34-181 as measured on the property boundary of the receiving land use. Operating or permitting to be operated in a residential district, or within 500 feet of any residence, any equipment used in commercial construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys or appurtenances thereto and/or the erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a residential district, or within 500 feet of any residence, at times other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(6)  Vehicle repairs or testing. The repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing of any motor vehicle (including off-road vehicles) or watercraft on private property, on a public right-of-way, on a public space, or in a quiet zone, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(7)  Impulsive sources. Causing impulsive sound sources including, but not limited to, the use of fireworks, explosives, the firing of guns or other explosive devices in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. This is not intended to preclude any existing ordinances prohibiting such acts. 
(8)  Powered model mechanical devices. The flying of model aircraft powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or the firing or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(9)  Refuse compacting vehicles. Operating or permitting to be operated any refuse compacting, processing or collection vehicle or parking lot sweeper between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in any residential district, or within 500 feet of any residence in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(10)  Quiet zone. Creating a noise disturbance on any street adjacent to any school, hospital, clinic or other noise sensitive facility, when conspicuous signs are located at such streets indicating that schools, hospitals, clinics or other noise sensitive facilities are adjacent thereto. 
(11)  Vibration. Using or causing the use of any device that creates any ground vibration which is perceptible without instruments at any point on or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private property or at 50 feet from the source if on a public space or public right-of-way. 
(12)  Stationary nonemergency signaling devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any electronically activated or amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place for more than five minutes during any consecutive 60-minute period. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 10.05)  
Secs. 34-183—34-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED, WRECKED, ABANDONED PROPERTY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 34-201—34-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Secs. 34-221—34-240. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Junked Vehicles[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Junked vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34-241. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years old. 
Demolisher means a person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or to otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle. 
Garagekeeper means an owner or operator of a parking place or establishment, garage, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, maintenance or parking of a motor vehicle. 
Inoperable means not capable of being used or operated due to legal or mechanical incapability. 
Junked vehicle means a vehicle that is self-propelled and: 
(1)  Does not have lawfully attached to it an unexpired license plate or a valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(2)  Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
(3)  Is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property, or 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
Motor vehicle means, but is not limited to, a vehicle that is subject to registration under chapters 501 or 502, [V.C.T.A.] Transportation Code, or chapter 31, [V.C.T.A.] Parks and Wildlife Code, which is self-propelled by mechanical power upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn or moved upon a street, highway, waterway, or airway, to include but not limited to any automobile, boat, bus designed to carry one or more persons, dune buggy, go-cart, mini-bike, moped, motorboat, motorcycle, personal watercraft, racing vehicle, recreational vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, and truck-tractor; but excluding construction equipment, forklifts, implements of husbandry, and devices moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
(1)  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and 
(2)  Acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
Storage facility includes a garage, parking lot, or establishment for the servicing, repairing, or parking of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 8.01; Ord. No. 61-99, § 2(8.01), 10-4-1999; Ord. No. 17-04, § 2, 3-1-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071.  
Sec. 34-242. - Declared to be public nuisance. 
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible at any time of the year from a public place or public right-of-way is declared a public nuisance if it: 
(1)  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  Tends to reduce the value of private property; 
(3)  Invites vandalism; 
(4)  Creates a fire hazard; 
(5)  Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; 
(6)  Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of municipalities. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 8.02; Ord. No. 61-99, § 2(8.02), 10-4-1999; Ord. No. 17-04, § 3, 3-1-2004) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.072.  
Sec. 34-243. - Maintenance of an offense. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by section 34-242. 
(b)  An offense under this subdivision is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00 per day that the public nuisance continues to exist. 
(c)  The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance upon conviction. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 8.03; Ord. No. 61-99, § 2(8.03), 10-4-1999) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.073.  
Sec. 34-244. - Abatement authority; procedures. 
(a)  Generally. The town, by this section, is adopting procedures for the abatement and removal from private or public property or a public right-of-way of a junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance. This subdivision shall be administered by the town manager or his designee, provided that the officer is a regularly salaried, full-time employee of the town. Any authorized person may remove the nuisance. A person authorized to administer the procedures of this section may enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance. 
(b)  Notice. Notice of the nature of the nuisance must be sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested to: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
(2)  Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and 
(3)  The owner or occupant of: 
a.  The property on which the nuisance is located; or 
b.  If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(4)  The notice must state that: 
a.  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was mailed; and 
b.  Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires. 
(5)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, hand delivered. 
(6)  If the notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(7)  No notice is required for issuance of a citation for an offense under this subdivision. 
(c)  Hearing. 
(1)  The municipal court judge shall conduct hearings relative to the abatement of junked vehicles. 
(2)  A public hearing must be conducted prior to the removal of the public nuisance not earlier than the 11th day after the date of service notice. 
(3)  If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required under subsection (b) of this section, the hearing shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of notice. 
(4)  At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. 
(5)  If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a resolution or order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the vehicle's: 
a.  Description; 
b.  Vehicle identification number; and 
c.  License plate number. 
(6)  As part of the order authorizing removal or abatement of the public nuisance, the court shall: 
a.  Prohibit a vehicle from being reconstructed or made operable after removal; and 
b.  Require that notice identifying the vehicle or part of the vehicle be given to the department of public safety not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. On receipt of notice of removal, the department shall immediately cancel the certificate of title issued for the vehicle. 
(7)  The municipal court shall have full authority to enforce the abatement procedures including, but not limited to, issuing all necessary orders. 
(d)  Relocation of junked vehicle. The relocation of the junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the town, after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the public nuisance has commenced, has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 8.04; Ord. No. 61-99, § 2(8.04), 10-4-1999) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.074, 683.075 and 683.076.  
Sec. 34-245. - Exceptions. 
Procedures adopted in this subdivision shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part: 
(1)  That is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property. 
(2)  That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, is: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Does not constitute a health hazard; and 
c.  Is screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees or shrubbery. A vehicle or part, covered by a tarp, car blanket or similar covering does not meet the requisite screening requirements of this subdivision. 
(3)  For purposes of this subdivision, the term "ordinary public view" means the view from private or public property, or public right-of-way from average grade of the surrounding property. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 8.05; Ord. No. 61-99, § 2(8.05), 10-4-1999) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.077.  
Secs. 34-246—34-270. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Abandoned Vehicles[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34-271. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that is: 
(1)  Inoperable and more than five years old and has been left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours; 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours; 
(3)  Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control or charge of the property for more than 48 hours; 
(4)  Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state or federal highway within the corporate limits of the town for more than 48 hours; or 
(5)  Has been left unattended for more than 24 hours on the right-of-way of a turnpike project constructed or maintained by the Texas Turnpike Authority or a controlled access highway. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-272. - Deemed nuisance. 
If a vehicle, including a motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor, is found unattended or unoccupied upon a street, highway, alley, other public place or upon private property without the consent of the owner of such land, in violation of any of the provisions of this subdivision, the vehicle is hereby declared a nuisance. The fact that such vehicle is unattended or unoccupied for the period of time prohibited by this subdivision shall be prima facie evidence that the owner unlawfully stopped, placed or parked such vehicle. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.02)  
Sec. 34-273. - Authority to move or remove. 
(a)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street, highway, other public place or upon private property without the consent of the owner of such land, in violation of this subdivision, such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle or to require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same to a position off the street, alley, other public property or off the private property. 
(b)  Any police officer is also authorized to remove the vehicle from the street, alley or other public place or from the private property to a garage or storage area maintained by the town or to such other place as the town manager may designate after contracting for such wrecker service and storage facilities as he may deem necessary. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.02) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt procedures for the abatement and removal of abandoned vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.011.  
Sec. 34-274. - Impoundment. 
All such property described in section 34-272 which is taken into custody shall be registered in a record book provided for that purpose and shall be tagged, and impoundment record cards shall be maintained on all vehicles. The chief of police shall enter upon his record and upon the tag or upon the impoundment card the following information: 
(1)  Description of the property; 
(2)  Time and place seized and by whom; 
(3)  Name of the owner and lienholders, if known; 
(4)  Storage and hauling charges accrued against the property; 
(5)  The reason for impounding; 
(6)  An inventory of articles or materials in the vehicle. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.03)  
Sec. 34-275. - Charges. 
The charges made against such vehicle shall be the actual expense incurred by the town in hauling and storing the vehicle, except that there shall be a minimum charge as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code for the storage of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.03)  
Sec. 34-276. - Taking abandoned vehicle into custody; notice. 
(a)  The town shall send notice of abandonment to: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of each motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor taken into custody by the agency or for which a report is received under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.031; and 
(2)  Each lienholder recorded under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 501.001 et seq. for the motor vehicle or under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.001 et seq. for the watercraft or outboard motor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.012(a). 
(b)  The notice required under subsection (a) of this section must: 
(1)  Be sent by certified mail not later than the tenth day after the date the town: 
a.  Takes the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor into custody; or 
b.  Receives the report under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.031; 
(2)  Specify the year, make, model and identification number of the item; 
(3)  Give the location of the facility where the item is being held; 
(4)  Inform the owner and lienholder of the right to claim the item not later than the 20th day after the date of the notice on payment of: 
a.  Towing, preservation and storage charges; or 
b.  Garagekeeper's charges and fees under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.032; and 
(5)  State that failure of the owner or lienholder to claim the item during the period specified by subsection (a)(4) of this section is: 
a.  A waiver by that person of all right, title and interest in the item; and 
b.  Consent to the sale of the item at a public auction. 
(c)  Notice by publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor was abandoned is sufficient notice under this subdivision if: 
(1)  The identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined; 
(2)  The registration has no address for the owner; or 
(3)  The determination with reasonable certainty of the identity and address of all lienholders is impossible. 
(d)  Notice by publication: 
(1)  Must be published in the same period that is required by subsection (b) of this section for notice by certified mail and contain all of the information required by that subsection; and 
(2)  May contain a list of more than one abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.05) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.012(b)—(d).  
Sec. 34-277. - Storage fees. 
The town or the agent of the town that takes into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor is entitled to reasonable storage fees: 
(1)  For not more than ten days, beginning on the day the item is taken into custody and ending on the day the required notice is mailed; and 
(2)  Beginning on the day after the day the agency mails the notice and ending on the day accrued charges are paid and the vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor is removed. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.013.  
Sec. 34-278. - Auction or use of abandoned items; waiver of rights. 
(a)  If an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor is not claimed under section 34-276: 
(1)  The owner or lienholder waives all rights and interests in the item and consents to the sale of the item by public auction. 
(2)  The law enforcement agency may sell the item at a public auction or use the item as provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.016. 
(b)  Proper notice of the auction shall be given. A garagekeeper who has a garagekeeper's lien shall be notified of the time and place of the auction. 
(c)  The purchaser of a motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor: 
(1)  Takes title free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership; 
(2)  Shall receive a sales receipt from the law enforcement agency; and 
(3)  Is entitled to register the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor and receive a certificate of title. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.014.  
Sec. 34-279. - Auction proceeds. 
(a)  The town is entitled to reimbursement from the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor for: 
(1)  The cost of the auction; 
(2)  Towing, preservation and storage fees resulting from the taking into custody; and 
(3)  The cost of notice or publication as required by section 34-276. 
(b)  After deducting the reimbursement allowed under subsection (a) of this section, the proceeds of the sale shall be held for 90 days for the owner or lienholder of the vehicle. 
(c)  After the period provided by subsection (b) of this section, proceeds unclaimed by the owner or lienholder shall be deposited in an account that may be used for the payment of auction, towing, preservation, storage, and notice and publication fees resulting from taking other vehicles, watercraft or outboard motors into custody if the proceeds from the sale of the other items are insufficient to meet those fees. 
(d)  A town may transfer funds in excess of $1,000.00 from the account to the police department's general revenue fund account to be used by the police department. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.08) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.015.  
Sec. 34-280. - Duties of property control officer. 
The property control officer or his duly authorized representative shall conduct any auction referred to in this subdivision. He shall keep an accurate statement of each motor vehicle sold and the price bid and paid therefor. The property control officer shall make a complete report in writing to the finance officer of the time, place and manner of conducting the sale. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.06)  
Sec. 34-281. - Public auction; place and hour; cash sales. 
The public auction provided for in this subdivision shall be conducted at the place and hour designated in the notice, and all sales shall be for cash. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.07)  
Sec. 34-282. - Disposition of worthless property. 
Any property, except abandoned motor vehicles, which has been listed and offered for sale and for which no price or sum has been offered, if deemed by the property control officer to be worthless and without sale value, shall be disposed of in such manner as he shall direct. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.09)  
Sec. 34-283. - Lien for towing and storage. 
(a)  The town shall have a lien on all abandoned, stolen and/or recovered motor vehicles for towing and storage charges in the amounts as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  Any such lien shall be prior and superior to any and all other liens, except for ad valorem taxes. Such liens shall be satisfied first from the proceeds from the sales of any motor vehicles under the terms of this subdivision, except that if a lien is asserted for ad valorem taxes, the lien for ad valorem taxes shall first be satisfied. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.10)  
Sec. 34-284. - Leaving or abandoning vehicles unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to leave standing or parked in or on any public street, alley, other public place or upon private property without the consent of the owner of such land an abandoned vehicle. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.01(a))  
Secs. 34-285—34-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERSONAL PROPERTY OTHER THAN VEHICLES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned or unclaimed property, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.17. 
 
Sec. 34-311. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned personal property means personal property that has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than 48 hours, or personal property that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours, or personal property left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state or federal highway within the town for more than 48 hours. 
Person designated by the town means an officer or employee of the town who is designated by the town to be primarily responsible for the disposition of property under this division. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-312. - Abandoned personal property deemed nuisance; authority to move or remove. 
If personal property is found unattended or unoccupied upon a street, highway, alley, other public place or upon private property without the consent of the owner of such land, in violation of any of the provisions of this division, the property is hereby declared a nuisance. The fact that such personal property is unattended or unoccupied for the period of time prohibited by this division shall be prima facie evidence that the owner unlawfully placed or parked such abandoned personal property. Whenever any police officer finds personal property upon a street, highway, other public place or upon private property without the consent of the owner of such land, in violation this division, such officer is hereby authorized to move such personal property or to require the person in charge of the property to move the property to a position off the street, alley, other public property or off the private property. Any police officer is also authorized to remove the personal property from the street, alley or other public place or from the private property to a garage or storage area maintained by the town, or to such other place as the town manager may designate after contracting for such service and storage facilities as the town manager may deem necessary. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.02)  
Sec. 34-313. - Impoundment. 
All such property described in this division which is taken into custody shall be registered in a record book provided for that purpose and shall be tagged. The chief of police shall enter upon his record and upon the tag the following information: 
(1)  Description of the property; 
(2)  Time and place seized and by whom; 
(3)  Name of the owner and lienholders, if known; 
(4)  Storage and hauling charges accrued against the property; 
(5)  The reason for impounding; 
(6)  An inventory of articles or materials in the personal property. 
(7)  The name of the person impounding such property. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.03)  
Sec. 34-314. - Charges by town for hauling and storage. 
The charges made against such property shall be the actual expense incurred by the town in hauling and storing the personal property, except that there shall be a minimum charge as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code for the storage of personal property. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.03)  
Sec. 34-315. - Notice; publication; use of proceeds. 
(a)  The person designated by the town shall mail a notice to the last known address of the owner of such property by certified mail. Such notice shall describe the property being held, give the name and address of the officer holding such property, and shall state that if the owner does not claim such property within 90 days from the date of the notice, such property will be disposed of, and the proceeds, after deducting the reasonable expense of keeping such property and the costs of the disposition, shall be placed in the treasury of the town. 
(b)  If the property has a fair market value of $500.00 or more and the owner or the address of the owner is unknown, the person designated by the town shall cause to be published once in a paper of general circulation in the town a notice containing a general description of the property held, the name of the owner, if known, the name and address of the officer holding such property, and a statement that if the owner does not claim such property within 90 days from the date of the publication, such property will be disposed of, and the costs of the disposition shall be placed in the treasury of the town. If the property has a fair market value of less than $500.00 and the owner or the address of the owner is unknown, the person designated by the town may sell or donate the property. The person designated by the town shall deposit the sale proceeds, after deducting the reasonable expense of keeping the property and costs of the sale, in the treasury of the town. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.17(b), (c). 
(c)  The sale under this division of any property that has a fair market value of $500.00 or more shall be preceded by a notice published once at least 14 days prior to the date of such sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the town stating the general description of the property, the names of the owner, if known, and the date and place that such sale will occur. This division does not require disposition by sale. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.05) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.17(d).  
Sec. 34-316. - Claim by real owner. 
The real owner of any property disposed of shall have the right to file a claim to the proceeds with the town council. A claim by the real owner must be filed not later than the 30th day after the date of disposition. If the claim is allowed by the town council, the town treasurer shall pay the owner such funds as were paid in to the town treasury as proceeds of the disposition. If the claim is denied by the town council or if the town council fails to act upon such claim within 90 days, the claimant may sue the town treasurer in a court of competent jurisdiction in the county, and upon sufficient proof of ownership, recover judgment against the town for the recovery of the proceeds of the disposition. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.05) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.17(e).  
Sec. 34-317. - Conversion; deposit of money. 
(a)  If the provisions of this division have been met and the property is scheduled for disposition, the police department or town agency that originally seized the property may request and have the property converted to their use. The town at any time may transfer the property to another municipal or county law enforcement agency for the use of that agency. The agency last using the property shall return the property to the person designated by the town for disposition when the agency has completed the intended use of the property. 
(b)  If the abandoned or unclaimed personal property is money, the person designated by the town may, after giving notice under this division, deposit the money in the treasury of the town without conducting the sale as required by subsection 34-315(c). 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.05) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.17(g), (h).  
Sec. 34-318. - Decline of bid due to insufficiency. 
While offering the property for sale under this division, if a person designated by the town considers any bid as insufficient, the person may decline the bid and reoffer the property for sale. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.17(i).  
Sec. 34-319. - Duties of property control officer. 
The property control officer, or his duly authorized representative, shall conduct any auction referred to in this division. He shall keep an accurate statement of each item of personal property sold and the price bid and paid for such item. The property control officer shall make a complete report in writing to the finance officer of the time, place and manner of conducting the sale. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.06)  
Sec. 34-320. - Public auction; place and hour designated; cash sales. 
The public auction provided for in this division shall be conducted at the place and hour designated in the notice, and all sales shall be for cash. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.07)  
Sec. 34-321. - Disposition of funds from auction. 
All funds received on account of any auction held under the provisions of this division shall be delivered to the finance officer, who shall give his receipt therefor. The finance officer is hereby required to place all funds received by him under and by virtue of this division to the credit of the general fund, except for the sale of abandoned motor vehicles which shall be handled as provided in section 34-278. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.08)  
Sec. 34-322. - Disposition of worthless property. 
Any property, except abandoned motor vehicles, which has been listed and offered for sale and for which no price or sum has been offered, if deemed by the property control officer to be worthless and without sale value, shall be disposed of in such manner as he shall direct. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.09)  
Sec. 34-323. - Leaving or abandoning property unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to leave in or on any public street, alley, other public place or upon private property without the consent of the owner of such land abandoned personal property. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 9.01(a))  
Secs. 34-324—34-350. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL AND SPA STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Swimming pool code, § 14-171 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34-351. - Title, purpose, intent and applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the town public swimming pool and spa design, construction, operation and maintenance regulations. 
(b)  This article shall apply to the design, construction, operation and maintenance of all swimming pools and spas as defined in the Texas Department of Health, Standards for Public Swimming Pools and Spas, 25 TAC 265.181 et seq. including all facilities incident thereto. 
(c)  The purpose of this article shall be to control and regulate the design, construction, operation, and maintenance of all public swimming pools and spas within the town; to provide for the issuance of operating permits, and to provide penalties and remedies so that health and safety hazards may be minimized. 
(d)  The intent of this article shall be to address clean, healthful, and safe practices for all public swimming pools and spas which may be constructed and operated within the town. 
(e)  This article shall apply to the design, construction, operation and maintenance of all non-residential swimming pools and spas which may be located within the town regardless of when the swimming pool or spa was constructed. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.01), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-352. - Standards for Public Pools and Spas adopted. 
Standards for Public Pools and Spas, 25 TAC 265.181 et seq., a copy of which is on file in the office of the town secretary, is hereby adopted and incorporated in this section as if the same was copied in its entirety and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the town, except as amended in this article. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.02), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-353. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certified pool operator (CPO) means any individual who has taken and successfully passed a certified pool operator course and who has in their possession a certificate or documentation of such current status. 
Certified pool operator course means a course accredited by the department of health as provided in 25 TAC 265.203. 
Make-up water means water which is added to a swimming pool to bring the water level up to the design or normal operating level. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, governmental agency, club or organization of any kind. 
Public swimming pool or spa means any pool or spa as defined under 25 TAC 265.182(94) that is not constructed or maintained in conjunction with a single-family residence or two-residence town house. 
Remodel means the replacement of or modification to a public swimming pool or spa, structure, circulation system and/or its appurtenances such as the design, configuration and/or operating characteristics, but does not include normal maintenance and repair. If the work involves the replacement of equipment which had been previously approved, but that does not meet the standards set forth in this article, then the equipment or structure must be designed and constructed to comply with all provisions of this article. 
Residual chlorine level means the amount of measurable chlorine remaining in the water following chlorination and is composed of the following components: 
(1)  Free available residual chlorine level means the amount of chlorine which is available to inactivate microorganisms and which has not reacted with ammonia, nitrogenous material and other material in swimming pool water; 
(2)  Combined residual chlorine level (also called "chloramine") means the amount of chlorine which has reacted with ammonia and other nitrogenous material to form chloro-ammonia compounds; 
(3)  Total residual chlorine level means the arithmetic sum of free available residual chlorine and combined residual chlorine. 
Shall is mandatory and not merely directory; should is recommendatory; and may is permissive. 
Superchlorinate means the addition to swimming pool water of an amount of chlorine sufficient to produce a free available residual which is at least equal to ten times the amount of combined residual chlorine plus the required minimum level of free available residual chlorine in order to oxidize the ammonia and nitrogenous materials which may be dissolved in the public swimming pool or spa water. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.03), 8-21-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-354. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
The enforcement of the rules and the provisions of this article shall be by the town manager, or his duly appointed representative. Any references in the rules to regulatory authority or local regulatory representative shall mean the town manager, or his duly appointed representative. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.04), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-355. - Issuance of operating health permit. 
(a)  No owner, operator or person in control of a public swimming pool or spa shall allow anyone to use it unless a valid health permit to operate such swimming pool or spa has been applied for and obtained from the town regulatory authority. Such permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked for cause as prescribed in this article. 
(b)  Applications for a permit to operate a swimming pool or spa shall be made to the town regulatory authority on forms provided by that department. The applicant shall certify that he is knowledgeable about and understands and is capable of operating the swimming pool for which the operating permit is requested. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of an operating health permit for a public swimming pool or spa at least one preopening and preoperational inspection must be conducted. No operator of a permitted public swimming pool or spa shall reopen after having been closed for 30 days or longer, without having first obtained a preopening and preoperational inspection. This inspection is to verify that the pool or spa is constructed in accordance with all approved plans and requirements, and the water chemistry meets or exceeds the minimum requirement set forth by this article, prior to its opening and use by the public. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.05), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-356. - Permit fees; exemptions. 
(a)  No operating permit shall be issued for a public swimming pool or spa until the applicant has paid the permit fees as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  No fee shall be charged to obtain an operating permit for any public swimming pool or spa owned and operated by a governmental agency, independent school district, and/or other nonprofit organizations. Proper documentation of tax-exempt status under federal or state law must be provided to the regulatory authority at the time of application in order to be exempt from the permit fee. 
(c)  All permit fees shall be paid to the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.06), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-357. - Certified pool operator required. 
(a)  Employment of certified pool operator. 
(1)  No person shall open a public swimming pool or spa for use on or after 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived unless the person shall have employed a registered certified pool operator. 
(2)  A registered certified pool operator must be employed by the permitted facility at all times. 
(b)  Duties of the certified pool operator. 
(1)  The certified pool operator shall be responsible for the sanitation, safety, and proper maintenance of the pool or spas and all associated physical and mechanical equipment. 
(2)  The certified pool operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all records and logs as required under this article. 
(c)  Registration with the town. 
(1)  The regulatory authority shall issue an official certified pool operator registration certificate to any individual who submits the required application, pays the required fee as provided in the fee schedule found in the appendix A of this Code and provides acceptable documentation of completion of a certified pool operator course. 
(2)  A certified pool operator registration certificate shall be prominently posted at the permitted facility. 
(3)  A certified pool operator registration certificate is not transferable among locations or people. 
(d)  Registered certified pool operator replacement. 
(1)  A permitted public swimming pool or spa shall notify the regulatory authority, in writing, within seven days of the effective date of termination or permanent transfer of the certified pool operator; and 
(2)  A permitted public swimming pool or spa shall employ another certified pool operator within 30 days of the effective date of termination or permanent transfer of the previous certified pool operator. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.07), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-358. - Pool and spa construction and remodeling. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall hereafter construct or remodel a public swimming pool or spa without having first obtained a building permit. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a new public swimming pool or spa, or the remodel of an existing public swimming pool or spa, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction or remodeling shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review and approval. 
(b)  Plans for review. Plans submitted for review must contain the following: 
(1)  Three full sets of blue prints must be submitted for review. 
(2)  Plans must be drawn to scale, and include a top view and a side cross section view. 
(3)  All dimensions and specifications must be referenced on the plans, including surface area of the pool, spa, and deck, in square feet, and total volume of pool and/or spa in cubic feet and gallons, as well as turn-over rates, type of disinfection, etc. 
(4)  All plans submitted shall bear the stamp of the designing professional engineer or professional architect, along with a statement by the designing professional engineer or professional architect that the plans submitted are designed in compliance with all state and local codes relating to the design, construction, and operation of the public swimming pool or spa in effect at the time of the submission of plans. 
(5)  Plans must contain detailed drawings, descriptions and specifications to include: 
a.  Type, location, and number of drains (outlets); 
b.  Type, location, and number of inlets (jets); 
c.  Type, location, and number of skimmer drains; 
d.  Type, location, and number of filters; 
e.  Type, location, and number of pumps; 
f.  Type, location, and number of lights; 
g.  Type, location, and number of depth markers; 
h.  Entries into pool/spa (steps, stairs, ladders, etc.); 
i.  Type and location of anti-backflow protection, and its location, installed between the town potable water supply and the pool or spa; 
j.  Type and number of chemical feeders (sanitizer dispensers-chlorinators, brominators, etc.); 
k.  Locations of all gauges, flowmeters, etc.; 
l.  Diving boards; 
m.  Life guard stands (if required) and life saving equipment; 
n.  Bath house and associated appurtenances; 
o.  Fencing, to include materials, height, layout, gates, hardware, etc.; 
p.  Telephone; 
q.  Clock (by spa); 
r.  Description, location, and drawings of all required signage. 
(c)  Inspections. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a newly constructed or remodeled swimming pool or spa at least one preopening or preoperational inspection must be conducted by the regulatory authority. This inspection is to verify that the pool or spa is constructed in accordance with all approved plans and requirements, and the water chemistry meets or exceeds the minimum requirement set forth in this article, prior to its opening and use by the public. 
(d)  Fee. An appropriate fee for plan review, inspection and reinspection shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.08), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-359. - Operation of a public swimming pool or spa. 
(a)  If upon inspection at any time the public swimming pool or spa is found not to be constructed in accordance with approved plans, the public swimming pool or spa shall cease operations until adequate evidence is provided to show compliance with this article. 
(b)  A manager of operations, a manager of the premises on which a public swimming pool or spa is located, the owner of a public swimming pool or spa, or the certified pool operator on duty shall not: 
(1)  Knowingly permit a condition to exist that endangers the life, health, or safety of a swimmer or that violates a provision of this article; 
(2)  Knowingly permit a person to occupy a pool or spa who is known to be or suspected of being infected with a transmissible condition of communicable disease; 
(3)  Fail to post any of the required placards or signage containing pool and/or spa regulations and instructions in conspicuous places within a pool or spa area or enclosure, as required. 
(c)  Every public swimming pool and spa shall be free of scum and foreign matter including sediment, dirt, slime, algae, and all other foreign matter that might be conducive to the transmission of disease. Debris shall be removed daily. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.09), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-360. - Manual application of chemicals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall add chemicals manually and directly to the water of any public swimming pool or spa except under special or emergency conditions, or as directly authorized by the regulatory authority. 
(b)  Whenever it is necessary to manually add any chemicals directly to the pool or spa waters, bathers shall be excluded from the pool or spa until the chemical is dissolved completely or completely diffused thoroughly throughout the swimming pool or spa water. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.10), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-361. - Water chemistry testing frequency. 
(a)  A test for the disinfectant level, pH, and clarity shall be performed and recorded a minimum of once every four hours that the public swimming pool or spa is open for use. This frequency shall be increased as defined in 25 TAC 265.204 for specific types and uses of pools. 
(b)  In lieu of the above testing frequency, if an automated sanitizer and pH dispensing system is installed and in use, a test for sanitizer and pH shall be conducted and recorded once per day. 
(c)  The operator of a public pool and/or spa shall be required to provide and maintain a test kit which is capable of detecting disinfectant residual by the DPD method (dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine), in parts per million, (ppm). The pH test kit shall be accurate to the nearest 0.2 pH units. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.11), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-362. - Operational records. 
(a)  Proper operating, maintenance and test records shall be maintained for every public swimming pool or spa when in use, and shall be available for inspection by the regulatory authority upon request. 
(b)  Operating records shall include daily figures for at least the following items: 
(1)  Disinfectant residual readings; e.g., free available residual chlorine and total residual chlorine, or equivalent; 
(2)  pH readings; 
(3)  Amounts of chemicals used; 
(4)  Cyanuric acid (if used); 
(5)  Total alkalinity; 
(6)  Readings of any other chemical tests; 
(7)  Water temperature for heated pools and spas; 
(8)  Clarity of the swimming pool water at the deepest point; 
(9)  Maintenance and servicing of equipment; and 
(10)  Space for general comments. 
(c)  Calcium hardness shall be tested and recorded once a month. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.12), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-363. - Requirement of bathers. 
No person shall be allowed the use of a public swimming pool or spa if he has an infectious/communicable disease, open cuts, wounds, burns, etc., engages in rough or inappropriate activity; brings animals (except guide animals assisting the disabled) into the pool area; purposely spits or blows the nose into the pool/spa; misuses lifesaving equipment; or brings glass (except eyeglasses) into the pool/spa area. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.13), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-364. - Temporary closure of swimming pool/spa. 
(a)  If it is determined by the regulatory authority that the operation or maintenance of the public pool or spa facility constitutes a serious health or safety hazard as specified in 25 TAC 265 for the users, the regulatory authority shall require closure of the pool or spa facility immediately. A public swimming pool or spa facility shall be temporarily closed for use whenever any of the following conditions occur and shall not be reopened for use until the condition has been brought into compliance and the appropriate reinspection fee paid, and a reinspection conducted by the regulatory authority to verify that all hazardous conditions have been eliminated, such as: 
(1)  The amount of a residual disinfectant is less than, or greater than, the minimum and/or maximum amounts specified in 25 TAC 265.204 (a); 
(2)  The pH of the swimming pool/spa water does not comply with the provisions in 25 TAC 265.204 (a); 
(3)  If any of the main drain covers are loose, missing, damaged and/or of a nonapproved anti-vortex design; 
(4)  The clarity of the water does not comply with the provisions in 25 TAC 265.204 (a); 
(5)  The temperature of a heated pool is greater than 98 degrees Fahrenheit or spa water is greater than 104 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(6)  There is malfunction or nonfunction of the recirculation system; 
(7)  If the public swimming pool or spa yard enclosure is found to not be in compliance with the provisions of 25 TAC 265.200; 
(8)  The swimming pool or spa does not conform to the construction permit plans; 
(9)  There is any other condition, which may endanger the health, safety, or welfare of persons using the swimming pool. 
(b)  Failure to pay the required reinspection fees in the instances noted in subsection (a) of this section will result in the immediate suspension of the public swimming pool or spa's permit to operate, and the facility ordered to cease operation immediately. The public swimming pool or spa shall remain closed until the violations are corrected, all required fees are paid, and a reinspection is conducted. 
(c)  The reinspection fee shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.14), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-365. - Suspension of operating permit. 
(a)  If the regulatory authority determines that the permitted public swimming pool or spa cannot be properly maintained at the required disinfectant levels, pH levels, water testing, record maintenance, and/or the maintenance of a full time staff member who is a certified pool operator (CPO) any time the facility is open for use, the regulatory authority may suspend the operating permit and order the permit holder to equip or retrofit the pool or spa with a fully automated chemical control system, capable of both monitoring and dispensing sanitizing chemicals and pH maintenance chemicals into the pool or spa, and maintaining those levels at the accepted levels set forth by this article. 
(b)  If the regulatory authority determines that the operation or maintenance of any public swimming pool or spa is such as to constitute an imminent hazard to the health and safety of the public, the operating permit shall be suspended immediately and the swimming pool or spa shall be closed immediately for use and shall remain closed until the necessary remedial action has been completed, the appropriate reinspection fee paid, and a follow up inspection has been conducted by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  An operating permit that has been suspended may be reissued only upon presentation of evidence that the deficiencies and/or irregularities that caused the suspension have been corrected, and the appropriate reinspection fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.15), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-366. - Closed swimming pools and spas. 
(a)  Upon an order of closure, the public pool or spa operator shall post signs at every entrance that is accessible to patrons, or at least two signs at opposite ends of the pool or spa, that state "Pool Closed" or "Spa Closed" in at least four-inch minimum high letters. No individual or person shall enter a public swimming pool or spa, or its enclosure, that has been closed by the regulatory authority or its operator, when such signs are posted. 
(b)  The operator of a pool or spa closed by order of the regulatory authority shall secure the pool or spa yard with an enclosure adequate to exclude any unauthorized entry. 
(c)  The regulatory authority shall have the right to lock and/or chain entrances to public swimming pools and/or spas if in the regulatory authority's opinion the facility is dangerous to public health, the operator is not enforcing closure and/or bathers are disregarding warnings. 
(d)  The regulatory authority shall have the right to post signs at a public swimming pool or spa stating that the facility is closed. A person commits an offense if he covers, removes, damages, or alters any sign or notice posted by order of the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.16), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-367. - Abandoned, neglected, inoperable, and hazardous public swimming pools and spas. 
(a)  No owner, operator or person in control of any public swimming pool or spa, permitted or unpermitted, shall suffer or permit the pool or spa to remain in a condition so as to create a public health hazard or a nuisance to the general public, regardless if the pool is open, closed, not in operation, or abandoned. 
(b)  The following conditions are hereby declared a public nuisance: 
(1)  Any time a public swimming pool or spa containing any amount of water shall not maintain water clarity so all parts of the pool or spa bottom can be easily seen. 
(2)  Any time a public swimming pool or spa fails to maintain an adequate fence or barrier around the pool or spa that complies with state law. 
(3)  Any time a public swimming pool or spa is not adequately secured to prevent unauthorized entry. 
(4)  Any time a public swimming pool or spa shall become a harborage or breeding place for insects and/or rodents. 
(c)  When the regulatory authority determines that an imminent risk to public health exists, the regulatory authority shall have the authority, but not an obligation, to enter private property, without notice, to abate a public nuisance thereon by erecting a fence or barrier adequate to prevent entry to a public swimming pool or spa. The regulatory authority shall be able to recover its costs expended to abate the nuisance, including placing a lien upon the real property affected, only after compliance with the procedures provided in section 14-216 for the abatement of dangerous structures. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.17), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-368. - Interfering with or hindering the regulatory authority. 
It shall be unlawful for any permit holder, owner, certified pool operator, manager, person-in-charge, other employee, or user of a public swimming pool or spa to interfere with or hinder the regulatory authority in the exercise of its duties under this article. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.18), 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 34-369. - Penalty; additional enforcement provisions. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this article, shall also be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00, such offenses being violations of the health and safety ordinance of the town. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. This section shall be in addition to and cumulative of the provisions for abatement of the nuisance by the town and charging the cost of such against the owner of the property. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection (a) of this section any violation of any provision of this article which constitutes an immediate danger or threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the town for such purpose. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained in this article, the town may enforce the provisions of this article pursuant to the applicable provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54 which chapter provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(d)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 2(5.19), 8-21-2000)  
Secs. 34-370—34-385. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 56-10, § 2, adopted Sept. 20, 2010, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 34-387—34-397, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to on-site sewage disposal and derived from Ord. No. 99-02, § 2, adopted 12-16-2002. 
 
Sec. 34-386. - Adopting chapter 366. 
The Town of Flower Mound, Texas, clearly understands that there are technical criteria, legal requirements, and administrative procedures and duties associated with regulating on-site sewage facilities, and will fully enforce V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Ch. 366 and V.T.C.A., Texas Water Code, Chs. 7 and 37. 
(Ord. No. 56-10, § 2, 9-20-2010)  
Sec. 34-387. - Area of jurisdiction. 
The rules adopted by this article shall apply to all of the area within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Ord. No. 56-10, § 2, 9-20-2010)  
Sec. 34-388. - On-site sewage facility rules. 
This article shall apply to any on-site sewage facility within the jurisdictional area of the town. Any OSSF within the jurisdiction of the town must comply with the rules adopted in section 34-389 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 56-10, § 2, 9-20-2010)  
Sec. 34-389. - On-site sewage facility rules adopted. 
V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Ch. 366 and Administrative Rules 30 TAC Chapter 30 Sections A and G, Chapter 285 (collectively referred to as the "rules"), promulgated by the state commission on environmental quality for on-site sewage facilities ("OSSF"), are hereby adopted, and all officials and employees of the town having the duties under said rules are authorized to perform such duties as are required of them under said rules, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 56-10, § 2, 9-20-2010)  
Sec. 34-390. - Incorporation by reference. 
The rules and all future amendments and revisions thereto are incorporated herein by reference and are thus made a part of this article. A copy of the rules shall be filed and maintained in the office of the town secretary, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section as if the same were copied in their entirety and the provisions of such rules shall be controlling within the town. 
(Ord. No. 56-10, § 2, 9-20-2010)  
Sec. 34-391. - Additional regulations. 
The town, pursuant to its home rule authority and wishing to adopt more stringent rules for its OSSF ordinance, understands that the more stringent local ordinance shall take precedence over the corresponding rules, hereby adopts more stringent standards relative to its on-site sewage facilities ordinance. Listed below are the more stringent rules adopted by the town council: 
(a)  No on-site sewage facilities shall be permitted on tracts of land or lots with a density of more than one dwelling unit per two acres, except as follows: 
(1)  Residential developments utilizing the approved cluster development option established in the town's master plan may install individual OSSFs on lots of at least one-half acre in size if served by a public water supply; 
(2)  An individual on-site sewage facility may be approved for smaller tracts of land as provided in 30 Texas Administrative Code § 285.4(b)(1). 
(b)  With regard to all on-site sewage facilities identified in [30 TAC] § 285.91(12) relating to tables, which require an affidavit to the public, prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of such a facility shall submit a certified copy of an affidavit supplied by the permitting authority which has been duly recorded at the county clerk's office and filed in reference to the real property deed to the tract on which the on-site sewage facility is to be installed. 
(c)  Every on-site sewage facility to be constructed, repaired, extended, or otherwise altered must first obtain a permit prior to the performance of any construction, extension, repair or other alteration work regardless of the size of the tract of land. 
(d)  All construction, alteration, extension, or repair of any type of on-site sewage facility shall be performed by a TCEQ licensed installer. No property owner or homeowner (herein collectively referred to as "owner") shall install an OSSF unless the owner is a licensed OSSF installer. 
(e)  In order to ensure that an OSSF is designed, installed, and maintained properly, such that the OSSF will be more protective of the environment, site evaluations must be performed by either a registered professional sanitarian or a registered professional engineer; who must have successfully completed a site evaluation training course approved by the TCEQ, must be in good standing with their respective professional licensing program, and the site evaluation must bear their original seal and original signature. 
(f)  A properly designed OSSF is more protective of public health, safety and the environment; therefore, all design and planning materials for any OSSF must be prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered professional sanitarian, and bear their original seal and original signature. 
(g)  A properly installed OSSF is more protective of public health, safety and the environment; therefore, a licensed, registered OSSF installer must be present on site at the time of the final on site inspection. 
(h)  The town may periodically inspect any on-site sewage facility, in order to ensure that a condition threatening the public health, safety and environment is not present. 
(i)  A properly monitored system is more protective of public health, safety and the environment; therefore, any building/structure, which is not used as a single-family dwelling, using an on-site sewage facility and receiving secondary treatment of the effluent shall be checked and maintained monthly by a contracted TCEQ licensed maintenance provider, and reports made to the town once a month. A chlorine residual or fecal coliform test shall be made at each site visit where disinfection is required. One BOD and TSS grab sample test shall be conducted per year. The minimum acceptable test results shall be sent to the town within 14 days after the test was performed. 
(j)  All surface spray systems shall have timers installed and set to go off between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(k)  If the owner where a malfunctioning OSSF exists fails to properly repair the OSSF in order to eliminate the health hazard, the town may take one or more of the following actions: 
(1)  Issue citations to the owner; 
(2)  Shut off the water to the house; 
(3)  Abate the nuisance as described in this chapter, and assess the expense to the owner as described therein; and 
(4)  Take any and all other appropriate measures allowed by law. 
The owner must take adequate measures as soon as practicable to abate an immediate health hazard. 
(l)  The town shall require the maintenance for all OSSF's identified in [30 TAC] 285.91(12), to be performed by a TCEQ licensed maintenance provider. 
(m)  Any person, contractor or entity doing business within the town, as an OSSF installer, repair company or maintenance provider, must register annually with the town, and pay the appropriate fee, as shown in appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 56-10, § 2, 9-20-2010; Ord. No. 29-14, § 2, 6-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-392. - Duties and powers. 
The director of environmental health or his or her duly appointed representative of the town is herewith declared the designated representative for the enforcement of these rules within the jurisdictional area. The appointed individual(s) must be approved and certified by the state commission on environmental quality before assuming the duties and responsibilities of the designated representative of the town. 
(Ord. No. 56-10, § 2, 9-20-2010)  
Sec. 34-393. - Collection of fees. 
All persons, companies, or other entities applying for permits, inspections, and re-inspections shall pay the permit fees as provided in the fee schedule in appendix A of this Code. All fees collected for permits and/or inspections shall be made payable to the town. A fee of $10.00 will be also be collected for each on-site sewage facility permit to be paid to the on-site wastewater treatment research council as required by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Ch. 367. 
(Ord. No. 56-10, § 2, 9-20-2010)  
Sec. 34-394. - Appeal. 
Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the permitting authority may appeal such action or decision to the town board of adjustment in writing within 15 calendar days of said action or decision. Failure to timely appeal renders the action or decision of the permitting authority final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 56-10, § 2, 9-20-2010)  
Sec. 34-395. - Penalties. 
This article adopts and incorporates all applicable penalty provisions related to on-site sewage facilities, which include, but are not limited to, those provisions found in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Chs. 341 and 366, V.T.C.A., Texas Water Code, Ch. 7, Ch. 26, and Ch. 37, and 30 TAC Chapter 30, Subchapters A and G, and Chapter 285. Further, an owner may be assessed a fine as provided in section 1-13(a) of this Code for each day that the on-site sewage facility remains un-repaired. 
Allegation and proof of a culpable mental state are not required for evidence of an offense committed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 56-10, § 2, 9-20-2010)  
Sec. 34-396. - Relinquishment. 
If the town council decides that it no longer wishes to regulate on-site sewage facilities in its area of jurisdiction, the town council shall follow the procedures outlined in the rules or as set forth below: 
(a)  The town council shall inform the state commission on environmental quality by certified mail at least 30 days before the published date of the public hearing notice that it wishes to relinquish all powers and authority granted it by the on-site sewage facility ordinance. 
(b)  The town shall post the required public notice in a newspaper regularly published or circulated in the area of jurisdiction not more than 30 days prior to the anticipated date of action by the authorized agent. 
(c)  The town shall send a copy of the public notice, a publisher's affidavit of public notice, and a certified copy of the minutes of the meeting of the town council to the state commission on environmental quality. 
(d)  After relinquishing its OSSF authority, the authorized agent understands that it may be subject to charge-back fees in accordance with 30 TAC § 285.10(d)(5) and § 285.14 after the date that delegation has been relinquished. 
(Ord. No. 56-10, § 2, 9-20-2010)  
Secs. 34-397—34-415. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OIL AND NATURAL GAS WELL DRILLING AND OPERATIONS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, adopted July 18, 2011, repealed the former Art. VII, Div. 1, § 34-416, Div. 2, § 34-417, Div. 3, § 34-418, Div. 4, § 34-419, Div. 5, §§ 34-420—34-425.1, Div. 6, § 34-426, Div. 7, §§ 34-427—34-430, Div. 8, § 34-431, Div. 9, § 34-432, Div. 10, § 34-433, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to oil and natural gas well drilling and operations and derived from Ord. No. 26-03, § 2, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 89-03, §§ 2, 3 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 29-05, § 2—8, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 23-07, §§ 2—12, 3-15-2007; Ord. No. 56-08, §§ 2—5, 9-15-2008; Ord. No. 51-09, § 2, adopted 12-7-2009. For a complete derivation, see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
 
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE 
 
Sec. 34-416. - Purpose. 
The exploration, development, and production of oil and gas in the town are activities that necessitate reasonable regulation to ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to enjoy their property and its benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards, and regulations for present and future operations related to the exploring, drilling, developing, producing, transporting, and storing of oil and gas and other substances produced in association with oil and gas within the corporate town limits, and to the extent allowed or may be allowed by state law, the extraterritorial jurisdiction, to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public; minimize the potential impact to property and mineral rights owners, protect the quality of the environment and encourage the orderly production of available mineral, oil, and gas resources. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 34-417. - Definitions. 
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of oil and gas wells not specifically defined shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment means "abandonment" as defined by the Texas Railroad Commission and includes the plugging of a well and the restoration of any well site as required by this article. 
Ambient noise level means the all encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources at the location except for those sources related to oil and gas drilling, production, and compression, constituting the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Best management practices are state-of-the-art mitigation measures applied on a site-specific basis to reduce, prevent or avoid adverse environmental or social impacts, and for purposes of this article, best management practices include those practices recommended by the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.), the United States Environmental Protection Agency's Natural Gas STAR Program, and/or other similarly recognized program, acceptable to and approved by the town. 
Blowout preventer means a mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, or other device or combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings, and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can be closed around the drill pipe or other tubular goods which completely close the top of the casing and are designed to prevent blowouts. 
Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portions thereof." 
Cathodic protection means an electrochemical corrosion control technique accomplished by applying a direct current to the structure that causes the structure potential to change from the corrosion potential to a protective potential in the immunity region. The required cathodic protection current is supplied by sacrificial anode materials or by an impressed current system. 
Closed loop mud system means a system utilized while drilling so that reserve pits are not used and instead steel bins are used to collect all drilling waste. 
Closest edge of construction or surface disturbance means and refers to the nearest point or location of the drill site or pad site. 
Commission or railroad commission means the Texas Railroad Commission, or any successor state regulatory agency. 
Completion of drilling, re-drilling, and re-working means the date the work is completed for the drilling, re-drilling, or re-working and the crew is released by completing its work or contract or by its employer. 
Compression facility means: 
(1)  Those facilities that compress natural gas after production-related activities which are conducted at or near the wellhead and prior to a point where the gas is transferred to a carrier for transport and serves more than one well; and/or 
(2)  A compressor that serves a pipeline. 
Days mean calendar days, unless otherwise noted. 
Daytime means the timeframe between 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
Derrick means any framework, tower, mast and/or structure used for lifting and positioning the drilling string and piping above the well bore, and containing the machinery for turning the drilling bit around in the bore hole and which is required or used in connection with drilling or re-working a well for the production of oil and/or gas. 
Drilling means digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing oil and/or gas or other hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting gas, water, or any other fluid or substance into the earth to develop, produce or improve the production of oil and/or natural gas or other hydrocarbons. 
Drilling equipment means the derrick, together with all parts of any apparatus to such structure, and every piece of apparatus, machinery or equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling. 
Drill site or pad site means the premises used during the drilling or re-working of a well or wells located there and subsequent life of a well or wells or any associated operation. 
Environmentally sensitive area means the same as that term is defined in section 98-32 of the town code, as amended. 
Exploration means geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for oil, gas, or other subsurface hydrocarbons. 
Fire and emergency services means the fire and emergency services department of the town. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to a general and temporary condition of partial or complete base flood inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland waters or from the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Frac or fracturing means the process of fracture stimulation of a rock formation. 
Gas means any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas. 
Gas well means any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of natural gas. 
Habitable structure means any structure suitable for human habitation or occupation, including but not limited to a single or multifamily residence(s), hotel, condominium building, building for commercial purposes and enclosed spaces in which individuals congregate for education, worship, amusement or similar purposes, or in which occupants are engaged at or in labor, and which is equipped with means of egress, light and ventilation facilities. Each building of a condominium regime is considered a separate habitable structure, but if a building is divided into apartments, then the entire building, not the individual apartments, is considered a habitable structure. 
Inspector means the oil and gas inspector designated by the town manager of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. Any technical advisor retained by the town pursuant to section 34-431 shall have the authority as the oil and gas inspector, pursuant to section 34-418. 
Nighttime means the timeframe between 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
Oil well means any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of oil. 
Operation site means the area used for development and production and all operational activities associated with oil and gas after drilling activities are complete, including any private access roadway utilized for such activities. 
Operator means, for each well, the person listed on the railroad commission form W-1 or form P-4 for an oil and gas well that is, or will be, actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well, including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as herein defined, is not the lessee under an oil and gas lease of any premises affected by the provisions of this article, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is no oil and gas lease relating to any premises affected by this article, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator. 
Permit means any written license granted by the town for the exploration, development, and production of oil and/or gas wells issued pursuant to rules and regulations of this article. Three types of permits may be issued by the town, including an oil well permit, gas well permit, or a combined permit for the exploration, development, and production of both oil and gas wells as indicated on a single application. 
Person means both the singular and the plural and means a natural person, a corporation, association, guardian, partnership, receiver, trustee, administrator, executor, and fiduciary or representative of any kind. 
Practicable means available and capable of being done after taking into consideration existing technology, costs, and logistics in light of the overall purpose of the activity. 
Public building means all buildings used or designed or intended to be used for the purpose of assembly of persons for such purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement, or health care. Public buildings include, but shall not be limited to, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories, mortuary chapels, dance halls, exhibition halls, museums, gymnasiums, bowling lanes, libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms, restaurants, churches, and hospitals. 
Public park means any land area dedicated to and/or maintained by the town for traditional park-like recreational purposes, but shall not include equestrian trails, trailheads, trails, and privately-owned or privately-managed golf courses. 
Re-drill means re-completion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than 150 feet from the existing well bore. 
Religious institution means any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Residence means a house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home, or other building designed for dwelling purposes, including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for an oil, gas, or combined well permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector. The term also includes structures attached to the residence, including but not limited to garages, porches, carports and similar structures. 
Re-working means re-completion or re-entry of an existing well within the existing bore hole or by deepening or sidetrack operations which do not extend more than 150 feet from the existing well bore, or replacement of well liners or casings. 
Right-of-way means public rights-of-way including streets, easements, and other property within the town and which is dedicated to the use and benefit of the public. 
School means any public or private primary, secondary and post-secondary educational facilities providing education up through and including college or university level courses or instruction; and any licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the state or by the town, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six children under 14 years of age, and for less than 24 hours per day. 
Storage tank means any vessel, having a liquid capacity that exceeds 230 L (60 gal.) containing a flammable or combustible product that is intended for fixed installation. 
Street means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area, or other public right-of-way, including the entire right-of-way. 
Tank means a container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of oil and gas or other hydrocarbons for holding or storing fluids. 
Tank battery means the point of collection (tanks) and disbursement (tank, meter, lease automated custody transfer [LACT] unit) of oil or gas from producing well(s). 
Technical advisor means such person(s) familiar with and educated in the oil and gas industry or the law as it relates to oil and gas matters who may be retained from time to time by the town. 
Town means the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Town attorney means the town attorney of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Town Code or Code means the code of ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, as amended. 
Town engineer means the town engineer of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Town manager means the town manager of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Town secretary means the town secretary of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Well means a hole or holes, bore or bores, to any horizon, formation, or strata used for the purpose of producing oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbon, brine water, or sulphur water, or used as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal or production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
DIVISION 3. - OIL AND GAS INSPECTOR 
 
Sec. 34-418. - Oil and gas inspector. 
(a)  The town manager shall designate an oil and gas inspector who shall enforce the provisions of this article. The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the intent and purpose of this article and its particular provisions. Failure of any person to comply with any such order or directive shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)  The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this article to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or directives of the state. Failure of any person to permit access to the oil and gas inspector shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  The oil and gas inspector shall conduct periodic operational inspections of all permitted wells in the town to determine that the wells are operating in accordance with proper safety parameters as set out in this article and all regulations of the commission. 
(d)  The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records, including any records sent to the commission, logs, reports and the like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well. Failure of any person to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
DIVISION 4. - AGENT 
 
Sec. 34-419. - Operator's agent. 
Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the State of Texas, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator so designating such agent shall within ten business days notify the town secretary in writing of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the town are discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
DIVISION 5. - OIL AND GAS WELL PERMITS 
 
Sec. 34-420. - Oil and gas well permit required. 
(a)  A person desiring to engage and/or operate in oil and/or gas production activities shall apply for and obtain an oil, gas, or combined well permit under this article. It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any person to drill any well, assist in any way in the site preparation, re-working, fracturing, or operation of any such well, or to conduct any activity related to the production of oil and/or gas without first obtaining an oil, gas, or combined well permit issued by the town in accordance with this division. Such activities include, but are not limited to, re-working, initial site preparation, drilling, operation, construction of derricks or tank batteries, fracturing, and pressurizing. 
(1)  A permit shall be required for seismic surveys. The operator conducting the seismic survey shall pay the appropriate fee for such permit, in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of this Code, and shall complete a written application for such permit, signed by the operator or some person duly authorized to sign on his or her behalf, no less than ten business days prior to the commencement of any seismic survey activities onsite, and in said permit application shall provide the following information to the oil and gas inspector: 
a.  Operator/applicant name, telephone number, address, and, if possible, email address; if the operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners. 
b.  Location of seismic survey. 
c.  Date and time the seismic survey will be conducted. 
d.  Detailed explanation of the seismic survey method to be used onsite. 
e.  Date and time the seismic survey will be completed. 
f.  Proof of insurance in the form of a standard commercial general liability insurance policy. This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed operations, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket contractual liability, broad form property damage, independent contractors' protective liability and personal injury. This coverage shall be a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence location for bodily injury and property damage. 
g.  A detailed map showing the location of all vibration and geophone points. 
(2)  Under no circumstances may explosive charges, including, but not limited to, dynamite, be used in any way related to the preparation and/or operation of conducting a seismic survey. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any provision contained herein, no seismic surveys shall be permitted on town property or in the right-of-way, as defined in this article. 
(b)  The operator must apply for and obtain an oil, gas, or combined well permit for the drilling, re-drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating or converting of each well. 
(c)  An oil, gas, or combined well permit shall not constitute authority for the re-entering and drilling of an abandoned well. An operator shall obtain a new well permit in accordance with the provisions of this section if the operator is re-entering and drilling an abandoned well. 
(d)  When an oil, gas, or combined well permit has been issued to the operator for the drilling, re-drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating, or converting of a well, such oil, gas, or combined well permit shall constitute sufficient authority for drilling, operation, production gathering or production maintenance, repair, re-working, testing, plugging and abandonment of the well and/or any other activity associated with mineral exploration at the site of such well; provided, however, that a new or amended permit shall be obtained before such well may be reworked for purposes of re-drilling, deepening or converting such well to a depth or use other than that set forth in the then current permit for such well. 
(e)  Any person who intends to re-work or re-drill a permitted well using a drilling rig, to fracture stimulate a permitted well after initial completion, or to conduct seismic surveys or other exploration activities shall give written notice to the oil and gas inspector no less than ten business days before the activities begin. The notice must identify where the activities will be conducted and must describe the activities in detail, including whether explosive charges will be used, the duration of the activities and the time the activities will be conducted. The notice must also provide the address and 24-hour phone number of the person conducting the activities. 
(f)  The following requirements shall apply to all fracture stimulation operations performed on a well: 
(1)  At least three business days before operations are commenced, the operator shall post a sign at the access road entrance of the well site advising the public of the date the operations will commence, said sign to be in accordance with the sign standards referenced in subsection 34-427(a)(36)a. herein; 
(2)  "Flowback" operations to recover fluids used during fracture stimulation shall be performed during daylight hours only unless the oil and gas inspector approves such operations during non-daylight hours; 
(3)  A watchperson shall be required at all times during such operations; and 
(4)  At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to the atmosphere without first directing the flow through separation equipment or into a portable tank. All formation fracturing operations shall be conducted during daylight hours unless the operator has notified and received authorization from the oil and gas inspector that fracturing operations will occur before or after daylight hours to meet safety requirements. 
(g)  An oil, gas, or combined well permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended, if drilling is not commenced within 60 days from the date of the issuance of the permit. Drilling must commence within 60 days from the date of the issuance of the permit on at least one well in order to maintain the validity of the permit for the multiple wells. A permit may be extended by the oil and gas inspector for an additional 60 days upon request by the operator and proof that the regulatory standards of the requested permit for such location have not changed. Any permit issued under this article shall otherwise expire two years after its initial issuance date if no drilling has commenced on the permitted pad site. Upon the expiration of such permit, within 90 days the operation site shall be restored to its original condition as nearly as practicable. 
(h)  The oil, gas, or combined well permits required by this division are in addition to and are not in lieu of any permit that may be required by any other provision of this Code or by any other governmental agency. 
(i)  No additional oil, gas, or combined well permit or filing fees shall be required for: 
(1)  Any wells, existing and approved by the town on the effective date of this article; or 
(2)  Any wells in existence or on any wells on which drilling has commenced on land annexed into the town after the effective date of this article. 
(j)  No oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any public park. 
(k)  No oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within 750 feet of a floodplain as measured from the closest edge of construction or surface disturbance. For floodplains identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on the most current federal insurance rate map (FIRM), the distance measurement from the closest edge of construction or surface disturbance shall be calculated in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the base flood elevation topographic contour. 
(l)  No oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be issued for any fresh water fracture pond or well to be drilled or drill site that is in non-compliance with any standard, provision, procedure, and/or recommendation as described in the Town of Flower Mound Engineering Services Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual. 
(m)  No oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled on town-owned property without the prior consent of the town council. The town council shall review the insurance and security requirements, potential environmental impacts, and threats to public health and safety, on an individual basis prior to town council issuing the permit. 
(n)  No oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within 750 feet of a designated environmentally sensitive area. The distance from the closest edge of construction or surface disturbance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the environmentally sensitive area. 
(o)  Pursuant to section 34-432 of this article, the oil and gas board of appeals may issue variances to reduce the distance requirements set out in subsections (k) and (n) of this section. In no event shall such reduction exceed 25 percent of the prescribed minimum setback distance. 
(p)  By acceptance of any permit issued pursuant to this article, the operator expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this article. The terms of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated in any oil, gas, or combined well permit issued pursuant to this article with the same force and effect as if this article was set forth verbatim in such oil, gas, or combined well permit. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-421. - Oil and gas well permit application and filing fees. 
(a)  Every application for an oil, gas, or combined well permit issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing signed by the operator, or some person duly authorized to sign on his or her behalf, and filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
(b)  Every application shall be accompanied by an appropriate permit fee that shall be assessed per well and in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of this Code. 
(c)  An appropriate inspection fee shall be assessed annually per well and in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of this Code. Said inspection fee shall be paid annually beginning on the first anniversary of the initial issuance date of the subject oil and/or gas well permit and each year thereafter on the anniversary date thereof. 
(d)  The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date of the application. 
(2)  An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for the oil and/or gas operation, the parcel, and the production unit and name of the geologic formation as used by the commission. Property recorded by plat shall reference subdivision, block and lot numbers, as applicable. 
(3)  Map showing proposed transportation route and road for equipment, chemicals or waste products used or produced by the oil and/or gas operation. 
(4)  Proposed well name(s). 
(5)  Surface owner name(s), telephone number(s), address(es), and, if possible, email address(es), of the lease property. 
(6)  Mineral lessee name(s), telephone number(s), address(es), and, if possible, email address(es). 
(7)  Mineral owner name(s), telephone number(s), address(es), and, if possible, email address(es). 
(8)  Operator/applicant name(s), telephone number(s), address(es), and, if possible, email address(es); if the operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners. 
(9)  Name, telephone number, address, and, if possible, email address of the individual designated to receive notice. 
(10)  Name of representative with supervisory authority over all oil and/or gas operation site activities and a 24-hour phone number. 
(11)  Location and description of all improvements, including water wells, and habitable structures within 1,500 feet of the proposed drill site. 
(12)  Owner and address of each parcel of property within 1,500 feet of the proposed drill site. 
(13)  A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of all improvements and drilling equipment, including the location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities, including, but not limited to, tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators, and storage tanks, including the location of the potential maximum number of wells to be drilled and associated drilling equipment. In addition, the site plan must conform to all relevant standards and requirements described in subpart B, "Land Development Regulations," chapter 82, "Development Standards," article II, "Site Plans." 
(14)  A tree survey prepared pursuant to chapter 94, "Vegetation," article II, "Trees," section 94-91, "Application." A tree survey shall be required from the outer edge of any improvements, construction areas, development, drilling equipment, materials, temporary roads, access easements, and/or built structures, extending outward therefrom 500 feet, without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
(15)  The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person to be notified in case of an emergency. 
(16)  The exact and correct acreage and number of wells included in the permit application. 
(17)  Copies of all reports required by the Commission, specifically, including a copy of the approved railroad commission form W-1 and/or P-4. 
(18)  A signed road maintenance agreement supplied by the town that provides that the operator shall repair, at his or her own expense, any damage to public roads, streets, or highways caused by the use of heavy vehicles for any activity associated with the preparation, drilling, production, and operation of oil and/or gas wells. 
(19)  A description of public utilities required during drilling and operation. 
(20)  A description of the water source(s) to be used during drilling. 
(21)  A copy of the approved commission permit to drill together including attachments and survey plats that are applicable to the drill and/or operation sites. 
(22)  A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan as required by the commission, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency. A copy of the notice of intent shall be submitted to the town environmental resources division, at least seven business days prior to the commencement of any onsite activity. 
(23)  A copy of the erosion control plan pursuant to the town's Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual, as amended, and approved by the town engineer. 
(24)  A copy of the hazardous materials management plan as required by the town's fire chief's office. In addition to the hazardous materials management plan, all material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials that will be located, stored, transported, and/or temporarily used on the drilling site shall be provided to the oil and gas inspector and fire chief. 
(25)  A copy of the emergency response plan as required by the town's fire chief's office. 
(26)  A copy of an emergency evacuation plan shall be provided, detailing all persons to be notified in the event of an evacuation, including, without limitation, all persons residing within one-half mile of the edge of construction or surface disturbance. 
(27)  The operator shall submit to the town a notarized letter from a hazardous materials cleanup service company, said company to be approved by the town, affirming that the operator has entered into a contract authorizing said company to perform cleanup services, at operator's cost, in the event of a hazardous materials spill, leak, seepage or accident. A contract shall be and remain in full force and effect during the term of a permit and any change in contractor shall be approved in advance by the town, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. 
(28)  A copy of the determination by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality of the depth of useable quality ground water. 
(29)  Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this article. 
(30)  A copy of the noise management plan, prepared by a noise control engineer or other qualified person approved by the oil and gas inspector, for any equipment used in the drilling, completion, or production of a well, as required in subsection 34-422(i)(5) of this article. 
(31)  A statement, under oath, signed by the operator, or designated representative, that the information submitted with the application is, to the best knowledge and belief of the operator or designated representative, true and correct. 
(32)  All required application and well permit fees assessed in accordance with the appropriate provisions of appendix A of this Code. 
(33)  A copy of an environmental protection plan, paid for by the applicant or operator, and prepared by a qualified individual or firm designated or retained by the town if an environmental survey identified any environmentally sensitive area (ESA) within the proposed drill site. 
(34)  A leak detection and compliance plan to ensure all site activities and equipment are in compliance with applicable federal, state and local rules and regulations. The plan shall outline the methodology to assess and evaluate the impact of drilling, fracturing, production, and other activities at the pad site and immediate surroundings. Specific elements of such a plan shall include, but are not limited to, a quarterly leak detection monitoring program; methods and equipment utilized for emission measurements; and a response plan to address leak issues, should they arise, and any other information required by the oil and gas inspector. Monitoring shall include the evaluation of potential impact to air, soil, surface water and groundwater. Quarterly reporting of the monitoring results to the town's environmental services division is required with all laboratory data sheets, field logs, data summaries, and actions taken in the previous quarter. The plan must be created in accordance with guidelines promulgated by the town's environmental services division. 
(35)  No permit shall be issued unless an applicant has presented to the town written approval for a drilling site or pad site from the United States Army Corps of Engineers, verifying that such drilling site or pad site is not located within 3,000 feet of any federal public work, pursuant to Section 408 of Title 33 of the United States Code. 
(36)  A restoration bond payable to the town in the amount of $100,000.00 per acre of the operation site, which shall be valid for a period of one year following the expiration of an oil and gas well permit. The purpose of the restoration bond is to provide the town with a mechanism to restore proper grading and vegetation to the pad site and operation site. The town reserves the right to call the bond at any point during the one-year period after expiration of the permit. The bond shall be returned after the drilling of a permitted well. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-422. - Oil and gas well permit. 
(a)  Generally. An oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be required for all wells related to developing or producing oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting gas, water, or any other fluid or substance into the earth. 
(b)  Application requirements. An application for an oil, gas, or combined well permit shall include the following information: 
(1)  All the requirements of section 34-421 of this article; 
(2)  A detailed site plan that includes all the information required in section 34-421 of this article, but also includes specific details to the projected location of the major components of the drilling site, impacted environmentally sensitive areas, floodplains, topographic contours, creeks and other topographic features, adjacent buildings and other structures, and the measured distance from the drilling site to these major components of the drilling site, impacted environmentally sensitive areas, floodplains, topographic contours, creeks and other topographic features, adjacent buildings and other structures. 
(3)  A traffic impact analysis in accordance with sections 82-181 through 82-183 of this Code, as amended. 
(4)  All application submissions for a permit shall include at a minimum four copies of the application and all associated documentation, including plats, maps, surveys, and supporting materials, reports, and/or forms. 
(c)  Permitting procedure. 
(1)  It is the responsibility of the oil and gas inspector to review and approve or disapprove all applications for oil, gas, or combined well drilling permits based on the criteria established by this article. 
(2)  The oil and gas inspector, within 45 days after the filing of a completed application and remittance of all fees, insurance, and security per the requirements of this article for an oil, gas, or combined well permit, shall determine whether the application complies in all respects with the provisions of this article and determine if the proposed well to be drilled and/or the drilling equipment to be installed is in compliance with the distance requirements for the requested permit on the date the completed application is received by the oil and gas inspector. Once the operator cures or otherwise complies with the conditions specifically noted by the oil and gas inspector's application comments by a resubmission of the application, such 45-day review period shall commence again. 
(3)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any habitable structures or buildings for which an application for a building permit has been submitted on the date the application for an oil, gas, or combined well permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
(4)  With the exception of those pad sites permitted prior to the effective date of this article, all new and/or proposed construction of any buildings, habitable structures, streets, roads, and/or applicable improvements to the property upon which any oil and/or gas well is located must be in conformance with all applicable setbacks required by this article. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the town for any of said habitable structure(s) or buildings, the owner or developer of any lot or tract for which a building permit is sought shall have the following notation placed on any deed, plat or site plan for said lot or tract: "This tract or lot is located less than 1,500 feet from an existing oil or gas well and is subject to the Codes and Ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound." The new construction setback may be reduced pursuant to section 34-432, "Appeals," of this article. 
(5)  If all the requirements of this article for new oil and gas well permit applications are met, the oil and gas inspector shall issue a permit for the drilling of the well or the installation of the facilities for which the permit application was made. Prior to the issuance of such permit, and within 30 days after the oil and gas inspector's determination that the application complies in all respects with the provisions of this article, notice of the pending permit approval shall be mailed, via hand delivery or United States mail, to all property owners, as indicated by the most recently approved town tax roll, within 1,500 feet of such site, informing said property owners of a meeting open to the public at which meeting said property owners may ask questions about and discuss the pending permit application. All costs of property owner notification shall be borne by the operator and the meeting referenced herein shall occur no later than 21 days after the date of mailing of property owner notification letters. 
(6)  If the oil and gas inspector denies a permit application for cause as set out in this article for the requested oil, gas, or combined well permit, the oil and gas inspector shall notify the operator in writing of such denial stating the reasons for the denial. Within 30 days of the date of the written decision of the oil and gas inspector to deny the permit, the operator shall cure those conditions that caused the denial and resubmit the application to the oil and gas inspector for approval and issuance of the permit. Alternatively, the operator may file an appeal to the oil and gas board of appeals under the provisions outlined in this article pursuant to section 34-432. 
(d)  Wells setbacks for oil and gas well permits. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to drill, re-drill, deepen, re-enter, activate or convert any oil or natural gas well, for which the closest edge of construction or surface disturbance is located: 
a.  Within 1,500 feet from any public park; or 
b.  Within 1,500 feet from any residence; or 
c.  Within 1,500 feet from the property line upon which any religious institution, public building, hospital building or school is located or for which a building permit has been issued on or before the date of the application for a drilling permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector; or 
d.  Within 1,500 feet from any habitable structure; or 
e.  Within 750 feet from any recorded property, lot or tract line, except where otherwise referenced in this section. Further, where common surface and mineral estate ownership exists for adjacent and abutting tracts, no variance shall be required for such property, lot or tract lines; or 
f.  Within 500 feet from any existing storage tank, or source of potential ignition; 
g.  Within 750 feet of any public street, road, highway, or right-of-way line; or 
h.  Within 1,500 feet from any existing fresh water well. 
i.  All distances shall be measured from the closest edge of construction or surface disturbance in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, or objects to the closest exterior point of any object, structure, or recorded property, lot or tract line, listed in subparagraphs (a) through (h), above. 
(2)  The distances set out in subsection (d)(1) of this section may be reduced and documented as variances to the requested permit prior to issuance at the discretion of the oil and gas board of appeals pursuant to section 34-432, "Appeals," of this article, but said setback distance variances shall never exceed: 
a.  Twenty-five percent of the distances set out in subsection (d)(1) of this section; or 
b.  No variance shall be permitted for any existing storage tank or source of potential ignition, pursuant to subsection (d)(1)f. of this section, or any public street, road, highway or right-of-way line, pursuant to section 34-422(d)(1)g. of this section. 
(e)  Erosion control plan. Erosion control practices shall be conducted for all gas wells. Notwithstanding the requirements as stated in subsection 34-421(d)(23) of this article, compost berms that are at least one foot high and two feet wide, or equivalent erosion control devices, shall be installed near, around and about the downslope portion of the well pad so that offsite runoff is contained. Damage resulting from sedimentation and /or erosion shall be repaired immediately. 
(f)  Vehicle routes for oil and gas well permits. Vehicles, in excess of three tons gross vehicle weight, associated with drilling and/or production shall be restricted to such streets designated as arterials, collectors or local commercial as delineated in the town's thoroughfare plan. The vehicles shall be operated on state arterials whenever capable of being used. Such vehicles shall be operated on town arterials, collectors and local commercial only when it is not possible to use a state arterial to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. The vehicle routes to be utilized and the operation of all such vehicles upon and across said vehicle routes shall be subject to approval by the town of a road maintenance agreement. 
(g)  Work hours for oil and gas well permits. Site development, other than drilling, shall be conducted only between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on the well site shall be limited to the same work hour restrictions identified above except in cases of fires, blowouts, explosions, and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent the cessation of drilling or production. The operator may request a variance from the oil and gas board of appeals, pursuant to section 34-432 of this article. 
(h)  Emissions requirements for oil and gas well permits; emissions compliance plan. Gas well sites and production facilities shall comply with all state and federal emissions and air quality regulations for exhaust emissions, fugitive emissions, greenhouse gas emissions and all other applicable emissions control and air quality standards for natural gas drilling and production. In the event there are two or more notices of violation during any 12-month period, as determined by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or the United States Environmental Protection Agency, within 30 days of the second notice of violation, the operator shall submit to the town an emissions compliance plan. An emissions compliance plan shall include, but is not limited to, 24-hour onsite emissions monitoring and subsequent periodic reporting to the town council for a period of 12 months of documented compliance, and the installation of appropriate equipment to meet the requirements of the emissions compliance plan, which may include but is not limited to vapor recovery units or other emissions control technology, to ensure that any emissions are within applicable state and federal regulations. Thereafter the operator shall employ best management practices to eliminate any emissions in violation of any state and federal regulations. 
(i)  Noise restrictions for oil and gas well permits. 
(1)  No drilling, producing, or other operations shall produce a sound level greater than: 
a.  Seventy decibels using the "A weighting filter" ("dB(a)") when measured at a distance of 300 feet from the drilling, producing, or operating equipment in question during the daytime. 
b.  Fifty-six dB(a) when measured to the nearest residence, public building, or habitable structure from the drilling, producing, or operating equipment in question during the nighttime. 
c.  Seventy dB(a) during apply to formation fracturing when measured at a distance of 300 feet from the production equipment in question during the daytime. 
(2)  No person shall operate or permit to be operated in connection with the operation of a producing well(s) any compression facility which creates a sound level that exceeds the ambient noise level by more than three dB(a) when measured at the nearest property line, residence, habitable structure, or public building, whichever is closer. In addition, if a residence, habitable structure, or public building for which an application for a building permit has been submitted on or before the date the application for a building permit for the compression facility is filed with building inspections is present on the property for which the compression facility is proposed, the sound level shall not exceed the ambient noise level by more than three dB(a) when measured at the proposed residence, habitable structure or public building. Upon approval by the town, the compression facility shall be totally enclosed and designed to meet architectural standards complementary of the surrounding area. 
(3)  Low frequency noise standards. No drilling, production, or other operations shall produce a low frequency sound level that exceeds the following decibel levels: 
16 Hz octave band: 65 decibels 
32 Hz octave band: 65 decibels 
64 Hz octave band: 65 decibels 
(4)  Sound level measurements shall conform to the following guidance: 
a.  Sound level meters shall conform, as a minimum, to the requirements of the American National Standards Institute. 
b.  Sound level measurements shall be taken four feet above ground level. 
c.  Sound levels shall be determined by averaging minute-by-minute measurements made over minimum 15-minute sample duration, if practicable. Sound level measurements shall be taken under conditions that are representative of the noise experienced by the complainant (e.g., at night, morning, evening, or during special weather conditions). 
d.  In all sound level measurements, the existing ambient noise level from all other sources in the encompassing environment at the time and place of such sound level measurement shall be considered to determine the contribution to the sound level by the oil and gas operation(s). 
(5)  The noise management plan, as approved by the oil and gas inspector, shall detail how the equipment used in the drilling, completion, transportation, or production of a well complies with the maximum permissible noise levels of this article. The noise management plan must: 
a.  Identify operation noise impacts; 
b.  Provide documentation, if applicable, establishing the ambient noise level for both daytime and nighttime hours prior to construction of any wellhead compressor or compression facility and after the installation of the noise generation equipment verifying compliance with this section. The operator shall be required to submit noise compliance reports at least semi-annually or in response to a noise complaint; and 
c.  Detail how the impacts will be mitigated. In determining noise mitigation, specific site characteristics shall be considered, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Nature and proximity of adjacent development, location, and type; 
2.  Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind directions; 
3.  Vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site; 
4.  Topography; 
5.  Operation and site noise management measures which may include but not be limited to: use of critical grade mufflers on generators and motors; use of structural noise curtains, walls, or enclosures; and best management practices by limiting or eliminating noisier operations, such as tripping, deliveries of pipe, casing and heavy loads, use of horns for communication, and operation of vehicle audible back-up alarms at night. 
d.  Identify the location of noise blankets, sound walls or other applicable noise mitigation effects around the pad side. Noise mitigation shall be required for all drilling, hydraulic fracturing and production operations. 
(j)  Tank specifications for oil and gas well permit. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications unless other specifications are approved by the fire chief. The top of the tanks shall be no higher than eight feet in height. 
(k)  Building permit required. 
(1)  No building or structure regulated by the current code adopted by the town, shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or structure has first been obtained from the building official. Notwithstanding the provisions of the town's building codes, compliance with all noise requirements of this article shall be documented, signed by a noise control engineer or other qualified person approved by the oil and gas inspector, and submitted to the oil and gas inspector prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of any person, firm, or corporation, upon submittal of an application for a building permit for work regulated by the current code adopted by the town, to register as a general contractor with the town. Work regulated includes but is not limited to: construction of gates, fencing, plumbing, irrigation, electricity, roadways, entrances, compressors, flow lines, pipelines, gathering lines, tank batteries, and buildings. Such registration shall be upon forms supplied by the building official and shall become null and void on December 31 of each year. An appropriate fee for registration shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of this Code. 
(l)  All other provisions outlined in this article shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011; Ord. No. 36-11, § 3, 8-1-2011)  
Sec. 34-423. - Amended oil and gas well permits. 
(a)  An operator may submit an application to the oil and gas inspector to amend an existing oil, gas, or combined well permit to commence drilling from a new drill site that is not shown on (or incorporated by reference as part of) the existing permit, to relocate a drill site or operation site that is shown on (or incorporated by reference as part of) the existing permit, or to otherwise amend the existing permit. 
(b)  Application for amended permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the operator, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit an appropriate application fee for amended oil and/or gas well permits that shall be assessed per well and in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of this Code; 
(2)  A description of the proposed amendments; 
(3)  Any changes to the information submitted with the application for the existing permit (if such updated information has not previously been provided to the town); 
(4)  Such additional information as is reasonably required by the oil and gas inspector to demonstrate compliance with the applicable permit; and 
(5)  Such additional information as is reasonably required by the oil and gas inspector to prevent imminent destruction of property or injury to persons. 
(c)  All applications for amended permits shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector for review. Incomplete applications may be returned to the applicant, in which case the town shall provide a written explanation of the deficiencies; however, the town shall retain the application fee. The town may return any application as incomplete if there is a dispute pending before the railroad commission regarding the determination of the operator. 
(d)  If the amended permit application is in compliance with the provisions of this article, the oil and gas inspector shall approve the amendment within 30 days after the application is filed. 
(e)  The failure of the oil and gas inspector to review and issue an amended permit within the time limits specified above shall not cause the application for the amended permit to be deemed approved. 
(f)  The decision of the oil and gas inspector to deny an amendment to a permit shall be provided to the operator in writing within 30 days after the decision is reached, including an explanation of the basis for the decision. The operator may appeal any such denial pursuant to the procedures outlined in section 34-432 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-423.1. - Transfer of oil and gas well permits. 
(a)  An oil, gas, or combined well permit may be transferred by the operator with the prior written consent of the town if no outstanding violations of the terms of this article exist, if the transfer is in writing signed by both parties, if the transferee agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of the transferred oil, gas, or combined well permit, if all information previously provided to the town as part of the application for the transferred oil, gas, or combined well permit is updated to reflect any changes, and if the transferee provides the insurance and security required by this article. The insurance and security provided by the transferor shall be released if a copy of a written transfer meeting these requirements is provided to the town. The transfer shall not relieve the transferor from any liability to the town arising out of any activities conducted prior to the transfer. The operator also shall submit an updated emergency response plan, hazardous materials management plan, and emergency evacuation plan. The operator shall not be permitted to assume control of the permit until all required documents have been submitted, reviewed and approved by the oil and gas inspector. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit an appropriate transfer fee for oil and/or gas well permits that shall be assessed per well and in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-424. - Suspension or revocation of oil and gas well permits. 
(a)  If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or representatives) fails to comply with any requirement of an oil, gas, or combined well permit (including any requirement incorporated by reference as part of the permit), the oil and gas inspector shall give written notice to the operator specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the potential impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the community and potential negative impacts upon the surrounding environment. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than 30 days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article. 
(b)  If, the operator fails to correct the noncompliance within the designated timeframe, the oil and gas inspector may suspend or revoke the permit pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of a permit issued under this article during any period of time in which the permit is suspended or revoked or pending a review of the decision or order of the town suspending or revoking the permit. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the necessary, diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or revocation of the permit was ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the commission. 
(d)  If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the oil and gas inspector, upon written notice to the operator, shall notify the commission and request that the commission take any appropriate action. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a stop work order or other appropriate order by the fire chief or police chief when, in his professional opinion, there exists a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons. In such event, an operator shall comply with such order and efforts shall be undertaken by an operator and such town official to bring such circumstances or condition into compliance with this article or pertinent provisions of the International Fire Code, as amended, and any other applicable local, state or federal regulations giving rise to the issuance of such order. 
(f)  An operator may file an appeal of the suspension or revocation of a permit to the board of appeals under the provisions outlined in this article pursuant to section 34-432, "Appeals" of this article. 
(g)  If an application for an oil, gas, or combined well permit is denied by the oil and gas inspector, nothing herein contained shall prevent a new permit application from being submitted to the oil and gas inspector for the same well. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-425. - Periodic reports. 
(a)  The operator shall notify the oil and gas inspector of any changes to the following information within seven business days after the change occurs: 
(1)  The name, address, and/or phone number of the operator; 
(2)  The name, address, and/or phone number of the person designated to receive notices from the town (which person must be a resident of Texas that can be served with such notices in person or by registered or certified mail); and 
(3)  The operator's emergency action response plan (including "drive-to-maps" from public rights-of-way to each drill site). 
(b)  The operator shall notify the oil and gas inspector of any change to the name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the person(s) with supervisory authority over drilling or operations activities within one business day. 
(c)  Requirement to report emergencies. 
(1)  The operator shall immediately notify the oil and gas inspector and fire chief of any incident resulting in product loss from a hydrocarbon storage facility or pipeline facility, blowout, fire, explosion, incident resulting in injury, death, or property damage, or any other significant incidents as defined by the commission. 
(2)  A written report, containing a brief summary of the incident, shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector by 5:00 p.m. on the first business day of the town following the incident, and a duplicate report shall be submitted to the fire chief by the same time. 
(3)  A follow-up report, signed and dated by the person responsible for said report, shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector and the fire chief within 30 days following the incident. The operator responsible for the follow-up incident report shall include the following information: 
a.  Operator/applicant name, phone number, address, and, if possible, email address. 
b.  Description of the incident, including, but not limited to, the time, date, location, and cause of the event. 
c.  Duration of the incident, that is, when it began and when it terminated to the degree that it no longer constituted a hazard to the health, safety, and well-being of persons or property, regardless of the distance or separation from the place of incident. 
d.  How the incident was brought under control and/or remedied. 
e.  A full and complete description of the type of intercompany investigation or other investigation or inquiry that was made concerning the incident, the findings or results of such inquiry or investigation, and the action taken as a result of the findings and inquiry concerning the prevention of the existence of future hazards. 
(d)  The operator shall provide the oil and gas inspector and the fire chief a copy of any "incident reports" or written complaints submitted to the railroad commission within 30 days after the operator has notice of the existence of such reports or complaints. This shall include, but not be limited to, notification of any reportable quantity releases of oil, natural gas, and/or associated minerals, chemicals, or solid and/or liquid wastes, pursuant to regulatory requirements established by the commission, and notification to the fire marshal of any fire, and/or equipment strikes by lightning. 
(e)  Beginning on December 31 after each well is completed, and continuing on each December 31 thereafter until the operator notifies the oil and gas inspector that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall submit a written report to the oil and gas inspector identifying any changes to the information that was included in the application for the applicable permit that have not been previously reported to the town. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-425.1. - Public information. 
(a)  After approval of a permit application, the operator shall submit in writing an accurate timeline account, which is updated weekly, of planned operational events associated with the permit to the oil and gas inspector. The account shall state a timeline and description of events that will occur. Events to be documented shall include but not be limited to: site preparation and grading, site construction of the derrick and drilling equipment and accessory structures, the expected amount of time spent drilling onsite, all casing installation, testing, flaring, disassembly of the derrick, pipeline installation, fracture stimulation, maintenance, tank battery construction, site cleanup, and production. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit an educational letter of operations within 15 days of approval of the application to all property owners within 1,500 feet of the edge of construction or surface disturbance. The letter shall detail typical operations associated with oil and gas drilling activity with an intended audience of the general public. The topics to be detailed shall include, but not be limited to: site preparation, site development and construction, drilling, casing, fracturing, pipeline construction, production, transportation, and general weekly, monthly, and yearly maintenance of the operation site. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
DIVISION 6. - INSURANCE, BOND AND INDEMNITY 
 
Sec. 34-426. - Bond, letters of credit, indemnity, insurance. 
(a)  General requirements. The operator shall be required to: 
(1)  Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the permit issued hereunder. 
(2)  Promptly clear drill sites and operation sites of all litter, trash, waste, materials, and/or other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the operations, and after abandonment or completion grade, level and restore such property to the same surface conditions as nearly as possible as existed before any oil and gas drilling, exploration and production operations were commenced. 
(3)  Indemnify and hold harmless the town, its officers, agents, and employees from and against any and all claims, losses, damages, causes of action, suits and liability of every kind, including all expenses of litigation, court costs, and attorney's fees, for injury to or death of any person or for damage to any property arising out of or in connection with the work done by operator under an oil, gas, or combined well permit: 
a.  Where such injuries, death or damages are caused by operator's sole negligence or the joint negligence of operator and any other person or entity; and 
b.  Regardless of whether such injuries, death or damages are caused in whole or in part by the negligence of operator. 
(4)  Promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments imposed due to breach of any requirements and/or terms of the oil, gas, or combined permit. 
(5)  Promptly restore to its former condition any public property damaged by the oil and gas drilling, exploration or production operation. 
(b)  Bond, irrevocable letter of credit. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of an oil, gas, or combined well permit the operator shall provide the oil and gas inspector with a security instrument in the form of a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit as follows: 
a.  Bond. A bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution authorized to do business in Texas, acceptable to the town. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the oil, gas, or combined well permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six months after the expiration of the permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is fully restored, whichever occurs first. The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the town, as obligee, and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and regulations of this article and the town. The original bond shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector with a copy of the same provided to the town secretary. 
b.  Letter of credit. An irrevocable letter of credit shall be issued in favor of the town by a reliable bank or other financial institution, acceptable to the town, authorized to do business in Texas and shall become effective on or before the date the permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six months after the expiration of the permit term. The town shall require a local banking association to be named as a confirming bank for purposes of presentment and collection in Denton or Tarrant Counties, Texas. The town shall be authorized to draw upon such letter of credit to recover any fines or penalties assessed under this article. Evidence of the execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector by submitting an original signed letter of credit from the banking or financial institution, with a copy of the same provided to the town secretary. 
c.  The principal amount of any security instrument shall be $50,000.00 for any single well and shall not be less than $200,000.00 per pad site. If, after completion of a well, the applicant/operator who initially posted a single well or pad site bond has complied with all of the provisions of this article and such operator's well(s) is (are) in production and all drilling operations have ceased, the operator may submit a request to the oil and gas inspector to reduce the existing bond to $10,000.00 per well for the remainder of the time the well produces without reworking. During any re-drilling or re-working, the amount of the bond or letter of credit shall be reinstated to and maintained at $50,000.00 for any single well and shall not be less than $200,000.00 per pad site. 
d.  If at any time after no less than a 15-day written notice to the operator, the oil and gas inspector shall deem any operator's bond or letter of credit to be insufficient, the town may require the operator to increase the amount of the bond or letter of credit up to a maximum of $300,000.00 per well. 
e.  The operator agrees to renew the bond or irrevocable letters of credit prior to expiration thereof so the bond or letters of credit shall remain in full force and effect during the entire permit term, including any extension. The operator shall provide the town evidence that the bond or irrevocable letter of credit has been renewed at least 30 days prior to its scheduled expiration date. If an operator fails to timely provide the town with such certification of renewal, the town shall be authorized to immediately, and at any time prior to the expiration date of the bond or irrevocable letters of credit accepted hereunder by the town by presenting the original thereof, together with an affidavit executed by the town manager stating that operator is in default under the terms of this article. 
f.  Whenever the oil and gas inspector finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement or condition imposed by this article, a written notice shall be given to the operator. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost and the period of time deemed by the oil and gas inspector to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the operator shall, within the time therein specified, either cause or require the work so identified to be performed, or failing to do so, shall pay over to the town 125 percent of the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than 30 days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article. 
g.  In the event of operator's failure or refusal to timely cure such a default, the town shall be authorized to draw against the irrevocable letter of credit or bond to recover such amount due from the operator. Upon receipt of such monies, the town shall have the right but not the corresponding obligation to proceed by such mode as deemed convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed. 
h.  In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the commission, at the end of the permit term and the drill site and the operation site restored in conformity with the regulations of this article, the town shall have the right to assert a claim against the bond and/or make presentment of the irrevocable letters of credit accepted hereunder by the town by presenting the original thereof, together with an affidavit executed by the town manager stating that the operator is in default under the terms of this article. If the operator provides a bond, the operator as principal, and the guarantor of surety on the bond or the operator shall be liable to pay for the cost to properly plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site and operation site in conformity with the regulations of this article. The surety shall be liable in the amount of the bond. If, however, the operator provides an irrevocable letter of credit, rather than a bond, then the operator shall be solely liable to pay for the cost to properly plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site and operation site in conformity with the regulations of this article. Upon receipt of such monies, the town shall have the right but not the corresponding obligation to proceed by such mode as deemed convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed. 
i.  When the well or wells covered by said irrevocable letters of credit or bond have been properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this article, and in conformity with all regulations of the commission and notice to that effect has been received by the town, or upon receipt of a satisfactory substitute, the irrevocable letter of credit or bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and canceled and returned to the applicant/operator. 
j.  The only requirements for presentment of any bond or letter of credit accepted hereunder by the town shall be the presentation of the original thereof, together with an affidavit executed by the town manager stating that the applicant/operator is in default under the terms of this article. 
(c)  Insurance. In addition to the bond or letter of credit required pursuant to this article, the operator shall carry a policy or policies of insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in Texas. In the event such insurance policy or policies are canceled, the oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be suspended on such date of cancellation and the operator's right to operate under such oil, gas, or combined well permit shall immediately cease until the operator files additional insurance as provided herein. 
(1)  General requirements applicable to all policies. 
a.  The town, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an "additional insured" to all policies except employers' liability coverage under the operator's workers compensation policy. 
b.  All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for environmental pollution liability (seepage and pollution coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be written on a claims-made basis. 
c.  All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-: VIII or better rating by the most current version of the A. M. Best Key Rating Guide or with such other financially sound insurance carriers acceptable to the town. 
d.  Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and shall be on a "per occurrence" basis unless otherwise stipulated herein. 
e.  Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the Town of Flower Mound, Environmental Resources Division, 2121 Cross Timbers, Flower Mound, Texas 75028, evidencing all the required coverages, including endorsements, prior to the issuance of a permit. 
f.  All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery in favor of the town. 
g.  Any failure on part of the town to request required insurance documentation shall not constitute a waiver of the insurance requirement specified herein. 
h.  Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the town a minimum 30-day notice of cancellation, non-renewal, and/or material change in policy terms or coverage. A ten-days' notice shall be acceptable in the event of non-payment of premium. 
i.  During the term of the oil, gas, or combined well permit, the operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the oil and gas inspector any known loss occurrence which could give rise to a liability claim or lawsuit or which could result in a property loss. 
j.  Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the town. 
(2)  Standard commercial general liability policy. This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed operations, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket contractual liability, underground resources damage, broad form property damage, independent contractors' protective liability and personal injury. This coverage shall be a minimum combined single limit of $25,000,000.00 per occurrence location for bodily injury and property damage. 
(3)  Excess or umbrella liability. $50,000,000.00 excess or umbrella liability coverage, if the operator has a stand-alone environmental pollution liability (EPL) policy. $75,000,000.00 excess or umbrella liability coverage, if the operator does not have a stand-alone EPL policy. This coverage must include an endorsement for sudden or accidental pollution. If excess or umbrella liability coverage is written on a "claims made" basis, the operator must maintain continuous coverage and purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit by the town. 
(4)  Environmental pollution liability coverage. 
a.  Operator shall purchase and maintain in force for the duration of the oil, gas, combined well permit, insurance for environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury, property damage, including loss of use of damaged property or of property that has not been physically injured or destroyed; cleanup costs; and defense, including costs and expenses incurred in the investigation, defense or settlement of claims; all in connection with an loss arising from the insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least $25,000,000.00 per loss. 
b.  Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants. 
c.  The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit by the town. 
(5)  Control of well. The policy shall cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, re-drilling or restoration expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator and related expenses, including, but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and evacuation of residents. 
a.  $5,000,000.00 per occurrence with no aggregate, if available, otherwise an aggregate of $10,000,000.00. 
b.  $500,000.00 sub-limit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the operator has care, custody and control. 
(6)  Workers' compensation and employers' liability insurance. 
a.  Workers' compensation benefits shall be Texas statutory limits. 
b.  Employers' liability shall be a minimum of $1,000,000.00 per accident. 
c.  Such coverage shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the town and provide coverage in accordance with applicable state and federal laws. 
(7)  Automobile liability insurance. 
a.  Combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
b.  Coverage must include all owned, hired and non-owned automobiles. 
(8)  Certificates of insurance. 
a.  The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the State of Texas, unless the coverage is written by a surplus lines insurer. 
b.  The insurance set forth by the insurance company must be underwritten on forms that have been approved by the Texas State Board of Insurance or ISO, or an equivalent policy form acceptable to the town, with the exception of environmental pollution liability and control of well coverage. 
c.  Shall set forth all endorsements and insurance coverage according to requirements and instructions contained herein. 
d.  Shall specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination, or change in coverage provisions to the town. All policies shall be endorsed to read: 
"THIS POLICY WILL NOT BE CANCELED, NON-RENEWED OR MATERIALLY ALTERED WITHOUT 30 DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND THE TOWN EXCEPT WHEN THIS POLICY IS BEING CANCELED FOR NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH CASE 10 DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE IS REQUIRED." 
e.  Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section shall be furnished with the certificates of insurance. 
(d)  Indemnification and express negligence provisions. 
(1)  Each oil, gas, combined well permit issued by the oil and gas inspector shall include the following language: Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge, all claims, demands, actions, judgments, and executions which it ever had, or now has or may have, or its assigns may have, or claim to have, against the Town of Flower Mound, and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, successors, assigns, sponsors, volunteers, or employees, created by, or arising out of personal injuries, known or unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under an oil, gas, or combined well permit. The operator shall fully defend, protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees, from and against any and all claims, suits, judgments and demands for and including, without limitation, personal injuries and death in connection therewith which may be made or asserted by operator, its agents, assigns, or any third parties on account of, arising out of, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a permit. The operator agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, its departments, its officers, agents, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from and against any liabilities or damages suffered as a result of claims, demands, costs, or judgments against the Town, its departments, its officers, agents, servants, or employees, created by, or arising out of the acts or omissions of the Town of Flower Mound occurring on the drill site or operation site in the course and scope of inspecting and permitting the oil and gas wells INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, CLAIMS AND DAMAGES ARISING IN WHOLE OR IN PART FROM THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR OPERATION-SITE IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE OIL, GAS, OR COMBINED WELLS. IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED THAT THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED FOR IN THIS SECTION IS AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED BY THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND PROTECT THE TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES, WHETHER THAT NEGLIGENCE IS THE SOLE OR CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY, DEATH, AND/OR DAMAGE. 
(e)  Notice. The individual designated to receive notice regarding or related to the oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be a resident of Texas upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator shall within ten days notify the oil and gas inspector in writing of any change in such agent or mailing address unless operations in the town are discontinued and abandonment is complete. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
DIVISION 7. - ONSITE AND TECHNICAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 34-427. - Technical requirements. 
(a)  Onsite requirements. 
(1)  Abandoned wells. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the railroad commission; however, all well casings shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least ten feet below the surface unless the surface owner submits a written agreement otherwise. Three feet shall be the minimum depth at which all well casings shall be cut and moved. No structures shall be built over an abandoned well. A permanent abandonment marker pipe, with the well identity and location permanently inscribed, shall be welded to the casing and shall be at least four inches in diameter with a length of four feet visible above the ground level. 
(2)  Annual meeting with town required. Each operator shall meet annually with representatives of the town to review emergency response plans. These reviews shall be in accord with U.S. Department of Transportation and Commission requirements and the operator shall: 
a.  Furnish or update a copy of the emergency response plan; 
b.  Review the responsibilities of each governmental organization in response to an emergency or incident; 
c.  Review the capabilities of the operator to respond to an emergency or incident; 
d.  Identify the types of emergencies or incidents that will result in or require contacting the town; and 
e.  Plan mutual activities in which the town and the operator can engage in order to minimize the risks associated with oil or gas well operation. 
f.  Within two years of the effective date of the oil/gas permit and every two years thereafter, the operator shall conduct an onsite emergency drill that includes, but shall not be limited to, the personnel operating the oil or gas well, local law enforcement personnel, the fire chief or his designee, and personnel from the town's environmental services division. 
(3)  Blowout prevention. Blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled, worked-over, re-worked, re-drilled or in which tubing is being changed. Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during oil and/or gas operations as required by and in conformance with the requirements of the commission and the recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute. The operator shall equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventors, flow lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures involved as required by the commission. 
(4)  Chemical and materials storage. All chemicals and/or hazardous materials shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent, contain, and facilitate rapid remediation and cleanup of any accidental spill, leak, or discharge of a hazardous material. Operator shall have all material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials onsite. All applicable federal and state regulatory requirements for the proper labeling of containers shall be followed. Appropriate pollution prevention actions shall be required and include, but are not limited to, chemicals and materials raised from the ground (e.g., wooden pallets), bulk storage, installation and maintenance of secondary containment systems, and protection from stormwater and weather elements. 
(5)  Closed-loop drilling fluid systems. Closed-loop drilling fluid systems shall be used instead of lined reserve pits. 
(6)  Compliance. Operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and town requirements. 
(7)  Discharge. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or discharged, any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substance, or any refuse including wastewater or brine from any oil and/or gas operation, or the contents of any container used in connection with any oil and/or gas operation in, into, or upon any public rights-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drains, ditches or sanitary sewer drains or any body of water or any public or private property in the town, or to the extent allowed or may be allowed by state law, in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town. 
(8)  Drilling fluids. Low toxicity glycols, synthetic hydrocarbons, polymers, and esters shall be substituted for conventional oil-based drilling fluids. 
(9)  Drilling fluid storage pit. No drilling fluid storage pits shall be located within the town. 
(10)  Drill stem testing. All open hole formation or drill stem testing shall be done during daylight hours. Drill stem tests may be conducted only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate oil and/or gas separator to storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. 
(11)  Drip pans and other containment devices. Drip pans and other containment devices shall be placed or installed underneath all tanks, containers, pumps, lubricating oil systems, engines, fuel and chemical storage tanks, system valves, connections, and any other areas or structures that could potentially leak, discharge, or spill hazardous liquids, semi-liquids, or solid waste materials, including hazardous waste that is inseparable by simple mechanical removal processes. 
(12)  Dust, vibrations, odors. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, so far as practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances. All equipment used shall be so constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor, or other harmful or annoying substances or effect will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or from anything incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity; and the site or structures thereon shall not be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements in industry standards of drilling and production in this area shall be adopted as they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor. 
(13)  Electric lines. All electric lines to production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those lines already installed in the surrounding area or subdivision. 
(14)  Electric motors. Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells or natural gas gathering compression facilities. No electric power shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to town ordinances and applicable national codes. 
(15)  Emergency response plan. Prior to the commencement of oil and/or gas drilling, or any other hydrocarbons production activities, operator shall submit to the oil and gas inspector an emergency response plan establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or producing of oil and/or gas wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the commission, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Texas Department of Transportation and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The emergency response plan shall be kept current with any additions, modifications, and/or amendments concerning all construction related activities, oil and/or natural gas operations and, oil and/or natural gas production. Updated plans shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector within two business days after any additions, modifications, and/or amendments to said plan(s). A copy of the emergency response plan shall be kept onsite. Further, a copy of the emergency response plan shall be provided to any potentially impacted independent school district for comment by said school district, with a copy of said comments provided to the oil and gas inspector. The emergency response plan shall at a minimum provide for: 
a.  Prompt and effective response to emergencies regarding: 
1.  Leaks or releases that can impact public health, safety, welfare; 
2.  Fire or explosions at or in the vicinity of an oil or gas well; or 
3.  Natural disasters; 
b.  Effective means to notify and communicate required and pertinent information to local fire, police, and public officials during an emergency. Further, at the request of the town, an automated audible alarm system shall be installed and maintained at each drill site to provide warnings for a substantial drop in pressure, the release of any gas or oil, or fire. Said alarm system shall be approved by the fire chief or his designee prior to beginning any drilling or production operations; 
c.  The availability of personnel, equipment, tools, and materials as necessary at the scene of an emergency; 
d.  Measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to injury and the probability of accidental death or dismemberment; 
e.  Emergency shut down of an oil or gas well and related site; 
f.  The safe restoration of service and operations following an emergency or incident; 
g.  A follow-up incident investigation to determine the cause of the incident and require the implementation of corrective measures. 
(16)  Equipment painted. All production equipment on the drill site and/or operation site shall be painted and maintained at all times, including pumping units, storage tanks, buildings and structures. Low VOC paints shall be used. 
(17)  Explosive charges. If, during any phase of drilling, re-drilling, deepening, re-entering, re-working, activating, converting, fracturing, or completing an oil and/or gas well, explosive charges are used, the operator shall provide notice to the oil and gas inspector at least ten days prior to such activities. The notice shall identify the date that the explosive charges will be used, the date and means of transporting the explosive charges, and the transportation route to and from the drill site and/or operation site that will be used for the delivery of the explosive charges. 
(18)  Fire prevention; sources of ignition. Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire services department and required by any applicable federal, state, or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the operator's cost, and shall be maintained on the drilling site and/or operation site at all times during drilling and production operations. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure. All well heads shall contain an emergency shut-off valve to the well distribution line. The operator shall comply with all requirements set forth in chapter 38, "Fire Prevention and Protection," of this Code, as amended. 
(19)  Fresh water wells. It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which well bore, at the surface of the ground, is located within the setbacks as described in subsection 34-422(d) of this article from any fresh water well. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest well bore to the fresh water well bore. Within 120 days of its completion date, each oil and/or gas well shall be equipped with a cathodic protection system to protect the production casing from external corrosion. The oil and gas inspector may approve an alternative method of protecting the production casing from external corrosion. 
a.  A third party contractor retained by the town shall collect and analyze a "pre-drilling," "post-drilling" and "post-fracturing" water analysis and flow rate from any existing fresh water well within 1,500 feet of the gas well. When such third party contractor is retained by the town for the purpose of collecting and analyzing water well samples, the cost of such fees and charges assessed by the third party contractor shall be borne by the operator. 
b.  Such water tests shall conform to the following testing requirements: 
1.  Water samples must be collected and analyzed utilizing proper sampling and laboratory protocol from a United States Environmental Protection Agency or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality approved laboratory. 
2.  Well samples shall be collected and analyzed prior to any drilling activity to document baseline water quality data of the well. A post-drilling sample shall be collected and analyzed after the conclusion of drilling of each well. A post-fracturing sample shall be collected and analyzed after the conclusion of each fracturing operation. 
3.  Parameters to be tested for include but are not limited to: methane, chloride, sodium, barium, and strontium, total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH), volatile organic compounds (VOCs), ethene and ethane. 
(20)  Gas emission or burning restrictions. No person shall allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the atmosphere or to be burned by open flame except as provided by law or as permitted by the commission. If the venting of gases into the atmosphere or the burning of gases by open flame is authorized as provided by law or as permitted by the commission, then such venting or open flame shall not be located closer than 500 feet from any habitable structure and not used in operations on the drilling site, and such venting or open flame shall be screened in such a way as to minimize detrimental effects to adjacent property owners. The town's fire chief and all property owners, as indicated by the most recently approved town tax roll, within 1,000 feet of such venting or open flame, shall be given 72-hours' advance notice, via hand delivery or United States mail, of any such activities and such notice shall include the date and time and anticipated length of time such activities will occur. 
(21)  Gas well stimulation. Only light sand fracture technology or technologies approved by the oil and gas inspector shall be used to fracture stimulate a well. Fracking operation shall be scheduled to occur during daylight hours unless the operator has notified the oil and gas inspector that fracking will occur before or after daylight hours to meet safety requirements. The operator shall add non-radioactive tracing or tagging additives into fracturing fluids and shall notify in writing the oil and gas inspector with the written formula identifying such additive(s). The written formula submitted by the operator shall be unique for each permitted pad site. Air, gas, or pneumatic drilling shall not be permitted. 
(22)  Grass, weeds, trash. All drill sites and operation sites shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds, and combustible trash within a radius of 100 feet around any gas tank or tanks or producing wells. 
(23)  Green completions. After fracturing or re-fracturing, an operator shall utilize appropriate equipment and processes to eliminate natural gas and associated vapor releases into the environment. All salable gas shall be directed to the sales line or shut in and conserved. All wells that have a sales line shall be required to employ reduced emission completion techniques and methods. The oil and gas inspector may modify the requirements of this subsection in the event that reduced emission completion techniques or methods are not feasible or would endanger the safety of personnel or the public. 
(24)  Hazardous materials plan. Hazardous materials management plan shall be on file with the oil and gas inspector and town's fire chief. The hazardous materials plan shall be kept current with any additions, modifications, and/or amendments concerning all construction related activities, oil and natural gas operations, and oil and natural gas production. Updated hazardous materials plans shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector within two business days of any additions, modifications, and/or amendments. 
(25)  Lights. No person shall permit any lights located on any drill site or operation site to be directed in such a manner that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the drill site or operation site. In addition, no person shall permit any lights located on any drill site or operation site to exceed 4/10 ths foot-candles at the closest public road, property line, habitable structure or residence. To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, all such lighting shall be directed downward and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and adjacent habitable structures and residences. 
(26)  Lubricating oil purification units. Any and all stationary diesel power plants located on the drilling site associated with the exploration development, operation, and production of oil, natural gas, or associated minerals shall have a lube oil purification unit installed, maintained and functional at all times while the diesel plant is operating. 
(27)  Muffling exhaust. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any drilling completion or production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers, or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and prevent the escape of noxious gases, fumes and ignited carbon or soot. In the event there are two or more notices of violation during any 12-month period, an emissions compliance plan shall be required, pursuant to subsection 34-422(h) of this article. 
(28)  Organic solvents. Organic solvents, such as trichloroethylene and carbon tetrachloride, shall not be used for cleaning any element, structure, or component of the derrick, drilling equipment, tools, or pipes. To the maximum extent practicable, high flash point Varsol shall be used. 
(29)  Pipe dope. Lead-free, biodegradable pipe dope shall be substituted for American Petroleum Institute (API) specified pipe dope. 
(30)  Pits. Pits are prohibited, unless authorized by the oil and gas board of appeals, pursuant to section 34-432 of this article, and in such event, any and all so authorized reserve pits, completion/workover pits, drilling fluid disposal pits, fresh makeup water pits, gas plant evaporation/retention pits, mud circulation pits, or water condensate pits shall be lined with plastic or stored above ground in tanks. Such pits and contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within 40 days after completion of the well, unless otherwise authorized by the oil and gas inspector. No washout pits shall be located within the town, unless all fluid, sludge, solid waste materials, drilling fluids, waste oil, spent completion fluids, all other liquids, semi-liquids, and mud, including hazardous waste that is inseparable by simple mechanical removal processes, and is made up primarily of natural material all of which is immediately captured within a fully enclosed, above ground containment tank. 
(31)  Private roads and drill sites. Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site and the operation site shall be at least 20 feet from any adjacent property line (where said adjacent property is separately owned), and 25 feet wide with an overhead clearance of 14 feet. Such roads shall be designed to avoid impact on environmentally sensitive areas, shall be constructed outside any environmentally sensitive areas, and shall be surfaced with crushed rock, gravel or ore and maintained so as to prevent dust and mud. Brine water, sulphur water, or water in mixture with any type of hydrocarbon, may not be used for dust suppression. In particular cases these requirements governing the surfacing of private roads may be altered at the discretion of the oil and gas inspector and the town engineer after consideration of all circumstances including, but not limited to, the following: distances from public streets and highways; distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operator; the purpose for which the property of such nearby property owners, whose surface rights are not leased by the operator, is or may be used; topographical features; nature of the soil; and exposure to wind. No aspect of this division shall be construed to supersede any permitting, review, standards, and regulations set forth in the Town of Flower Mound Engineering Services Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual. 
(32)  Salt water disposal (injection) wells. No salt water disposal (injection) wells shall be located within the town. 
(33)  Secondary containment systems. All pad sites shall be equipped with a secondary containment system, including lining with an impervious material. The secondary containment system shall be designed to prevent a harmful impact to the property adjacent to the pad site or to any surface water. The secondary containment system must be designed in accordance with guidelines promulgated by the town's environmental services division. 
(34)  Soil sampling pre- and post-drilling; periodic soil sampling. It shall be unlawful to contaminate any soil, and fail to remediate such contamination, at any drill site in the town. Soil sampling shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Upon application for an oil and gas well permit, soil sampling shall be conducted prior to the commencement of any drilling activities at the proposed drill site to establish a baseline study of site conditions. A minimum of one soil sample shall be taken at the location of any proposed equipment to be utilized at the site to document existing conditions at the drill site. 
b.  A third party contractor retained by the town shall collect and analyze all "pre-drilling" and "post-drilling" soil analysis. The cost of such fees and charges assessed by the third party contractor shall be borne by the operator. 
c.  Soil samples must be collected and analyzed utilizing proper sampling and laboratory protocol from a United States Environmental Protection Agency or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality approved laboratory. 
d.  Post-drilling soil samples shall be collected and analyzed after the conclusion of drilling of each well. Subsequent to the drilling of each well, periodic soil samples shall be taken to document soil quality data at the drill site, as requested by the oil and gas inspector. 
e.  Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of the commission and as referenced in section 34-430 of this article, the operator so abandoning shall conduct post production soil sampling when equipment is removed from the drill site to document that the final conditions are within regulatory requirements. 
f.  Methodology and parameters to be tested are referenced in subsection (35) herein. 
g.  If it is found that soil contains a prohibited amount of a hazardous substance, the operator, within 30 days, shall remediate the location and thereafter soil sampling shall be collected and analyzed at such locations on the drill site to determine compliance with subsection (35) herein. 
(35)  Soil sampling parameters and sampling requirements for pits. If reserve pits, completion/workover pits, drilling fluid disposal pits, fresh makeup water pits, gas plant evaporation/retention pits, mud circulation pits, washout pits, or water condensate pits are constructed, operated, or maintained on the drill site or operation site and are not stored above ground in tanks, the oil and gas inspector shall have the discretion to require the well operator to perform soil sampling. 
a.  The following selected Texas-specific median background concentrations (TSBCs) are provided by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality as representations of median concentrations across Texas. It is recommended that a site-specific background be collected to allow more specific data available unless use of the TSBCs are acceptable to the operator. The railroad commission guidance concerning releases in sensitive areas provides the minimum criteria acceptable for soil sampling as illustrated below. If any media other than soil is impacted by operations at the site, consultation with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and [the] railroad commission will be sought to determine if the Texas Risk Reduction Program (TRRP, 30 TAC 350) will be applied. The concentrations below will be utilized by the town to determine if additional sampling or reporting to the state is needed: 
Metal 	Median Background 
Concentration 
(mg/kg) 	Metal 	Median Background 
Concentration 
(mg/kg) 
Antimony 	1 	Mercury 	0.04 
Arsenic 	5.9 	Nickel 	10 
Barium 	300 	Selenium 	0.3 
Beryllium 	1.5 	Strontium 	100 
Boron 	30 	Tin 	0.9 
Total Chromium 	30 	Titanium 	2,000 
Cobalt 	7 	Thorium 	9.3 
Lead 	15 	Vanadium 	50 
Manganese 	300 	Zinc 	30 
 
Compound 	RRC Limits (mg/kg) 
TPH 	10,000 
Benzene 	0.026 
Toluene 	8.2 
Ethylbenzene 	7.6 
Xylenes 	120 
 
b.  If soil sampling is required by the oil and gas inspector, it shall be conducted prior to refilling, backfilling, modifying, deactivating, or abandoning any reserve pit, completion/workover pit, drilling fluid disposal pit, fresh makeup water pit, gas plant evaporation/retention pit, mud circulation pit, washout pit, or water condensate pit located on the oil and gas drilling site and/or operation site. 
c.  The soil sampling shall be completed with all data, results, documentation, and/or reports provided to the oil and gas inspector within 30 days of sample collection. The reporting shall include at a minimum, a description of the points samples (GPS coordinates included), description of the planned/existing/removed equipment above the sampled area, methodology of sample collection, description of field conditions, summary of laboratory data results compared to the criteria noted above, copies of all laboratory data sheets, drawings (prepared to scale) of sampling points, past equipment and areas where spills are anticipated to have occurred (if applicable). 
d.  The third party shall perform soil sampling through the collection and analysis of a sufficient number of samples from environmental media to reliably characterize the nature and degree of potential release(s) at the drill site, as well as the horizontal and vertical extent of the impact, if identified above the criteria listed above. Surface samples collected from surface to one foot (1') below grade are sufficient for initial screening or confirmatory sampling. 
e.  At a minimum, a soil contamination assessment shall consist of no less than five sample locations across a pad site. A minimum of two samples shall be taken from beneath the planned tank containment area or immediately adjacent if tank containment is present. A minimum of two samples shall be taken down gradient, and, if applicable, in the direction of the nearest surface water source from the tank containment. All surface water sources located within 300 feet of the pit shall have a minimum of one sediment sample taken and analyzed pursuant to compounds noted above. 
(36)  Signs. 
a.  A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at the gate on the temporary and permanent drilling site- and operation site-fencing erected pursuant to section 34-428 of this article. Such sign shall be of durable material, maintained in good condition and, unless otherwise required by the Commission, shall have a surface area of not less than two square feet or more than four square feet and shall be lettered with the following: 
1.  Well name and number; 
2.  Name of operator; 
3.  Address of property; 
4.  The emergency 911 number; and 
5.  Telephone numbers of two persons responsible for the well who may be contacted 24 hours a day in case of an emergency. 
b.  Permanent weatherproof signs reading "DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED" shall be posted immediately upon completion of the drill site- or operation site-fencing at the entrance of each such site and tank battery or in any other location approved or designated by the town's fire chief. Sign lettering shall be four inches in height and shall be red on white background or white on a red background. Each sign shall include the emergency notification numbers of the fire services department and the operator, well and lease designations required by the commission. 
c.  For notification of fracture stimulation activities, required signage shall have white lettering on a red background. 
(37)  Storage of equipment. Onsite storage is prohibited on the drill site or operation site. No equipment shall be stored on the drilling or production operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber, pipes, tubing and casing shall not be left on the drill site or operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations are being conducted on the site. No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street, right-of-way or in any driveway, alley, or upon any drill site or operation site which constitutes a fire hazard or an obstruction to or interference with fighting or controlling fires except that equipment which is necessary for drilling or production operations on the site. Fire and emergency services shall be the entity that determines whether any and all equipment on the drill site or operation site shall constitute a fire hazard. No refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the premises. This prohibition shall not be deemed to exclude a conventional gas separator or dehydrator. 
(38)  Storage tanks. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the A.P.I. specifications unless other specifications are approved or required by the fire chief. All storage tanks shall be equipped with a secondary containment system including lining with an impervious material. The secondary containment system shall be a minimum of three feet in height and have a storage capacity of one and one-half times the contents of the largest tank in accordance with the fire codes, and be buried at least one foot below the surface. Drip pots shall be provided at the pump out connection to contain the liquids from the storage tank. Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control device that will automatically activate a valve to close the well in the event of excess liquid accumulation in the tank. 
(39)  Tank battery facilities. Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam line and a lightning arrestor system. All tank batteries shall comply with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Comprehensive Consensus Codes (C3) NFPA 30 Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code. An operator shall eliminate, capture or destroy any and all emissions emanating from any tanks. 
(40)  Surface casing. Surface casing shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the commission. 
(41)  Valves. Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production. The fire services department shall have access to the well site to enable it to close the shut-off valve in an emergency. 
(42)  Waste disposal. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to the following: 
a.  Operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons. Tanks must meet all A.P.I. standards. All tanks must have a vent line, flame arrester and pressure relief valve. All tanks must be enclosed by a fence applicable to the issued permit. 
b.  Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting from or connected with the drilling, re-drilling, re-working or deepening of any well shall be discharged into an aboveground self-contained tank. All disposals must be in accordance with the rules of the Commission and any other applicable local, state or federal agency. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by the commission, waste materials shall be removed from the drill site or operation site and transported to an offsite disposal facility not less often than one time every 30 days. Water stored in onsite tanks shall be removed as necessary. 
d.  All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water pollution control regulations of the state, this article, and any other applicable ordinance of the town. 
(43)  Watchperson. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel onsite during the drilling, re-drilling or re-working of a well when other workmen are not on the premises. 
(b)  Pursuant to section 34-432 of this article, the oil and gas board of appeals may issue variances to technical requirements (8), (19), (21), (25), (27), (28), (30), and (35) set out in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-428. - Screening, fences, and gates. 
(a)  Screening. Screening shall be installed completely around the entire perimeter of the pad site and shall be sufficient to screen from view the structures sought to be screened within 45 days following the completion of drilling of the first permitted well. Screening options shall adhere to a combination of the following: 
(1)  Vegetation. A landscape plan is required and shall include a combination of large canopy trees and small to medium canopy trees which are native or adaptive drought tolerant species, shrubs, vines, groundcover, ornamental grasses, and/or wildflowers, or other adapted drought tolerant species, complementary to the surrounding landscape. 
a.  Trees shall be a minimum three-inch caliper at the time of planting. A minimum of six trees per 100 linear feet is required. Vegetation must have an installed and operable irrigation system that provides total water coverage to all plant materials. All vegetation shall be planted and spaced to provide maximum screening, growth, and overall health. 
b.  At least 50 percent of the landscape vegetation shall be evergreen. 
c.  The vegetation shall be kept in an attractive state and in good condition at all times by the applicant or operator. 
d.  Landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect and vegetation used to satisfy screening standards shall include the following species, as may be approved by the oil and gas inspector: 
1.  Juniperus species 
2.  Live Oak 
3.  Bur Oak 
4.  Shumard Oak 
5.  Water Oak 
6.  Pinus species 
7.  Ilex species 
8.  Wax Myrtle 
9.  Leyland Cypress 
10.  Cedar Elm 
e.  Protected trees and specimen trees removed from the area of the drill site or operation site shall be mitigated for and shall conform to the tree removal requirements in chapter 94, "Trees." 
(2)  Natural and manmade screens. When possible, sites should be located to utilize natural, structural, and topographical screens. Vegetated berms may be constructed if they are compatible with the surrounding area. 
(3)  Fence screening. Fencing shall be equipped with interlocking opaque slats, mesh, or other screening material approved by the oil and gas inspector. Color of materials shall be uniform, non-reflective tones, similar to the Bureau of Land Management Standard Environmental Colors chart. Approved colors shall include, but not be limited to green, brown, tan, and black and be complementary to the color of the fence and painted equipment. 
(b)  Fences/walls. Fences shall be required around all operation sites and drill sites during initial drilling, completion, re-drilling or re-working operations. A secured entrance gate to the drill site or operation site shall be required. All gates are to be kept locked when the operator or his and her employees are not within the enclosure. Within 45 days following the completion of drilling the first permitted well or the derrick being removed following the completion of drilling for wells drilled in succession, all remaining drilling equipment shall be completely enclosed by a permanent chain link fence or other approved fencing material according to the requirements of the requested permit, as follows: 
(1)  The fence fabric shall be at least eight feet in height, but no more than ten feet in height; 
(2)  Support posts shall be set in concrete and shall be imbedded into the ground to a depth sufficient to maintain the stability of the fence; provided, however, so long as stability of the fence is maintained, temporary fence posts shall not be required to be set in concrete; 
(3)  The chain link fabric shall be coated with vinyl or plastic material and approved colors including, but not limited to, green, brown, tan, and black and be complimentary to the color of the fence screening and painted equipment; 
(4)  The chain link fence fabric shall have a minimum thickness of 11 gauge; 
(5)  The chain link fabric shall be two-inch mesh; provided, however, three and one-half-inch mesh may be used on any fence where the fabric is interwoven with artificial screening material approved by the fire chief; 
(6)  Posts and rails shall be standard galvanized, welded pipe, schedule 40 or thicker; provided, however, that non-galvanized drill pipe may be used if it exceeds schedule 40 in thickness; 
(7)  All pipe and other ferrous parts, except chain link fabric and drill pipe, shall be galvanized inside and outside with a plating which contains a minimum of one and two-tenths (1.2) ounces of zinc per square foot of surface area; 
(8)  Tension rods shall be three-eighths-inch round steel bolt stock. Adjustable tighteners shall be turnbuckle or equivalent having a six-inch minimum take-up. Tension bars shall have a minimum thickness of one-fourth-inch by three-fourths-inch; and 
(9)  All fences shall have security extension arms at the top of such fences and such security extension arms shall be strung with at least two strands of galvanized barbed wire. 
(c)  Gate specifications. All chain link fences shall be equipped with at least one (1) gate. The gate shall meet the following specifications: 
(1)  Each gate shall be not less than 12 feet wide and be composed of two gates, each of which is not less than six feet wide, or one sliding gate not less than 12 feet wide. If two gates are used, gates shall latch and lock in the center of the span; 
(2)  The gates shall be of chain link construction that meets the applicable specifications, or of other approved material that, for safety reasons, shall be at least as secure as chain link fence; 
(3)  The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a padlock, and shall be kept locked except when being used for immediate access to the drill site or operation site; and 
(4)  Operator must provide the town's fire chief with a "knox padlock" or "knox box with a key" to access the well site to be used only in case of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-429. - Emergency control; cleanup and maintenance. 
(a)  Cleanup after well servicing. After the well has been completed, or plugged and abandoned, the operator shall clean the drill site or operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property caused by such operations within 30 days. 
(b)  Clean-up after spills, leaks and malfunctions. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause to be removed to the satisfaction of the town's fire chief and the oil and gas inspector all waste materials from any public or private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. Clean-up operations must begin immediately. If the owner fails to begin site clean-up within 24 hours, the town shall have the right to contact the commission in order to facilitate the removal of all waste materials from the property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. 
(c)  Free from debris. The property on which a drill site or operation site is located shall at all times be kept free of debris, pools of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste material within a radius of 100 feet around any separators, tanks and producing wells. 
(d)  Painting. All drilling equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping units, tanks, and onsite buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such, the oil and gas inspector shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which such equipment, facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray and unobtrusive shades of green, blue and brown, or other neutral colors approved by the oil and gas inspector. 
(e)  Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, operator shall immediately take all steps to regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify the oil and gas inspector immediately. The oil and gas inspector shall certify in writing, briefly describing the same, to the town manager and reporting regarding any and all reported blowouts and the steps taken to regain control of such well(s). In the event of such loss of well control, the oil and gas inspector may employ any well control expert or experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, including but not limited to companies offering hazardous materials cleanup services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and material which the oil and gas inspector deems necessary to regain control of such well. The town shall then have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners, excluding working interest owners designated as such by the commission as a result of a forced pooling order, to secure payment of any expenditure made by the town pursuant to such action of the oil and gas inspector in gaining control of said well. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-430. - Plugged and abandoned wells. 
(a)  Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned well or drill site. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of the commission, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the site to its original condition as nearly as practicable in conformity with the regulations of this article. 
(b)  Abandonment shall be approved by the oil and gas inspector after restoration of the drill site and operation site has been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements at the discretion of the oil and gas inspector: 
(1)  The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from the drill site or operation site; 
(2)  All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site or operation site; 
(3)  All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials regardless of depth, except surface casing, shall be removed from the drill site or operation site, unless otherwise directed by the commission; 
(4)  All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil; 
(5)  All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site or operation site; and 
(6)  During abandonment, the operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this article. 
(c)  Abandoned well requirement. The operator shall furnish the following at the discretion of the oil and gas inspector: 
(1)  A copy of the W-3A 'Notice of Intention to Plug & Abandon' and 'W-3 Plugging Record' forms on the same date these forms are submitted to the commission; and 
(2)  A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the date so stated and shall take no longer than 45 days once commenced. 
(d)  Abandonment requirements prior to new construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall meet the most current abandonment requirements of the commission and this article prior to the issuance of any building permit for development of the property. No structure shall be built over an abandoned well. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
DIVISION 8. - TECHNICAL ADVISOR 
 
Sec. 34-431. - Technical advisor. 
The town may from time to time employ a technical advisor or advisors who are experienced and educated in the oil and gas industry or the law as it pertains to oil and gas matters. The function of such advisor(s) shall be to advise, counsel or represent the town on such matters relating to oil and gas operations within the town as the town may want or require and the effect thereof, both present and future, on the health, welfare, comfort and safety of the citizens of the town. In the event such technical advisor(s) is employed for the purpose of advising, counseling or representing the town relative to an operator's unique and particular set of circumstances, case or request relating to this article, then the cost for fees or charges assessed pursuant to this article shall be borne entirely by operator. Prior to the employment of a technical advisor, the town shall inform the operator of the intended scope of work and the estimated costs and expenses. The employment of a technical advisor shall be approved by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
DIVISION 9. - APPEALS 
 
Sec. 34-432. - Appeals. 
(a)  In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the oil and gas inspector relative to the application and interpretation of this article, there shall be and is hereby created an oil and gas board of appeals consisting of members who shall pass on matters pertaining to all oil and/or gas well applications and permits. 
(b)  The members of the zoning board of adjustment are hereby appointed as the oil and gas board of appeals as provided by subsection (a) of this section and shall have and exercise the authority to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion regarding the issuance of an oil, gas, or combined well permit or the revocation or suspension of any permit issued hereunder, and as provided by this article. Any person or entity whose application is denied by the oil and gas inspector or whose permit is suspended or revoked or whose well or equipment is deemed by the oil and gas inspector to be abandoned may file an appeal to the oil and gas board of appeals pursuant to chapter 78, division 3, entitled "Board of Adjustment" in this Code. 
(c)  The oil and gas board of appeals shall review the appeal and any other related information. The oil and gas board of appeals shall consider the following in deciding an appeal: 
(1)  Whether there are special circumstances existing on the property on which the application is made related to size, shape, area, topography, surrounding conditions and location that do not apply generally to other property in the vicinity; 
(2)  Whether a variance is necessary to permit the applicant the same rights in the use of his property that are presently enjoyed by other similarly situated properties, but which rights are denied to the property on which the application is made; 
(3)  Whether the granting of the variance on the specific property will adversely affect any other feature of the comprehensive master plan of the town; 
(4)  Whether the variance, if granted, will be of no material detriment to the public welfare or injury to the use, enjoyment, or value of property in the vicinity; 
(5)  Whether the operations proposed are reasonable under the circumstances and conditions prevailing in the vicinity considering the particular location and the character of the improvements located there; 
(6)  Whether the drilling of the maximum number of potential wells for the proposed drill site would conflict with the orderly growth and development of the town; 
(7)  Whether there are other alternative well site locations; 
(8)  Whether the operations proposed are consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the public when and if conducted in accordance with the oil, gas, or combined well permit conditions to be imposed; 
(9)  Whether the operations proposed are consistent with protecting the ecological integrity and environmental quality, including protection of surface and ground water sources, of potentially impacted environmentally sensitive areas; 
(10)  Whether there is reasonable access for town fire personnel and firefighting equipment, including the ability to safely evacuate potentially affected residents; and 
(11)  Whether the impact upon the adjacent property(ies) and the general public by operations conducted in compliance with the oil, gas, or combined well permit conditions are reasonable and justified, balancing the following factors: 
a.  The reasonable use of the mineral estate by the mineral estate owner(s) to explore, develop, and produce the minerals; and 
b.  The availability of alternative drilling sites. 
(d)  Any person or entity aggrieved by any decision of the oil and gas board of appeals may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, stating that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the alleged illegality. Such petition shall be presented within ten days after the date on which the decision of the oil and gas board of appeals was rendered and not thereafter, and judicial review of the petition shall be pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 211.011, as amended. 
(e)  The oil and gas board of appeals may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the oil and gas inspector's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination. Any action under this subsection, including the issuance of any variance authorized by this article, shall require a three-fourths majority vote of the entire oil and gas board of appeals. 
(f)  Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal, which fees shall be assessed per well and in accordance with the provisions of appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
DIVISION 10. - PENALTY 
 
Sec. 34-433. - Penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following: 
(1)  Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of an oil, gas, or combined well permit issued under this article. 
(2)  Fail to comply with any condition set forth in an oil, gas, or combined well permit issued under this article; or 
(3)  Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 per violation per day, subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any violation of this article that governs fire safety, public health, and/or sanitation, including dumping, refuse, or discharge, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 per violation per day, subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of all other remedies provided by state law, including but not limited to the recovery of civil penalties under V.C.T.A, Local Government Code, subchapter B, chapter 54. The town may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violation of this article. The power of injunction may be exercised in enforcing this article whether or not there has been a criminal complaint filed. 
(Ord. No. 29-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Secs. 34-434—451. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OIL AND GAS PIPELINE STANDARDS[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, adopted July 18, 2011, repealed the former Art. VIII, Div. 1, § 34-452, Div. 2, § 34-453, Div. 3, §§ 34-454—34-471, and enacted a new Art. VIII as set out herein. The former Art. VIII pertained to oil and gas pipeline standards and derived from Ord. No. 04-10, § 2, adopted 1-21-2010. 
 
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE. 
 
Sec. 34-452. - Purpose. 
The exploration, development, and production of oil and gas in the town are activities that necessitate reasonable regulation to ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to enjoy their property and its benefits and revenues while at the same time protecting the town's citizens and others from risks associated with such activities. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards, and regulations for present and future operations related to transporting oil and gas and other substances which are produced in association with oil and gas, within the corporate limits of the town, and to the extent allowed or as may be allowed by state law, the extraterritorial jurisdiction, and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public; minimize the potential impact to property and persons; protect the quality of the environment; and encourage the safe and orderly transport of oil and gas resources. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 34-453. - Definitions. 
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of oil and gas wells not specifically defined shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person applying to the town for a permit and/or certificate for an oil or gas pipeline permit. 
Best management practices are state-of-the-art mitigation measures applied on a site-specific basis to reduce, prevent or avoid adverse environmental or social impacts, and for purposes of this article, best management practices include those practices recommended by the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.), the United States Environmental Protection Agency's Natural Gas STAR Program, and/or other similarly recognized program, acceptable to and approved by the town. 
Building includes, but is not limited to, all related site work and placement of construction materials on the site. 
Centralized natural gas compression facility means any natural gas compression facilities and all related appurtenances and equipment that serve multiple gas well pad sites. 
Centralized natural gas lift facility means any natural gas lift facilities and all related appurtenances and equipment that serve multiple gas well pad sites. 
Centralized natural gas produced water storage facility means any produced water storage and collection facilities and all related appurtenances and equipment that serve multiple gas well pad sites. 
Compression facility means those facilities that compress natural gas after production-related activities which are conducted at or near the wellhead and prior to a point where the gas is transferred to a carrier for transport. 
Construction means causing or carrying out any building, bulk-heading, filling, clearing, excavation, or substantial improvement to land or the size of any structure. 
Dedication includes but is not limited to a permanent easement or a fee simple acquisition of land for a specific purpose. 
Excavation includes, but is not limited to, scraping or grading a site. 
Filling includes, but is not limited to, disposal of excavated materials. 
Gas lift means a recovery method which lowers fluid in a well to allow natural gas to escape by injecting compressed gas down the well through tubing or through the tubing-casing annulus. Gas may be injected continuously or intermittently, depending on the producing characteristics of the well and the arrangement of the gas-lift equipment. 
Gas lift facility means those facilities that are used to artificially lift gas, oil, and/or water from the well when there is insufficient reservoir pressure to produce the well. 
Hazardous liquid, as defined by the Texas Railroad Commission at 16 Texas Administrative Code, section 7.80, Definitions, as amended, shall mean petroleum or any petroleum product, and any substance or material which is in a liquid state, when transported by pipeline facilities and which has been determined by the United States Secretary of Transportation to pose an unreasonable risk to life or property when transported by pipeline facilities. The term shall be enlarged to include liquefied natural gas and anhydrous ammonia should such materials at any time be introduced into any pipeline subject to this article. It shall also include carbon dioxide, defined at 49 CFR § 192.2, as amended, as a fluid consisting of more than 90 percent carbon dioxide molecules compressed to a supercritical state. 
Idled pipeline means a pipeline that has been inactive for at least two years even though there may be no specific plans to reactivate the pipeline. 
Inactive pipeline means a pipeline that has temporarily been taken out of service for a period of at least six months for hazardous materials or hazardous liquids and one year for natural gas with the expectation that the pipeline may be reactivated within two years even though there may be no specific plans to reactivate the pipeline. 
New pipelines shall mean pipelines constructed after the effective date of this article but shall not include: 
(1)  The replacement or repair of any existing pipeline; 
(2)  The realignment of a portion of an existing pipeline to a position that is not greater than 50 feet from its original position; or 
(3)  Surface appurtenances added to existing pipelines. 
Oil and gas inspector means the oil and gas inspector designated by the town manager of the town. 
Owner or operator shall mean any person owning, operating or responsible for operating an oil or gas pipeline for the purpose of transporting oil, gas, or other gasses, or liquids related to the production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons. 
Permittee shall mean any person authorized to act under a permit or a certificate issued by the town. 
Person shall mean an individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, consortium, joint venture, commercial entity, the United States government, a state, a municipality, commission, political subdivision or any international or interstate body or any other governmental entity. 
Pipeline shall mean all parts of those physical facilities through which oil or gas move in transportation, including, but not limited to, pipe, valves and other appurtenances attached to pipe, compressor units, metering stations, pumping units, regulator stations, delivery stations, terminals, holders and fabricated assemblies and breakout tanks whether or not laid in a public or private easement or public or private right-of-way within the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
Pipeline emergency means a pipeline incident in which any of the following has occurred or is occurring: 
(1)  Fire or explosion not initiated by the owner/operator as part of its operations (in accordance with accepted safety practices). 
(2)  Release of a gas, hazardous liquid or chemical that could adversely impact the environment or health of individuals, livestock and/or domestic animals, and wildlife, within the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(3)  Death of any person or individual directly attributable to the operations of the pipeline. 
(4)  Bodily harm of any person that results in loss of consciousness, the need to assist a person from the scene of the incident or the necessity of medical treatment in excess of first aid. 
(5)  Damage to private or public property not owned by the pipeline owner or operator in excess of $5,000.00 in combined values. 
(6)  The rerouting of traffic or the evacuation of buildings. 
Practicable. In determining what is practicable, the town council shall consider the effectiveness, scientific feasibility and commercial availability of the technology or technique. The town council may also consider the cost of the technology or technique. 
Produced water means water found in the same formations as oil and gas and which may contain some of the chemical characteristics of the formation from which it was produced, associated hydrocarbons, and industrial chemical additives. 
Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of the street right-of-way that is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Street right-of-way means that land dedicated or acquired by easement or by fee simple, or qualifies as a prescriptive easement, or prescriptive right-of-way, for the use and construction of a street or roadway. 
Structure means, without limitation, any building, or combination of related components constructed in an ordered scheme that constitutes a work or improvement constructed on or affixed to land, including but not limited to partially enclosed structures, enclosed tanks, etc. 
Town means the town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Unregulated pipeline means those pipelines within the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction that enjoy exemptions under federal and state rules that exclude such lines from construction standards, safety standards or reporting requirements of either or both federal and state governments. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 34-454. - General requirements and minimum design standards. 
(a)  An oil and gas pipeline permit is required as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, acting either for himself or as an agent, employee, independent contractor or servant of any other person, to commence to construct, install, operate or reconstruct a pipeline or any section of a pipeline or to operate any pipeline or to assist in the construction, installation, operation or reconstruction of a pipeline if a lawful oil and gas pipeline permit has not been obtained. 
(2)  Any applications to construct, lay, rework, wrap or otherwise lower or replace existing pipelines or install monitoring or recovery wells shall be submitted to the town in a form prescribed by the town. 
(3)  Each application for an oil and gas pipeline permit shall be accompanied by five sets of plans showing the dimensions and locations of the pipelines and related items or facilities within the subject right-of-way or easement, as well as all proposed lift stations, compression or gas lift facilities, pumps or other service structures related to such pipeline and the location, type and size of all existing utilities, drainage, right-of-way and roadway improvements. Each application also shall contain plans for vapor recovery/emissions control systems for each compressor or gas lift facility, as well as other surface equipment, all as referenced herein. 
(4)  Within 15 days after the date of filing of said application and plans, the town shall send notice to the applicant as to whether the application will be accepted for processing and the total charge due. If the application is rejected, reasons for rejection of the application shall be provided in writing. 
(b)  No pipeline for the transportation of gas, oil, and hydrocarbons from wells drilled or to be drilled shall be constructed or laid except in rights-of-way or easements owned by the owners or operators of wells or third party pipeline companies, or upon designated drilling tracts and upon rights-of-way or easements necessary to connect future well sites to present lines. 
(c)  In order to enable the holder of each permit to move gas or oil to or from the location of a well, the holder of each permit shall apply to the town for an easement on, over, under, along or across the town's streets, sidewalks, alleys and other town property for the purpose of constructing, laying, maintaining, operating, repairing, replacing and removing pipelines so long as production or operations may be continued under any permit issued pursuant to this article; provided, however, such permittee shall: 
(1)  Not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer or gas lines or the facilities of public utilities located on, under or across the course of such right-of-way; 
(2)  Furnish to the oil and gas inspector a plat showing the location of such pipelines for the transport of gas or oil. Said plat shall conform to the town's standards for site plans, pursuant to section 82-33 of this Code, as amended. 
(3)  Construct such lines or cause same to be constructed out of new pipe. 
(4)  Grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly practicable, as existed before operations were first commenced. 
(5)  All required agreements pursuant to this division shall be completed, reviewed, and resolved by the town engineer, town attorney, town manager, and, if required, by town council, prior to the determination of any oil, gas, or combined permit as being administratively complete. 
(d)  Pipeline trenches shall be double ditch backfilled and pipelines shall be constructed so as to maintain a minimum depth of 36 inches below the finished grade except in public rights-of-way, where minimum cover to the top of the pipe shall be at least 48 inches below the bottom of any adjacent roadside ditch. Public roads shall not be crossed by open cut. During the backfill of any pipeline excavations, detectable underground warning tape shall be buried one foot above any such pipeline to warn future excavators of the presence of a buried pipeline. Said detectable underground warning tape shall be at least six inches wide and four mils thick complying with APWA Uniform Color Code for marking of underground utilities. 
(e)  In all cases in which one or more residential lots in a proposed subdivision are crossed or come by or come within 100 feet of any existing oil or gas pipeline or pipeline easement, the subdivider shall, prior to and as a condition of town approval of the subdivision, execute the following waiver and hold harmless agreement, which shall be duly acknowledged in the manner provided by law, and which shall thereafter be recorded in the appropriate deed or other permanent county records: 
"[Subdivider Name], by and through its duly undersigned and authorized officer, does hereby state that it fully realizes that it is applying for a permit from the Town of Flower Mound to build within 100 feet of an existing oil or gas pipeline or pipeline easement, and that the Town of Flower Mound considers building near such pipeline or pipeline easement to have certain inherent dangers, including, but not limited to, explosion and release of noxious, toxic and flammable substances. For the aforementioned reasons, [Subdivider Name], for itself and its successors and assigns, does hereby RELEASE and agrees to forever HOLD HARMLESS the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, its officers, officials, employees, successors and assigns from all liability in any way arising from the building, use or habitation of the structure(s) described in the said permit." 
(f)  In all cases in which one or more residential lots in a proposed subdivision are crossed or come by or come within 100 feet of any existing oil or gas pipeline or pipeline easement, the subdivider shall provide a note on the face of the development plan and record plat stating that the subdivision is crossed or is located within 100 feet of an existing oil or gas pipeline or pipeline easement. 
(g)  Construction, repair and/or maintenance of all pipelines, gathering lines, and production lines shall meet or exceed the minimum criteria established by the statutory or regulatory requirements of the state and federal governments for oil and gas pipelines. 
(h)  Transmission pipelines, gathering lines and production lines within the town limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be constructed in accordance with the ordinances, utilize best management practices, and be designed and constructed to the latest standards mandated by the United States Department of Transportation (DOT) and Texas Railroad Commission for pipelines operating within a class 3 location in accordance with 49 CFR § 192.111, as amended. 
(i)  Pipelines subject to this article shall be constructed with an automated pressure monitoring system that detects leaks and shuts off any line or any section of line that develops a leak. In lieu of such system, the pipeline operator may have 24-hour pressure monitoring of the pipeline system which provides monitoring of the pipeline within the town limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction. Any monitoring system(s) shall be keyed to or required to notify the town's emergency response providers in order to provide them with immediate notice of any leak. 
(j)  Compression and gas lift facilities and associated pipelines shall conform to the current code adopted by the town and set forth within the chapter 34, article VII of this Code ("Oil and Natural Gas Well Drilling and Operations" ordinance), as amended. Compression and gas lift facilities shall be required to comply with all state and/or federal regulations relative to emissions standards and air permitting compliance requirements for exhaust emissions, fugitive emissions, greenhouse gas emissions, and all other applicable air quality standards associated with natural gas compression and gas lift facilities. Best management practices to meet all permitting requirements and control emissions generated at compression and gas lift facilities, and associated equipment, shall be required and submitted to the town for approval. Compression facilities shall be equipped with: 
(1)  Gas and flame detection equipment designed to shut down the operations if a gas leak or flame is detected at the facility; 
(2)  High/low pressure automatic cutoff switch; and 
(3)  Sound control enclosures to reduce compressor noise and vibrations. 
(k)  Construction of the pipeline must commence within six months of approval by the town or otherwise the permit expires. A one-year extension of time may be granted if existing conditions are the same, as determined by the oil and gas inspector. Once construction has commenced, the permit shall continue (i) until the pipeline covered by the permit is complete and the site restored, or (ii) one year has elapsed since the approval date of the permit by the town council, whichever occurs first. 
(l)  Structures shall not be built over flow lines or gathering lines and within any pipeline easement. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-455. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-456. - New pipeline permit application. 
(a)  At least 45 days prior to the scheduled commencement of the construction of a new pipeline, the pipeline owner or operator shall submit an application and pay a fee, as established by the adopted fee schedule, for an oil and gas pipeline permit to the town pursuant to its intention to construct the pipeline and shall submit the following information in the application for a permit: 
(1)  The name, business address and telephone numbers of the pipeline owner or operator. 
(2)  The names, titles and telephone numbers of the following: 
a.  The person submitting the application for an oil and gas pipeline permit to construct the pipeline; 
b.  The person designated as the principal contact for the submittal; 
c.  The person designated as the 24-hour emergency contact; and 
d.  The person or firm that will operate the pipeline. 
(3)  The origin point and the destination of the segment of the pipeline to be constructed. 
(4)  A text description of the general location of the planned pipeline. 
(5)  A description of the substance to be transported through the pipeline. 
(6)  A copy of the substance material safety data sheet (MSDS). 
(7)  The maximum allowable operating pressure on the pipeline, along with the specified minimum yield strength (SMYS) of the pipe, its pressure class, and design calculations in accordance with 49 CFR § 192.105, as amended, assuming a class 3 or better location. 
(8)  The normal operating pressure range of the pipeline, not to exceed the maximum allowable operating pressure as designated above. 
(9)  Engineering plans, drawings and/or maps with summarized specifications showing the horizontal pipeline location, pipeline covering depths, and location of shutoff valves (the location of shutoff valves must be known in order for emergency responders to clear area for access valves.) To the extent that information can be obtained, drawings shall show the location of other pipelines and utilities that will be crossed or paralleled within five feet of the proposed pipeline. 
(10)  A description of the consideration given to matters of public safety and the avoidance, as far as practicable, of existing inhabited structures and congregated areas. 
(11)  Detailed cross section drawings for all public street right-of-way and easement crossings. 
(12)  Methods to be used to prevent both internal and external corrosion. 
(13)  A binder or certificates of all bonds and insurance as required under this article. 
(14)  A tree survey of specimen trees prepared pursuant to chapter 94, "Vegetation," article II, "Trees," section 94-91, "Application," as amended. A tree survey of specimen trees shall be required from the outer edge of any improvements, construction areas, development, equipment, materials, temporary roads, access easements, and/or built structures, extending 25 feet, without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-457. - Permit approval. 
(a)  The applicant shall submit an application as described in section 34-456 of this article and in accordance with a submittal schedule as provided by the town. Any application submitted that is determined to be administratively incomplete shall be returned to the applicant within ten business days of the submittal date along with a letter documenting the deficiencies of the application, if any. 
(b)  After the submission of an administratively complete application, an administrative conference may be conducted to seek resolution of any substantive, non-resolvable technical issues. The conference shall be conducted with the pipeline review committee, which shall consist of the town engineer, fire chief, oil and gas inspector and, if necessary, a third-party technical expert. The costs associated with the technical expert shall be borne by the applicant. A quorum of at least three members must be present to conduct a conference with at least one of the members present at the conference having emergency management expertise. Any decision by the pipeline review committee is final. 
(c)  From time to time the town may need to obtain an independent study or analysis of an application or petition to construct a new pipeline. The town, upon approval by the town council after recommendation by the pipeline review committee, shall engage duly qualified independent consultant(s) or contractor(s) to conduct such special studies or analyses as required to fully evaluate and act upon an application for a new pipeline. Cost for said consultant or contractor shall be billed directly to the applicant for all direct expenses incurred by the town relative thereto. Failure to timely remit payment to the town shall result in the denial of an application. 
(d)  The pipeline owner or operator shall give notice at least 48 hours prior to the commencement of pipeline construction to all residents and business establishments that are located within 500 feet of the proposed centerline of the pipeline. 
(e)  Upon completion of pipeline construction the pipeline owner or operator shall provide the town with as-built or record drawings of the pipelines within 120 calendar days. Accuracy of the as-built or record drawings shall meet a survey level of one foot to 50,000 feet. The drawings shall also be supplied in a DXF digital file format with the location tied to one nearby GPS (global positioning system) town monument. If the new pipeline length exceeds 1,000 feet within the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the pipeline shall be tied to at least two GPS town monuments. 
(f)  Any change in service of a pipeline not previously addressed by this article must be reviewed in accordance with the new pipeline review procedure outlined herein, as if it were new pipeline construction. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-458. - Public education. 
(a)  In keeping with the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 and 49 CFR § 192.614, "Damage Prevention Program," 49 CFR § 192.615, "Emergency Plans," the Hazardous Liquids Safety Act of 1979, and 49 CFR § 195.408, "Communications," 49 CFR § 195.440, "Public Awareness," and the Community Right-to-Know Act, 40 CFR Parts 350-374, all as amended: 
(1)  Each pipeline owner or operator shall maintain a public education program that is communicated to residents and business establishments within 1,000 feet of the centerline of a pipeline. 
(2)  Pipeline information communicated per subsection (a)(1) of this section shall contain the following subjects: 
a.  Pipeline location; 
b.  Material transported within the pipeline; 
c.  Pipeline markers; 
d.  How to recognize a pipeline; 
e.  How to report a pipeline emergency; 
f.  Contact information regarding underground utility locations; 
g.  Additional requirements for excavations near a home or business; and 
h.  Response needs during a pipeline emergency, including instructions for sheltering in the event of an emergency. 
(3)  Public education information shall be communicated at least annually in both English and Spanish. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-459. - Pipeline information reporting requirements. 
(a)  Each pipeline owner or operator shall provide to the oil and gas inspector, the fire department, and the town's law enforcement provider the names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of at least two primary persons, officers or contacts available on a 24-hour basis and at least two alternative persons, officers or contacts to be reached in the event that the primary contacts are unavailable who: 
(1)  Can initiate appropriate actions to respond to an emergency; 
(2)  Have access to information on the location of the closest shutoff valve to any specific point in the town or its jurisdiction; and 
(3)  Can furnish the common name of the material then being carried by the pipeline. 
Any change in the above information must be provided to the town by contacting the oil and gas inspector prior to such change. 
(b)  Every owner or operator of a pipeline subject to this article shall be required to present to the town a safety report and file with the town an annual verified safety report in letter form on or before June 30 of each year to cover a reporting period of June 1 through May 31. Said written safety report shall contain the following information and said information shall be presented to the oil and gas inspector by every owner or operator of a pipeline subject to this article: 
(1)  A statement that the pipeline has no outstanding safety violations as determined in an inspection or audit by either the Texas Railroad Commission and/or the U.S. Department of Transportation with regard to any pipeline operating within the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Alternatively, if there are any safety violations as determined by the Texas Railroad Commission and/or the U.S. Department of Transportation that have not been corrected, these outstanding safety violations shall be described to the town with an action plan to correct the safety violations. Said action plan shall include a timeline for corrective action and the individual or firm responsible for each action. 
(2)  Evidence that the pipeline owner or operator has current liability insurance covering each respective pipeline in the minimum amount of $5,000,000.00 or has a self-insured signed program, verified by an independent certified public accountant, which program and verification will be reviewed and judged to determine equivalency by the town. Insurance carriers must be licensed to conduct business in the State of Texas and possess at least an "A" rating by the A.M. Best Company. 
(3)  A statement that the pipeline information specified in subsection (a) is correct. Alternatively, in the event that the required information on file with the town is no longer correct, updated or corrected information shall be submitted within five calendar days of the change and the updated information shall be submitted with the annual safety report. 
(4)  Owners or operators of any unregulated pipeline who have no reporting responsibility to the Texas Railroad Commission or the U.S. Department of Transportation and who may otherwise operate outside the safety regulations of either of these agencies shall additionally provide the following information pertaining to the preceding reporting period of June 1 through May 31: 
a.  Copies of internal reports of responses to pipeline emergencies, as pipeline emergency is defined in this article; 
b.  Current operations and maintenance logs; and 
c.  Current emergency action plan. 
(5)  A log of all the maintenance and monitoring activities conducted on all lines subject to this article for the reporting period shall be made available upon request by the town. 
(6)  The designated owner or operator shall submit the annual safety report with respect to all pipelines subject to the ordinances of the town of Flower Mound. The safety report and verification shall be executed by an officer or a person who is authorized to sign such safety report letter and make verification. The prescribed form of verification on the safety report letter shall read: 
Verification 
I, [NAME], [TITLE], of [OWNER/OPERATOR], am authorized to make and have made the foregoing annual safety report letter to the Town for oil and gas pipelines. Any attachments submitted with this letter are true and correct copies of originals and the information provided in this letter is true and correct to the best of my knowledge and is information based on the standard of inquiry and investigation as would be made by a reasonably prudent pipeline owner or operator within the Town of Flower Mound or within the Town's extra-territorial jurisdiction. 
_____
Signature of Officer or Person Authorized to Sign Letter 
STATE OF TEXAS       § 
COUNTY OF [Place Where Safety Letter is Prepared]       § 
The foregoing annual safety report letter was sworn to and subscribed before my by (signatory of letter) on this ________ day of ________, 20___. 
Signed: 
___________ 
Notary Public for the State of Texas 
Printed Name: ___________ 
My Commission Expires: _______ 
(7)  An annual fee in the amount of $100.00 for administrative costs shall be remitted by each owner or operator for each pipeline on or before June 30 of each year with the annual safety report letter as required herein. 
(8)  A copy of all initial or follow-up reports provided to the U.S. Department of Transportation or the Texas Railroad Commission on unsafe pipeline conditions, pipeline emergencies or pipeline incidents within the town's jurisdiction must be filed concurrently with the town. In addition, any initial or follow-up reports filed with state and federal environmental regulatory agencies pertaining to pipeline releases, emergencies or releases within the town's jurisdiction that threaten to impact the environment, public health or safety must be filed concurrently with the town. 
(9)  Upon written request of the town the pipeline owner or operator shall make available to the town during normal business hours and at the pipeline owner or operator's local office documents for review that are required for submittal to or to be maintained on file for the U.S. Department of Transportation and the Texas Railroad Commission such as: 
a.  Operations and maintenance; 
b.  Employee training; 
c.  Annual inspection; 
d.  Repair records; 
e.  Operating records; and 
f.  Insurance. 
In the case of unregulated pipelines, the town may request any such additional information that the town deems may be necessary to the best interests of the town and to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-460. - Pipeline markers. 
(a)  In accordance with U.S. Department of Transportation and Texas Railroad Commission requirements, pipeline owners or operators shall place and maintain permanent line markers as close as practical over the pipeline(s) at each crossing of a public street, utility easement or railroad. Marker(s) shall also be maintained by the pipeline owners or operators along each pipeline that is located above ground in an area accessible to the public. The markers shall be of permanent type construction and contain labeling identifying the: 
(1)  Pipeline owner or operator; 
(2)  Twenty-four-hour contact telephone number; and 
(3)  A general description of the product transported in the pipeline; i.e., natural gas, oil or petroleum. 
(b)  No person shall tamper with, deface, damage or remove any pipeline marker, except the pipeline owner or operator. 
(c)  Upon specific reasonable request of the owner of a residential property, the pipeline owner or operator shall install temporary pipeline markers or flagging to reduce the possibility of pipeline damage or interference, in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-461. - One Call System. 
(a)  The owner or operator of any pipeline that transports gas, oil or hydrocarbons that is located in the town's jurisdiction shall be a member in good standing with the One Call system or other approved excavation monitoring system as required by state law. The owner or operator of any pipeline that transports gas, oil or hydrocarbons subject to this article shall contract for service with the selected underground utility coordinating system for a minimum of five years unless there is an agreement to change to an alternate system between the town and the pipeline owners or operators. Said services shall be maintained without interruption for the life of the oil and gas pipeline permit. The selected underground utility coordinating system may be different than the one used by the town for other underground utility services. 
(b)  Prior to beginning any excavation, trenching or digging using powered equipment or hand tools that may damage a pipeline, any person in the town's jurisdiction shall be required to contact the One Call system and any other appropriate underground utility coordinating systems and determine if there are any pipelines or public utilities in the vicinity of the proposed activities. 
(c)  If physical contact is made with a pipeline during any excavation, trenching or digging, the pipeline company must be notified by the person or agency making the physical contact with the pipeline for any necessary pipeline inspection or repair. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-462. - Inactive and idled pipelines. 
(a)  Inactive pipelines. 
(1)  All reporting records specified in section 34-457 of this article shall be maintained and kept current on inactive pipelines. 
(2)  Inactive pipelines shall be purged of gas, hazardous liquids, and chemicals, and physically isolated if such action does not adversely effect the pipeline owner or operators right-of-way easement and does not prevent the pipeline owner or operator from maintaining the physical integrity of the pipeline. These pipelines shall be maintained to prevent deterioration. 
(3)  The means used to physically isolate, if such action is taken, the inactive pipeline shall be included in the information retained on file with the town for reporting as specified in section 34-457 of this article. 
(b)  Idled pipelines. 
(1)  An entry shall be made to the required reporting records as required in section 34-457 of this article that the pipeline has been idled. 
(2)  Idled pipelines shall be purged, disconnected from all sources or supplies of gas, hazardous liquids and chemicals, and capped or sealed at the ends. 
(3)  Reactivation of idled pipelines shall require notification of the town pursuant to the standards and requirements specified in section 34-457 of this article. Reactivation shall require pressure testing for integrity and compliance with Texas Railroad Commission and/or United States Department of Transportation regulations. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-463. - Emergency response plans and emergency incident reporting. 
(a)  Each pipeline owner or operator shall maintain written procedures to minimize the hazards resulting from an emergency. These procedures shall at a minimum provide for: 
(1)  Prompt and effective response to emergencies including by way of example and not limitation: 
a.  Leaks or releases that can impact public health, safety or welfare; 
b.  Fire or explosions at or in the vicinity of a pipeline or pipeline easement; or 
c.  Natural disasters; 
(2)  Effective means to notify and communicate required and pertinent information to local fire, police, and public officials during an emergency; 
(3)  The availability of personnel, equipment, tools and materials as necessary at the scene of an emergency; 
(4)  Measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to injury and probability of accidental death or dismemberment; 
(5)  Emergency shut down and pressure reduction of a pipeline; 
(6)  The safe restoration of service following an emergency or incident; 
(7)  A follow-up incident investigation to determine the cause of the incident; and 
(8)  Require the implementation of corrective measures. 
(b)  Each pipeline owner or operator shall meet annually with the oil and gas inspector to review emergency response plans. These reviews shall be in accord with U.S. Department of Transportation and Texas Railroad Commission requirements and the owner or operator will: 
(1)  Furnish or update a copy of the emergency response plan described in subsection (a); 
(2)  Review the responsibilities of each governmental organization in response to an emergency or incident; 
(3)  Review the capabilities of the pipeline owner or operator to respond to an emergency or incident; 
(4)  Identify the types of emergencies or incidents that will result in or require contacting the town; and 
(5)  Plan mutual activities that the town and the pipeline owner or operator can engage in to minimize risks associated with pipeline operation. 
(6)  At this meeting, the town shall provide the pipeline owner or operator with a list of additional contacts that shall be made in the event of a pipeline emergency or incident. The town will inform the pipeline owner or operator of the emergency response groups that will be contacted through 911. 
(c)  Upon discovery of a pipeline emergency or incident, the following communications are to be initiated immediately by the affected pipeline owners or operators: 
(1)  A general description of the emergency or incident; 
(2)  The location of the emergency or incident; 
(3)  The name and telephone number of the person reporting the emergency or incident; 
(4)  The name of the pipeline owner or operator; 
(5)  Whether or not any hazardous material is involved and identification of the hazardous material so involved; and 
(6)  Any other information as requested by the emergency dispatcher or other such official at the time of reporting the emergency or incident. 
(d)  The pipeline owner or operator shall contact any other emergency response groups that are necessary that may not be activated through the county 911 system. 
(e)  The pipeline owner or operator shall contact the town fire department no later than one hour after the discovery of any incident. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any provision in this article, each pipeline containing natural gas which contains hydrogen sulfide in concentrations of more than 100 parts per million, shall be constructed with an audible alarm system that will provide an alarm to the general public in the event of a leak from any pipeline, gathering or flow line subject to this article. Said audible alarm system shall be of a type and design approved by the town. The owner or operator shall place a warning sign for lines carrying H 2 S (hydrogen sulfide) gas as required by the commission and all other applicable state or federal regulatory agencies. 
(g)  Within two years of the effective date of the pipeline permit and every two years thereafter, the pipeline owner or operator shall conduct an onsite, emergency drill that includes, but shall not be limited to, the personnel operating the pipeline, local law enforcement personnel, and officials of the town. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-464. - Pipeline repairs and maintenance. 
(a)  All repairs and maintenance are to be performed in accordance with U.S. Department of Transportation and Texas Railroad Commission mechanical integrity requirements. This requirement applies to all pipelines covered by this article, unregulated as well as those operating under federal rules. 
(b)  If non-emergency repairs necessitate excavation of the pipeline, prior notification is required to occupants of all business establishments and residential dwellings located within 500 feet from the centerline of the pipeline section to be excavated. 
(c)  Above-ground non-emergency repairs that are not routine maintenance necessitate prior notification to occupants of all businesses and residential dwellings located within 500 feet from the centerline of the pipeline section to be repaired. 
(d)  Without limitation on the methods of giving the notice required in subsections (b) and (c), the leaving of a written notice securely attached to the front door of a residence or business establishment or the posting of a written notice at the entry to any recreational area or place of public assembly to be noticed shall be deemed compliance with this section. 
(e)  Inspection of the interior of all pipelines subject to these standards shall follow United States Department of Transportation and Texas Railroad Commission rules. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-465. - No grant of town easement; no assumption of responsibility by town. 
(a)  Nothing in this article grants permission for the use of any street, right-of-way or property of the town, and any such use shall be subject to the town at its sole discretion. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as an assumption by the town of any responsibility of an owner or operator of a pipeline not owned by the town, and no town officer, employee or agent shall have authority to relieve an owner or operator of a pipeline from their responsibility under this article or by any other law, ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-466. - Protection and painting of structures. 
All pipeline risers and all appurtenances related to pipeline construction and operations composed of materials generally protected or painted shall be protected and painted and shall be repainted at sufficiently frequent intervals to maintain same in good condition. It shall be a violation of this article for any pipeline riser and/or appurtenances related to pipeline construction and operations to be in a state of disrepair or to have chipped, peeling or unpainted portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-467. - Waiver/hold harmless agreement required for issuance of building permit. 
Any person, firm or corporation wishing to obtain a building permit for the erection, construction, reconstruction or expansion of any structure, of which any portion of such erection, construction, reconstruction or expansion would occur within 100 feet of an existing oil or gas pipeline or pipeline easement, shall, prior to and as a condition of the issuance of such building permit, execute the following waiver and hold harmless agreement, which shall be duly acknowledged in the manner provided by law, and which shall thereafter be notarized and recorded in the appropriate deed or other permanent county records: 
"I, [Applicant's Name], do hereby state, on my oath, that I fully realize I am applying for a permit from the Town of Flower Mound to build within 100 feet of an existing oil or gas pipeline or pipeline easement; that I am fully aware of the dangers inherent in building near such pipeline or easement, including, but not limited to, explosion and release of noxious, toxic and flammable substances; and, further, that I do hereby RELEASE and agree to forever HOLD HARMLESS the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, its officers, officials, employees, successors and assigns from all liability in any way arising from the building, use or habitation of the structure described in the said permit." 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-468. - Street and right-of-way use. 
(a)  In the event an oil or gas pipeline is placed within any public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the town, the owner/operator shall comply with the right-of-way use regulations as provided in this Code and obtain an appropriate franchise, permit or authorization for the use of such right-of-way. 
(b)  To the extent that the provisions of this article conflict with the town's right-of-way use ordinance, this article shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-469. - Violations. 
(a)  Any pipeline owner or operator subject to this article, who shall have failed to comply with this article, shall be deemed to maintain a nuisance and the town may take such measures to remedy such nuisance as may be necessary. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly make a misrepresentation of any information to be reported pursuant to this article. It shall also be a violation of this article if the person makes such misrepresentation as a result of failure to exercise such due diligence of investigation or inquiry, as would a reasonably prudent pipeline owner or operator conducting business in the jurisdiction of the town. 
(c)  Each violation of any section, subsection or part of this article shall be a separate offense. Each day of ongoing violation shall be a separate offense, and shall carry with it a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per day. 
(d)  The town shall be entitled to injunctive relief or any other appropriate relief in a court of appropriate jurisdiction to prevent violation of or to compel compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-470. - Bond and insurance required. 
(a)  In the event that a permit is issued for a pipeline or other operation under this article, no actual operation shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the town secretary a bond and a certificate of insurance as follows: 
(1)  No person shall begin the construction or operation of any pipeline until he has filed with the town secretary a duly executed bond executed by the applicant as principal with an AM Best "A" rated surety company that is acceptable to the town and is licensed to conduct business in the state as surety, payable to the town and the policy shall name the town as an additional insured and such surety company shall maintain an A.M. Best "A" rating for the policy period. Said bond shall include conditions that the applicant, its heirs, assigns and successors will do the following: 
a.  Comply with the terms and conditions of the application and this article in the construction, operation and maintenance of the pipeline and related structure(s). 
b.  That all streets and sidewalks and all other public places and all public utilities that may be injured or damaged in the operation will be restored to their former condition. 
c.  That all litter, machinery, buildings, trash, and waste used, accumulated or allowed in the construction of any pipeline will be removed within 30 days of the completion of said construction. 
d.  That all litter, machinery, buildings, trash, and waste used, accumulated or allowed in the operation of any pipeline will be removed within 30 days of the completion of said operations. 
e.  Such bond shall be in the sum of $1,000,000.00 and before the permit shall be issued, the bond shall be approved by the town and filed with the town secretary. Such bond shall become effective upon the granting of the permit and shall remain in full force and effect until all work under the terms of such permit has been completed. Such bond may later be amended to include other pipelines, under provisions of other applications, or other permits. 
(2)  In addition to the bond required in subsection (a)(1) above, each person desiring to construct a pipeline or to conduct any other work under the provisions of this article shall be required to carry public liability insurance with a carrier rated "A" or better by A.M. Best in a minimum amount of $2,000,000.00 for one person and $5,000,000.00 for one accident and property damage insurance in the amount of $10,000,000.00 for one accident, all of which insurance coverages shall remain in full force and effect and be carried so long as such pipeline is operated. A certificate of insurance shall be furnished annually by the permittee or the subsequent owner and operator of such pipeline showing that such insurance is and continues to be in effect. 
(3)  Permittee shall provide and maintain in full force and effect during the term of its permit insurance with the following minimum limits: 
a.  Worker's compensation at statutory limits; 
b.  Employer's liability, including bodily injury by accident and by disease, for $500,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence and a 12-month aggregate policy limit of $1,000,000.00; 
c.  Commercial general liability coverage, including blanket contractual liability, products and completed operations, personal injury, bodily injury, broad form property damage, operations hazard, pollution, explosion, collapse and underground hazards for $5,000,000.00 per occurrence and a 12-month aggregate policy limit of $25,000,000.00; and 
d.  Automobile liability insurance (for automobiles used by the permittee in the course of its performance under the permit, including employer's non-ownership and hired auto coverage) for $2,000,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence. 
(b)  The town shall adjust the above minimum liability limits every two years during the term of the permit to compensate for the effects of inflation and with the objective to reestablish the value of coverage required as of the effective date of this article. 
(c)  Each policy or an endorsement thereto, except those for worker's compensation and employer's liability, shall name the town and its officers, officials, employees, successors and assigns as additional insured parties, but limited to risks indemnified pursuant to this article. If any such policy is written as "claims made" coverage and the town is required to be carried as an additional insured, then the permittee shall purchase policy period extensions so as to provide coverage to the town for a period of at least two years after the last date that the permit is in effect. No deductible shall exceed ten percent of the minimum limits of liability or one percent of the consolidated net worth of the permittee and its permitted affiliates, whichever is greater. 
(d)  Permittee shall assume and bear the risk of any and all claims or losses to the extent of deductible amounts and waives any claim it may ever have for the same against the town and its officers, officials, employees, successors and assigns in respect of any covered event. 
(e)  All such policies and certificates shall contain an agreement that the insurer shall notify the town in writing not less than 30 days before any material change, reduction in coverage or cancellation of any policy. Permittee shall give written notice to the town within five days of the date upon which total claims by any party against permittee reduce the aggregate amount of coverage below the amounts required by the oil and gas pipeline permit. 
(f)  Each policy must contain an endorsement to the effect that the insurer waives any claim or right in the nature of subrogation to recover against the town, its officers, officials, employees, successors and assigns. 
(g)  Each policy must contain an endorsement that such policy is primary insurance to any other insurance available to the town as an additional insured with respect to claims arising thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-471. - Termination of permit. 
Any violation of the provisions of any or all sections of this article shall be grounds for the termination of any oil and gas pipeline permit. The termination of any oil and gas pipeline permit shall require the immediate cessation of all operations authorized by the permit and shall require the pipeline owner or operator to reapply for a new oil and gas pipeline permit in full accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-472. - Production fluid pipeline general requirements and minimum design standards. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "production fluid" means and includes produced water, drilling fluid, and other fluids associated with the exploration or production of natural gas or oil. 
(b)  General requirements and minimum design standards. 
(1)  A permit for a production fluid or produced water pipeline shall conform to all of the requirements of section 34-454 of this article. 
(2)  General pipeline design requirements. All production fluid pipelines shall be constructed using a double-wall containment pipe system including, but not limited to, fiberglass reinforced plastic (FRP) materials or other materials that are "as-equal" or better than FRP suitable for the pressures, temperatures, and internal and external corrosion, and environmental conditions. Pipeline design, materials of construction, and related construction work shall be approved by the town's oil and gas inspector. 
(3)  Production fluid pipelines shall be constructed with an automated leak detection monitoring system that detects leaks and shuts off any line or any section of line that develops a leak. This system shall consist of a pressure monitoring system capable of detecting large leaks that cause a pressure drop as well as an alarm system to detect small leaks caught by the secondary containment pipeline. The system shall provide for shutdown via automatic valves spaced at each well head, major pipeline junctions, and at the influent and effluent of the storage and disposal tanks. Valve placements shall be indicated on submitted plans and are subject to town approval. In lieu of such system, the pipeline operator may have 24-hour pressure monitoring of the pipeline system which provides monitoring of the pipeline within the town limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction. Any monitoring system(s) shall be keyed to or required to notify the town's emergency response providers in order to provide them with immediate notice of any leak. 
(4)  When crossing existing utilities, production fluid pipelines shall be installed beneath all utilities; no seams, splices or joint connections shall be allowed within town right-of-way and minimum cover to the top of the pipe shall be at the discretion of the town based on existing or planned utilities and existing conditions or planned alterations to roadways. The production fluid at such pipeline crossings must pass through an additional casing of a design and constructed in accordance with the United States Department of Transportation standards set forth in 49 CFR § 192.323 (Casing), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-473. - Centralized natural gas facilities and minimum design standards. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "centralized natural gas facility" shall mean any centralized natural gas compression facility, centralized natural gas lift facility and/or centralized natural gas produced water facility, and all related appurtenances and equipment. 
(1)  A person desiring to construct and/or operate a centralized natural gas facility shall apply for and obtain a specific use permit (SUP) for such use. If at the time of application, section 98-2 of this Code, as amended, does not define a "centralized natural gas facility" or the town's land development regulations do not permit any such uses, then a zoning amendment shall be required, pursuant to the provisions of article IV of chapter 78 of the town's code of regulations, as amended. The use of any property in the town as a centralized natural gas facility is otherwise strictly prohibited. 
(2)  A person desiring to construct and/or operate a centralized natural gas facility shall submit an application accompanied by permit fees in accordance with appendix A of this Code and shall include the following information: 
a.  The date of the application. 
b.  An accurate legal description of the property to be used for the centralized natural gas facility. Property recorded by plat should reference subdivision, block, and lot numbers, as applicable. 
c.  Map showing the proposed transportation route and road for the conveyance of equipment, chemicals or waste products used or produced by and stored at the centralized natural gas facility. 
d.  Surface owner name(s), phone number(s), physical address(es), and, if possible, email address(es), of the surface owner. 
e.  Operator/applicant name, phone number, physical address, and, if possible, email address; if the operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners shall be provided. 
f.  Name, phone number, physical address, and, if possible, email address of the individual designated to receive notice. 
g.  Name of representative with supervisory authority over all centralized natural gas facility site activities and a 24-hour phone number for such representative. 
h.  Location and description of all improvements and structures within 1,000 feet of the proposed centralized natural gas facility site. 
i.  Name and address of the owner(s) of each parcel of property within 1,000 feet of the proposed centralized natural gas facility site. 
j.  A site plan, drawn to scale, of the proposed centralized natural gas facility site showing the location of all improvements and equipment, including but not limited to the location of tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators, and storage tanks. In addition, the site plan must conform to all relevant standards and requirements described in subpart B, "Land Development Regulations," chapter 82, "Development Standards," article II, "Site Plans" of this Code. 
k.  A tree survey prepared pursuant to chapter 94, "Trees" of this Code. A tree survey shall be required from the outer edge of any improvements, construction areas, development, equipment, materials, temporary roads, access easements, and/or built structures, extending outward 500 feet, without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
l.  The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person to be notified in case of an emergency. 
m.  A signed road maintenance agreement supplied by the town that provides that the operator shall repair, at his or her own expense, any damage to public roads, streets, or highways caused by the use of heavy vehicles for any activity associated with the preparation and operation of the centralized natural gas facility. 
n.  A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan as required by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency. A copy of the "notice of intent" shall be submitted to the town of Flower Mound, Environmental Resources Division at least seven business days prior to the commencement of any onsite activity. 
o.  A copy of the erosion control plan pursuant to the town's Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual, as amended, and approved by the town engineer. 
p.  A copy of the hazardous materials management plan as required by the town's fire chief. In addition to the hazardous materials management plan, material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials that will be located, stored, transported, and/or temporarily used on the centralized natural gas facility site shall be provided to the oil and gas inspector and fire chief. 
q.  A copy of the emergency response plan as required by the town's fire chief's office and a copy of the spill prevention and control plan. 
r.  Evidence of insurance and security requirements required by this article or article VII of this chapter, whichever coverage amounts are greater. 
s.  A copy of the noise management plan, prepared by a noise control engineer or other qualified person approved by the oil and gas inspector, for any equipment used in drilling, completion, or production of a well, as required in subsection 34-422[(i)(5)] of this Code. 
t.  A statement, under oath, signed by the operator, or designated representative, that the information submitted with the application is, to the best knowledge and belief and/or understanding of the operator or designated representative, true and correct. 
u.  All required application and permit fees. 
(3)  Any centralized natural gas facility shall conform to all provisions contained in article VII of this chapter, as amended. Any reference to a well, well site, drilling site, operation site or production site, or similar term, in article VII of this chapter shall apply to any centralized natural gas facility. In addition to the provisions contained in article VII of this chapter, best management practices for vapor recovery equipment shall be required for any centralized natural gas facility. 
(4)  Walls, gates, and vehicular drives for any centralized natural gas facility. In addition to the surface equipment requirements set forth in article VII of this chapter, as amended, the following requirements for any centralized natural gas facility shall apply. 
a.  Walls shall be installed completely around all permanent structures and equipment associated with and including the centralized natural gas facility and shall be sufficient to screen from view the structures and equipment sought to be screened. Screening options for masonry walls shall adhere to a combination of the following: 
1.  The wall shall be constructed of hand-laid brick or stone, shall have columns spaced no more than 50 feet apart on center, shall be of a design compatible with the facilities, buildings, and structures on and adjacent to the site, if any; and 
2.  The wall shall be at least eight feet in height. 
b.  Any gate to a centralized natural gas facility shall be at least 12 feet wide and shall be constructed in a manner as to screen from view the interior of said facility; and 
c.  Any vehicular drives designed to access any centralized natural gas facility shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete, at least 26 feet wide with an overhead clearance of at least 14 feet. 
(5)  Landscaping requirements in addition to the requirements set forth in article VII of this chapter, as amended, shall adhere to the following requirements. Landscaping may also include construction of vegetative berms upon approval by the town. Landscape plans shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector for approval. Required landscaping shall be installed and approved by the town prior to commencing operations. 
a.  All centralized natural gas facility sites must be landscaped along the entire perimeter of the required screening wall. 
b.  Vegetation shall include a combination of large canopy trees and small to medium canopy trees which are native or adaptive drought tolerant species, complimentary with the surrounding landscape. 
c.  Trees shall be a minimum of three-inch caliper at the time of planting. A minimum of six trees per 100 linear feet is required. Vegetation must have an installed and operable irrigation system that provides total water coverage to all plant materials. All vegetation shall be planted and spaced to provide maximum screening, growth, and overall health. 
d.  At least 75 percent of the trees utilized for landscaping shall be evergreen. 
e.  Vegetation used to satisfy screening standards shall include the following species and such other species as may be approved by the oil and gas inspector: 
1.  Juniperus species 
2.  Live Oak 
3.  Bur Oak 
4.  Shumard Oak 
5.  Water Oak 
6.  Pinus species 
7.  Ilex species 
8.  Wax Myrtle 
9.  Leyland Cypress 
10.  Cedar Elm 
f.  Protected trees and specimen trees removed from the site shall be mitigated for and shall conform to the tree removal requirements in chapter 94, "Trees", of this Code. 
(6)  All equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with the surrounding uses, and shall include unobtrusive shades of green, sand, brown, or other neutral colors approved by the town. 
(b)  Any centralized natural gas facility shall be located in accordance with any and all well setback distances referenced in article VII of this chapter. All minimum setback requirements shall be measured from the nearest exterior face of the wall surrounding the centralized natural gas facility. 
(c)  All lighting at a centralized natural gas facility shall be in accordance with the provisions of division 6, article IV of chapter 98 of this Code, as amended. 
(d)  Any variance to the setback requirements for any centralized natural gas facility shall be heard by the oil and gas board of appeals, in accordance with the provisions of division 9, article VII of chapter 34 of this Code. Any other requested waiver, exception or variance to any of the provisions of this article related to centralized natural gas facilities shall be heard by the board of adjustment, in accordance with the provisions of division 3, article II of chapter 78 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 34-474. - Conflict between articles. 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and article VII of this chapter, the provisions of this article shall control, unless otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Secs. 34-475—34-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - VESTED RIGHTS/PREEMPTION DETERMINATION 
 
Sec. 34-500. - Vested rights/preemption determination. 
(a)  Introduction and purpose. V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, chapter 245 ("chapter 245"), commonly referred to as the state's "vested rights law," provides an opportunity for persons to "freeze" or "vest" governmental regulations by filing a permit application. Other laws, such as V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 211.016 also provide certain vesting or "grandfathered" rights. To: 
(1)  Ensure that the town recognizes and protects all vested rights created by chapter 245 and other applicable laws; 
(2)  Ensure that all vested rights and/or state or federal law preemption determinations are made by the town only after the town is in receipt of all information necessary to allow the town to determine whether vested rights are present or whether state or federal law preempts certain areas of town regulatory authority; and 
(3)  Provide a method of administrative review of vested rights or preemption determinations, the town has established the following administrative procedure for consideration of any claim of a vested right under chapter 245 or other applicable vesting laws, and/or state or federal preemption. 
(b)  Vested rights/preemption submission. For purposes of article VII or article VIII of this chapter only, any person who believes that he has obtained a vested right under chapter 245 or other applicable vesting law, or that state or federal law preempts certain areas of town regulatory authority, and pursuant to chapter 34 of this Code, shall submit to the town secretary a letter explaining the factual and legal bases upon which the person relies to support his contention that he has a particular vested right and/or claim of preemption and, consequently, is exempt or not subject to a particular town order, regulation, ordinance, rule, expiration date, or other properly adopted requirement (hereinafter referred to collectively as "regulations"). Such written submission shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The name, mailing address, phone number and fax number of the person (or the person's duly authorized agent); 
(2)  Identification of the property for which the person claims a vested right or a claim of preemption; 
(3)  For a vested rights claim, identification of the "project," as that term is defined in chapter 245 at § 245.001(3); 
(4)  For a vested rights claim, identification of the original application for the first permit in the series of permits required for the project, as described in chapter 245 at § 245.001(1) and § 245.002(a) and (b); 
(5)  The date that the first permit in the series of permits required for the project was filed with the town; 
(6)  A chronology of the history of the project; 
(7)  For a vested rights claim, identification of all pertinent town regulations in effect at the time the original application for the permit was filed that (a) the person contends are vested and (b) the person contends controls the approval, disapproval, or conditional approval of an application for a permit, pursuant to chapter 245 at § 245.002(a) and (b); and 
(8)  For a vested rights claim, identification of all pertinent town regulations that the person contends do not apply to the project due to the vested rights provided the person by chapter 245 or other applicable vesting laws. 
(9)  For a vested rights claim or a claim that the town's regulatory authority is preempted under state or federal law, and if a person contends that certain town regulations do not apply to the project, the person is expected to identify, with particularity, all requirements that the person contends do not apply. Global references to a particular ordinance, statute or set of criteria, may be deemed insufficient and the town may consider the request for a vested rights or preemption determination to be incomplete and, hence, not subject to a staff determination at that time. 
(c)  Vested rights/preemption determination. The town secretary shall promptly forward the person's vested rights or preemption determination request, along with any supporting information or documentation provided along with the request, to the town manager and town attorney for their respective reviews. The town manager, after consultation with the town attorney, shall issue a final administrative determination of whether a vested right exists in relation to the project or whether the town's regulatory authority has been preempted under state or federal law, and shall identify, with particularity, all claims for vested rights that have been granted and all claims for vested rights that have been denied, or identify areas where the town's regulatory authority has been preempted under state or federal law. Prior to rendering his final determination, the town manager may request a pre-determination conference with the person to discuss the person's vested rights or preemption claim and to ensure that the nature of the claim is fully and completely understood by the town manager. The town manager shall act as the building official, pursuant to section 78-84 of this Code, as amended, for the limited purpose of determining vested rights or preemption claims under this article. 
(d)  Board of adjustment appeal. Any person who is aggrieved by or believes that the town manager's vested rights or preemption determination is in error, the person shall have the right to appeal such determination to the town's board of adjustment pursuant to section 78-84 of this Code, which board shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide the appeal pursuant to chapter 34 of the town's code of ordinances and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 211. 
(e)  Judicial review. Should the town or any person be aggrieved by or dissatisfied with the actions of the board of adjustment, either the town or the person may pursue all legal remedies to review the decision, pursuant to chapter 34 of this Code, as amended. 
(f)  Binding determination. The town manager's final determination, if not timely appealed to the board of adjustment pursuant to section 78-84 of this Code, shall be immediately filed in the town's files related to the project and the determination shall be considered binding upon the town and the person for the duration of the project. Similarly, any decision by the board of adjustment, regarding a vested right or preemption claim, if not timely appealed pursuant to chapter 34 of this Code, shall be filed in the town's files related to the project and the determination shall be considered binding upon the town and the person for the duration of the project. Notwithstanding the binding nature of the town manager's final determination and any ruling by the board of adjustment, the town and the person may, at any time, enter into an agreement that, to the extent authorized by law, modifies the final determination and the applicable regulations to be applied to the project. 
(g)  Filing date. The board's decision shall be deemed filed in the board's office on the first business day following the date on which action was taken by the board. 
(Ord. No. 30-11, § 2, 7-18-2011)  
Secs. 34-501—34-524. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - FATS, OILS, AND GREASE 
 
Sec. 34-525. - Purpose and policy. 
This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the Town of Flower Mound to capture and dispose of fats, oils, and grease and enables the town to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 U.S.C., § 1251, et seq.; and the General Pretreatment Regulations, Title 40 C.F.R. Part 403. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of fats, oils, and grease into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of fats, oils, and grease into the publicly owned treatment works that could pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise interfere or be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To prevent sanitary sewer overflow, in which waste water flows out of a manhole cover and along the ground, and can then contaminate the ground, local water bodies and any property the waste water comes into contact with; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of waste grease from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To enable the town to comply with federal, state and local pollutant discharge limits; and 
(6)  To establish fees for the recovery of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
( Ord. No. 45-19 , § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 34-526. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
Authority means the POTW or its duly authorized representative, either of which are the authorized agent of the town. 
BOD means the value of the five-day test for biochemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater." 
COD means the value of the test for chemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater." 
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Fats, oils, and grease or FOG means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases." 
Generator means any person who owns or operates a grease trap/grease interceptor, or whose act or process produces grease trap waste. 
Grease trap or interceptor or grease trap/interceptor or grease interceptor means a pretreatment device that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept non-petroleum FOG from wastewater. The definition includes the interceptor and all of its parts, above ground and below ground, along with all lids, caps, and cleanouts that connect directly to the interceptor. This device is designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils, and grease prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. 
Grease trap waste means material collected in and from a grease trap or interceptor in the sanitary sewer service line of a commercial, institutional, or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting from de-watering processes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any non-domestic source. 
Interference means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or is a cause of a violation of the town's TPDES permit. 
pH means the measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water and is defined as the negative logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
POTW or publicly owned treatment works means a treatment works as defined by section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act which is owned in this instance by the Town of Flower Mound. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. For purposes of this article, the terms "authority" and "POTW" may be used interchangeably. 
TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and its predecessor and successor agencies. 
Transporter means a person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code § 312.142. 
TSS means the value of the test for total suspended solids, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater." 
User means any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the town, who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources. 
( Ord. No. 45-19 , § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 34-527. - Applicability and prohibitions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all non-domestic users of the POTW. 
(b)  Grease traps or grease interceptors shall not be required for residential users. 
(c)  Facilities generating fats, oils, and grease as a result of food manufacturing, processing, preparation, or food service shall install, use, and maintain appropriate grease traps or interceptors as required in this article. These facilities include but are not limited to restaurants, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels and motels, grocery stores, nursing homes, and any other facility preparing, serving, or otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption. 
(d)  No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect discharge of any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW system in such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass through the treatment works into the environment. 
( Ord. No. 45-19 , § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 34-528. - Installation and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Installations. 
(1)  Food processing or food service facilities which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility, where such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grease trap/interceptor in accordance with town plumbing codes or other applicable ordinances. Grease traps and interceptors shall be installed and inspected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Existing grease traps and interceptors must be operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and in accordance with federal and state laws, and with town ordinances unless specified in writing and approved by the authority. 
(3)  All grease trap and interceptor waste shall be properly disposed of at a facility in accordance with federal, state, or local regulation. 
(b)  Cleaning and maintenance. 
(1)  Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating condition at all times. All exterior openings of the grease trap and interceptor shall have properly fitting covers and caps. Covers and caps shall remain in place during normal use and shall be easily removable for inspection and sampling purposes. The user shall be responsible for prompt replacement or repair of any defective, damaged, or inoperable components of the grease interceptor. 
(2)  Each grease trap pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the trap volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the trap is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period, in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code § 312.143. 
(c)  Cleaning schedules. 
(1)  Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease trap and interceptor; to ensure the discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits; and to ensure no visible grease is observed in discharge. 
(2)  Grease traps and grease interceptors subject to these standards shall be completely evacuated a minimum of every 90 days, or more frequently when: 
a.  Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases; or 
b.  Liquid discharged from the interceptor/grease trap to the sanitary sewer exceeds pollutant levels established by the POTW; or 
c.  There is a history of non-compliance. 
(3)  Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/interceptor may submit to the authority a request in writing for an exception to the 90-day pumping frequency of their grease trap/interceptor. The authority may grant an extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when: 
a.  The grease trap/interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated the specific trap/interceptor will produce an effluent, based on defensible analytical results, in consistent compliance with established local discharge limits based on parameters as determined by the authority; or 
b.  Less than 25 percent of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases. 
(4)  In any event, a grease trap and grease interceptor shall be fully evacuated, cleaned, and inspected at least once every 180 days. 
(d)  Manifest requirements. 
(1)  Each pump-out of a grease trap or interceptor must be accompanied by a manifest to be used for record keeping purposes. 
(2)  Persons who generate, collect, and transport grease waste shall maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records shall be in the form of the manifest, obtained from the liquid waste transporter. The manifest shall include: 
a.  Name, addresses, telephone, and commission registration number of transporter; 
b.  Name, signature, address, and phone number of the person who generated the waste and the date collected; 
c.  Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported; 
d.  Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting, and depositing the waste; 
e.  Date and place where the waste was deposited; 
f.  Identification (permit or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited; 
g.  Name and signature of facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received; 
h.  The volume of the grease waste received; and 
i.  A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters, waste generators, and regulating authorities in tracking the volume of grease transported. 
(3)  Manifests shall be divided into five parts and records shall be maintained as follows: 
a.  One part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter information completed and be given to the generator at the time of waste pickup. 
b.  The remaining four parts of the manifest shall have all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the manifest. 
c.  One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility. 
d.  One part of the manifest shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the collection and disposition of waste. 
e.  One copy of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to the person who generated the wastes within 15 days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility. 
f.  One part of the manifest shall go to the local authority. 
(4)  Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be retained for five years and be readily available for review by the POTW. 
(e)  Alternative treatment. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person introduces, or causes, permits, or suffers the introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier into a grease trap. Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are materials which allow the grease to pass from the trap into the collection system, and include but are not limited to enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene, and other solvents. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement subsection (e)(1) that the use of surfactants or soaps is incidental to normal kitchen hygiene operations. 
(3)  Bioremediation media may be used with the authority's approval if the person has proved to the satisfaction of the authority that laboratory testing which is appropriate for the type of grease trap to be used has verified that: 
a.  The media is a pure live bacterial product which is not inactivated by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and detergents, strong alkalis, acids, and/or water temperatures of 160/F (71/C); 
b.  The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap and does not increase the potential for oil and grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer; 
c.  The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming in the sanitary sewer; and 
d.  The BOD, COD, and TSS discharged to the sanitary sewer after use of the media does not exceed the BOD, COD, and TSS which would be discharged if the product were not being used and the grease trap was being properly maintained. pH levels must be between five and 11. 
(4)  All testing designed to satisfy the criteria set forth in subsection (e)(3) shall be scientifically sound and statistically valid. All tests to determine oil and grease, TSS, BOD, COD, pH, and other pollutant levels shall use appropriate tests which have been approved by the environmental protection agency and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and which are defined in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 136 or Title 30, Texas Administrative Code § 319.11. Testing shall be open to inspection by the POTW, and shall meet the POTW's approval. 
( Ord. No. 45-19 , § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 34-529. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  The authority shall have the right to enter the premises of any user or potential user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article. Users shall allow the authority ready access to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(b)  The user shall, upon written or verbal request by the authority, be prepared to promptly remove any manhole covers, cleanout caps, or other temporary or permanent obstructions to safe and easy access to interceptors, grease traps, or other pretreatment devices for purposes of inspection and sampling. The user shall be responsible for closing and securing any cover, lid, or other appurtenance removed for purposes of inspection and sampling. The user shall be responsible for prompt replacement or repair of any defective, damaged, or inoperable components of the grease interceptor. 
(c)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the authority access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 45-19 , § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 34-530. - Schedule of penalties. 
(a)  If the authority determines that a generator is responsible for a blockage of a collection system line the generator shall owe a civil penalty of $1,000.00 for the first violation, $1,500.00 for the second violation, and $2,000.00 for the third violation within a two-year period. Continuous violations shall result in an increase in penalty by $500.00 and may also result in termination of services. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a written warning for the first violation, a $1,000.00 civil penalty for the second violation, a $1,500.00 civil penalty for the third violation, and a $2,000.00 civil penalty for the fourth violation within a two-year period. Consistent violations will result in a $500.00 increase in civil penalty and may result in termination of service. 
( Ord. No. 45-19 , § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 22; emergency services, ch. 30; fires at Grapevine Lake, § 54-167; smoke and particulate matter, § 98-1053; fire and explosive hazard material, § 98-1055. 
State Law reference— Authority to enforce ordinances to protect health, life and property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.004; authority to bring civil action for enforcement of ordinances relating to fire safety of building, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.012(2); designation of fire limits and removal of structures deemed to be fire hazards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.12. 
Charter reference— Authority to establish fire limits and regulate structures to be fireproof, § 3.07(1). 
 
Sec. 38-1. - International Fire Code adopted. 
The International Fire Code, 2018 edition, including Appendix Chapters A—G, copies of which are on file in the office of the town secretary, are hereby adopted and designated as the Fire Code of the town, the same as though the provisions of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, were copied at length in this section, subject to the deletions, amendments and additions provided in section 38-2. 
(Code 1989, ch. 5, § 1.01; Ord. No. 83-99, § 1, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 12-05, § 2, 2-21-2005; Ord. No. 64-08, § 2, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 19-14, § 2, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 31-16 , § 2, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 33-19 , § 2, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 38-2. - Amendments to International Fire Code, 2018 edition. 
The International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by amending only the enumerated sections and provisions as follows, and all sections and provisions not expressly amended shall remain in full force and effect: 
(a)  Section 101.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the Town of Flower Mound, herein after referred to as "this code." 
(b)  Section 102.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to change subparagraph 3 to read as follows and add a new subparagraph number 5 as follows: 
3.  Existing structures, facilities, and conditions when required in Chapter 11 or in specific sections of this code. 
5.  The provisions of this code apply to buildings built under the IRC and the IBC. 
(c)  Section 103 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by revising the title of said section to read as follows: 
Section 103. FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION 
(d)  Section 103.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 103.1. General. The fire prevention division is established within the jurisdiction under the direction of the Fire Marshal. The function of the division shall be the implementation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code. 
(e)  Section 103.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 103.2. Appointment. The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Fire Chief of the Town of Flower Mound on the basis of proper qualification. 
(f)  Section 104.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Under the Fire Chief's direction, the fire department is authorized to enforce all ordinances of the Town pertaining to: 
1.  the prevention of fires; 
2.  the suppression or extinguishment of dangerous or hazardous fires; 
3.  the storage, use, and handling of hazardous materials; 
4.  the installation and maintenance of automatic, manual and other private fire alarm systems and fire-extinguishing equipment; 
5.  the maintenance and regulation of fire escapes; 
6.  the elimination of fire hazards on land and in buildings, structures and other property, including those under construction; 
7.  the maintenance of means of ingress and egress; 
8.  the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire and unauthorized releases of hazardous materials; and 
9.  the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of explosions. 
(g)  Section 105.3.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by inserting the following language immediately following the first full sentence of such section to read as follows: 
Section 105.3.1. Expiration. Operational permits shall be renewed on an annual basis. Expiration shall be on December 31st of the current year. 
(h)  Section 105.3.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 105.3.3. Occupancy Prohibited before Approval . The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the fire code official issuing a permit when required and conducting associated inspections indicating the applicable provisions of this code have been met. 
(i)  Section 105.6 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 105.6. Required operational permits. The Fire Code Official is authorized to issue operational permits for the operations set forth in Sections 105.6.1 through 105.6.50. 
(j)  Section 105.7 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Section 105.7.20 to read as follows: 
Section 105.7.20. Smoke control or exhaust systems . Construction permits are required for installation of or alteration to smoke control or smoke exhaust systems as specified in Section 909 and Section 910 respectively. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit. 
(k)  Section 105.7 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Section 105.7.26 to read as follows: 
Section 105.7.26. Electronic access control systems . Construction permits are required for the installation or modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in Section 503 and Section 1010. A separate construction permit is required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm system that may be connected to the access control system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit. 
(l)  Section 107.2.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 107.2.1. Inspections request . It shall be the duty of the permit holder or his duly authorized agent to notify the Fire Marshal when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this code. The permit holder shall schedule all necessary inspections at least 48 hours in advance. If the inspection fails to pass and a return inspection is necessary the return inspection shall constitute a re-inspection, and an additional fee will be assessed on the second re-inspection and each subsequent re-inspection in accordance to Appendix A, re-inspection fee schedule. 
(m)  Section 110.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 110.4. Violation penalties. Persons who violate a provision of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Marshal, or of a permit or certificate used under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation exists or continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(n)  Section 202 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended, in part, to add to and revise the existing definitions contained in Section 202 by inserting or amending the following definitions, in alphabetical order: 
ADDRESSABLE FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM - Any system capable of providing identification of each individual alarm - initiating device. The identification shall be in plain English and as descriptive as possible to specifically identify the location of the device in alarm. The system shall have the capability of alarm verification. 
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY - Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing, or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to persons who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group may include but not be limited to the following: 
- Dialysis centers 
- Procedures involving sedation 
- Sedation dentistry 
- Surgery centers 
- Colonic centers 
- Psychiatric centers 
ANALOG INTELLIGENT ADDRESSABLE FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM - 
Any system capable of calculating a change in value by directly measurable quantities (voltage, resistance, etc.) at the sensing point. The physical analog may be conducted at the sensing point or at the main control panel. The systems shall be capable of compensating for long-term changes in sensor response while maintaining a constant sensitivity. The compensation shall have a preset point at which a detector maintenance signal shall be transmitted to the control panel. The sensor shall remain capable of detecting and transmitting an alarm while in maintenance alert. FIRE CODE OFFICIAL is the Fire Marshal or other designated authority appointed by the Fire Chief with the duties of administration and enforcement of the code, or a duly authorized representative. 
ATRIUM - An opening connecting three or more stories… {remaining text unchanged} . 
BONFIRE is a large outdoor fire utilized for recreational or ceremonial purposes. 
DEFEND IN PLACE - A method of emergency response that engages building components and trained staff to provide occupant safety during an emergency. Emergency response involves remaining in place, relocating within the building, or both, without evacuating the building. 
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL - the Fire Marshal or other designated authority appointed by the Fire Chief with the duties of administration and enforcement of the code, or a duly authorized representative. 
FIRE DEPARTMENT - the Town of Flower Mound Fire and Emergency Services Department. 
FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION - a division within the Town's Department of Fire and Emergency Services. 
FIRE WATCH - A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when required by the fire code official, for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire, and notifying the fire department. 
FIREWORKS - Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and/or activated by ignition with a match or other heat producing device that meets the definition of 1.4G fireworks or 1.3G fireworks as set forth herein.… {remainder of text unchanged} . 
HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE - add a second paragraph to read as follows: Any building classified as a group S Occupancy or Speculative Building exceeding 5,000 sq. ft. that has a clear height in excess of 14 feet, making it possible to be used for storage in excess of 12 feet, shall be considered to be high-piled storage. When a specific product cannot be identified, a fire protection system and life safety features shall be installed as for Class IV commodities, to the maximum pile height. 
HIGH-RISE BUILDING - A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
JURISDICTION - is the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
REPAIR GARAGE - A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification, and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair, or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement, and other such minor repairs. 
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY - Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service basis. 
STANDBY PERSONNEL - Qualified fire service personnel, approved by the Fire Chief. When utilized, the number required shall be as directed by the Fire Chief. Charges for utilization shall be as normally calculated by the jurisdiction. 
UPGRADED OR REPLACED FIRE ALARM SYSTEM - A fire alarm system that is upgraded or replaced includes, but is not limited to the following: 
• Replacing one single board or fire alarm control unit component with a newer model 
• Installing a new fire alarm control unit in addition to or in place of an existing one 
• Conversion from a horn system to an emergency voice/alarm communication system 
• Conversion from a conventional system to one that utilizes addressable or analog devices 
The following are not considered an upgrade or replacement: 
• Firmware updates 
• Software updates 
• Replacing boards of the same model with chips utilizing the same or newer firmware 
(o)  Section 301.1 of the International Fire Code 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 301.1. Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the occupancy and maintenance of all structures, premises, and property for precautions against fire and the spread of fire. 
(p)  Section 302.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended, in part, to add to and revise the existing definitions contained in Section 302.1 by inserting the following definitions, in alphabetical order: 
BONFIRE is a large outdoor fire utilized for recreational or ceremonial purposes. 
INCINERATOR BURNING shall be defined as the burning of natural materials within an enclosed combustion chamber constructed of brick, concrete, hollow tile, metal or other fire resistive material and shall be equipped with a spark arrestor. 
(q)  Section 305 of the International Fire Code 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 305.6 and Section 305.6.1 to read as follows: 
Section 305.6 Outdoor welding. All welding processes within the Town of Flower Mound shall require an operational permit as established in Section 105.6. A 30 foot radius shall be established that is free of all combustible materials. A fire watch shall be established. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire extinguishing equipment, such as a water barrel, garden hose or water truck with a ready water supply, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
Section 305.6.1. Weather conditions. Outdoor welding shall not be performed when the wind speed is 15 miles per hour (mph) or greater. The relative humidity at the time work is being performed must be 25 percent or higher. 
(r)  Section 305 of the International Fire Code 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 305.7 read as follows: 
Section 305.7. Outdoor fire pits. All fire pits shall be constructed in a manner consistent with good engineering and construction practices. The fire pit shall not be installed within 10 feet of adjoining property lines, 15 feet from a residence and 10 feet from other combustible materials. The maximum diameter of a fire pit shall be 3 feet, unless approved by the Fire Marshal. 
Exception: Natural gas fueled fire pits may be installed closer than 15' from residence if approved by the Fire Code Official. 
(s)  Section 307.1.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.1.1 Prohibited Open Burning. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited. 
Exception: {No change.} 
(t)  Section 307.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.2 Permit Required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or open burning. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) guidelines and/or restrictions. 
2.  State, County, or Local temporary or permanent bans on open burning. 
3.  Local written policies as established by the fire code official . 
(u)  Section 307.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding a new Section 307.2.2 to read as follows: 
Section 307.2.2. Permit timelines. Open burning permits shall be in effect for a period of two weeks from the date of issuance. A two week extension may be obtained by requesting the permit time be extended prior to the expiration date of the then existing permit. For a tract of land, under common ownership, of 40 acres or larger; the permit shall be in effect for a period of one month. An extension of one month for a 40 acre tract of land may be obtained by requesting the permit time to be extended prior to the permit expiring. 
Recreational burn permits shall be in effect for the time specified on the permit not to exceed one week. 
Incinerator permits shall last 90 days from the date of issuance and an extension of 90 days may be obtained by requesting an extension prior to the expiration date. 
(v)  Section 307.3. of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.3 Extinguishment Authority. The fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible, or the fire department of open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. 
(w)  Section 307.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.4. Location. The location for open burning shall be not less than 500 feet from any structure, provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 500 feet of any structure, other combustible, or property lines and conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 500 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to the issuance of the permit. The size of any burn pile shall not exceed 5 feet in diameter and 5 feet in height. 
Exception: Fires in approved incinerators that are not less than 20 feet from a structure or other combustible materials. 
(x)  Section 307.4.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.4.1. Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within the Town's corporate limits. 
(y)  Section 307.4.3, of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add Exception #2 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
2.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
(z)  Section 307.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add Sections 307.4.4 and 307.4.5 and 307.4.6 to read as follows: 
Section 307.4.4. Permanent outdoor fire pit. Permanently installed outdoor fire pits for recreational fire purposes shall not be installed within 10 feet of structure or combustible material. 
Exception: Permanently installed outdoor fireplaces constructed in accordance with the International Building Code. 
Section 307.4.5. Trench burns: Shall not be allowed in The Town of Flower Mound. 
Section 307.4.6. Incinerator fires. A fire within an incinerator shall not be conducted within 20 feet of a structure or other combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 20 feet of a structure or other combustible material shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Burning in an incinerator shall not be permitted on lots or tracts of land less than two acres in size. Fire must be entirely contained within the approved container with a spark arrestor in place at all times. 
(aa)  Section 307.5 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.5. Attendance. Open burning, recreational fires, and use of portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the… {remainder of section unchanged} . 
(bb)  Section 307 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 307.6 to read as follows: 
Section 307.6. Burn Ban. If it is determined that atmospheric conditions i.e., ozone action days, extended drought, or other conditions exist that make it necessary to limit outdoor processes which may cause a fire, a burn ban can be instituted. The Fire Chief or his authorized representative under an executive order shall issue an emergency declaration instituting a burn ban for all properties within the Town of Flower Mound. The burn ban shall prohibit all outdoor activities and/or processes that may start a fire. Such outdoor activities and/or processes shall include but are not limited to: open burning, incinerator burning, recreational burning, outdoor welding, outside use of torches or other cutting devices that emit sparks, charcoal grills, fireworks, and outdoor fireplaces or fire pits. 
(cc)  Section 307 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 307.7 to read as follows: 
Section 307.7. Posting a declaration of a burn ban. The emergency declaration specified in section 307.6 shall be posted or published in the following locations: 
• Official Town of Flower Mound Newspaper 
• Town of Flower Mound web-site 
• Bulletin boards at all Town of Flower Mound facilities 
(dd)  Section 307 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 307.8 to read as follows: 
Section 307.8. Violation. Persons who violate a burn ban by igniting a fire, engaging in one of the prohibited activities or allowing a prohibited activity to be carried out on property under his or her control shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense, punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00 or more than $2,000.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(ee)  Section 308.1.4; of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
308.1.4 Open-flame Cooking Devices. Open-flame cooking devices, charcoal grills, and other similar devices used for cooking shall not be located or used on combustible balconies, decks, or within 10 feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two-family dwellings, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity] with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 100 lbs. (5 containers). 
2.  Where buildings, balconies, and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity], with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 40 lbs. (2 containers). 
3.  {No change.} 
(ff)  Section 308.1.5; of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
308.1.5 Locations near combustibles. Open flames such as from candles, lanterns, kerosene heaters, and gas-fired heaters shall not be located on or near decorative material or similar combustible materials. Luminaria Bags with candles are prohibited. 
(gg)  Section 308.1.6.2, of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to change Exception number 3 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 3. Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with Section 308.1.3. 
(hh)  Section 308.1.6.3; of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 308.1.6.3 Sky Lanterns. A person shall not release or cause to be released any unmanned free-floating devices containing an open flame or other heat source, such as, but not limited to, a sky lantern. 
(ii)  Section 311.5. of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 311.5 Placards. The fire code official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandoned buildings or structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to Section 110 of this code relating to structural or interior hazards, as required by Sections 311.5.1 through 311.5.5. 
(jj)  Section 403.5 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 403.5 Group E Occupancies. An approved fire safety and evacuation plan in accordance with Section 404 shall be prepared and maintained for Group E occupancies and for buildings containing both a Group E occupancy and an atrium. A diagram depicting two evacuation routes shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each classroom. Group E occupancies shall also comply with Sections 403.5.1 through 403.5.3. 
(kk)  Section 404.2.2; the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new subsection 4.10 to read as follows: 
4.10 Fire extinguishing system controls. 
(ll)  Section 405.4; of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 405.4. Time. The fire code official may require an evacuation drill at any time. Drills shall be held at unexpected times and under varying conditions to simulate the unusual conditions that occur in case of fire. 
(mm)  Section 501.4. of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 501.4 Timing of Installation. When fire apparatus access roads or a water supply for fire protection is required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be installed, tested, and approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure. 
(nn)  Section 503.1.1. of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a sentence to read as follows: 
Except for one- or two-family dwellings, the path of measurement shall be along a minimum of a ten feet (10') wide unobstructed pathway around the external walls of the structure. 
(oo)  Section 503.1.2. of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a sentence to read as follows: 
The Fire Code Official is also hereby authorized and empowered to establish and designate fire lanes as deemed necessary for the proper ingress and egress of emergency vehicles. Any fire lane designated by the Fire Marshal shall become effective as of the date so designated. 
(pp)  Section 503.1. of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 503.1.4 to read as follows: 
Section 503.1.4. Existing Fire Lanes. Any fire lane that has been established prior to passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived and designated by the Fire Marshal or that has been established by a separate ordinance shall be a fire lane for all intents and purposes and shall be maintained as required by this code. 
(qq)  Section 503.2.1. of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 503.2.1. Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet. Where a fire hydrant is situated on or adjacent to a fire lane or a fire apparatus access road, the minimum unobstructed width of the fire lane or fire apparatus access road shall be 26 feet. Fire lanes where there is "opposed" parking shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 26 feet. 
Exception: Vertical clearance may be reduced; provided such reduction does not impair access by fire apparatus and approved signs are installed and maintained indicating the established vertical clearance when approved. 
(rr)  Section 503.2.2. of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 503.2.2. Authority. The Fire Code Official shall have the authority to require an increase in the minimum access widths and vertical clearances where they are inadequate for fire or rescue operations. 
(ss)  Section 503.2.3. of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add the following sentences to read as follows: 
The required weight load of such roads shall be at least 85,000 pounds. In no event shall speed bumps, speed humps, or other "traffic-calming" devices be placed, installed, or located in a fire lane or fire apparatus access road unless approved by the Fire Code Official. 
(tt)  Section 503.2.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add Section 503.2.3.1 to read as follows: 
Section 503.2.3.1 Maintenance Generally. 
1.  The Fire Code Official shall report any damaged, worn or poorly maintained surface conditions, markings, or signs to the owner or person in control of property upon which a fire lane exists and shall issue instructions for repair. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of property upon which a fire lane has been designated or exists to fail to maintain the surface of the fire lane in good condition, free of potholes and other non-approved obstructions. 
3.  It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of property upon which a fire lane has been designated or exists to fail to maintain any marking of the fire lane as required by this code in a condition that is not clearly legible. 
(uu)  Section 503.2.4. of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 503.2.4. Turning radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be a minimum of 25 feet inner radii and 45 feet exterior radii or as determined by the Fire Code Official. 
(vv)  Section 503.2.7 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 503.2.7. Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access road shall be no greater than 8 percent in grade based on the fire department's apparatus. 
(ww)  Section 503.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 503.3. Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings, when approved by the Fire Code Official, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. 
1.  Striping - Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at 25 feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb. 
2.  Signs - Signs shall read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" and shall be 12" wide and 18" high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6'6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart along both sides of the fire lane. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the Fire Chief. 
(xx)  Section 503.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 503.4. Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads . Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including parking, stopping, or standing or by any non-emergency vehicle, whether attended or unattended. The minimum widths and clearances established in Section 503.2.1 and any area marked as a fire lane as described in Section 503.3 shall be maintained at all times. The operator of a premise shall maintain, free of obstruction, all fire lanes on his premises. No person may mark, post, or otherwise identify a non-fire lane private vehicular passageway as a fire lane or in such a manner as tends to create confusion as to whether the passageway is a fire lane. Any unauthorized vehicle in a fire lane is: 
1.  Subject to removal from the premises by the operator of the premises, with the expense of removal and storage to be borne by the registered owner of the vehicle; 
2.  Subject to citation, as well as removal from the premises, by the Fire Marshal, or his designee or a police officer, with the expense of removal and storage to be borne by the registered owner of the vehicle; and 
3.  Prima facie evidence that the person in whose name the vehicle is registered is guilty of a violation of the parking provisions of this section. 
(yy)  Section 503.6 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 503.6. Security Gates. The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus access road shall require the approval of the Fire Code Official or his designee. Where security gates are installed, they shall have an approved means of emergency operation. The security gates and the emergency operation capability of same shall be maintained operational at all times. 
All primary entries, and emergency access entries, into gate-controlled subdivisions, commercial properties, apartment or multi-family developments or other complexes shall be equipped with an approved 3M® light attenuated opening device. These light attenuated opening devices shall be controlled bidirectional. All gates shall have Knox locks installed in the event of power failure. All secondary emergency access gates shall be equipped with Knox locks only. This requirement is for existing and new installations. Existing locations shall have six months from the date this code becomes effective in which to comply with this provision. 
(zz)  Section 505.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 505.1. Address identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Where required by the Fire Code Official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches (152.4 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). Where access is by means of a private road, buildings do not immediately front a street, and/or the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, or other sign with approved 6 inch (152.4 mm) height building numerals or addresses and 4 inch (101.6 mm) height suite/apartment numerals of a color contrasting with the background of the building or other approved means shall be used to identify the structure. Numerals or addresses shall be posted on a minimum 20 inch (508 mm) by 30 inch (762 mm) background on border. Address numbers shall be maintained. 
Exception: R-3 Single Family occupancies shall have approved numerals of a minimum 3-1/2 inches (88.9 mm) in height and a color contrasting with the background clearly visible and legible from the street fronting the property and rear alleyway where such alleyway exists. 
(aaa)  Section 506.1.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 506.1.2 Key Boxes for Fire Service Elevators . Knox Brand Elevator Key Boxes shall be required for all buildings that have elevators. Existing buildings with elevators will be given one (1) year to comply from date of deficient notification. Building owners or Property Managers will be required to supply a correct and current set of keys, for the elevator cars and hoistway doors, to be placed in the Elevator Knox Box. 
(bbb)  Section 507.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 507.4. Water supply test date and information. The water supply test used for hydraulic calculation of fire protection systems shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 291 "Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants" and within 6 months of sprinkler plan submittal. The Fire Code Official shall be notified prior to the water supply test. Water supply tests shall be witnessed by the Fire Code Official, as required. The exact location of the static/residual hydrant and the flow hydrant shall be indicated on the design drawings. All fire protection plan submittals shall be accompanied by a hard copy of the water flow test report, or as approved by the Fire Code Official. The report must indicate the dominant water tank level at the time of the test and the maximum and minimum operating levels of the tank, as well, or identify applicable water supply fluctuation. The licensed contractor must then design the fire protection system based on this fluctuation information, as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard. Reference Section 903.3.5 for additional design requirements. 
(ccc)  Section 507.5.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 507.5.4. Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. Posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage, and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections, or fire protection system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately discernible. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants. 
(ddd)  Section 507.5. of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 507.5.7 to read as follows: 
Section 507.5.7. Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 300 feet from a fire hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured in an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the Fire Code Official. A minimum of one fire hydrant shall be located within 50 feet of the fire department connection and on the same side of the roadway as the facility or building. 
Exception: For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies, the distance requirement shall be 500 feet between fire hydrants along an approved route. 
(eee)  Section 509.1. of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 509.1.2 to read as follows: 
Section 509.1.2. Sign Requirements. Unless more stringent requirements apply, lettering for signs required by this section shall have a minimum height of 2 inches (50.8 mm) when located inside a building and 4 inches (101.6 mm) when located outside, or as approved by the Fire Code Official. The letters shall be of a color that contrasts with the background. 
(fff)  Chapter 5 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 511.1 to read as follows: 
Section 511.1. Communications. In all new and existing buildings in which the type of construction or distance from an operational emergency services antenna or dispatch site does not provide adequate frequency or signal strength as determined by the Fire Code Official, the building owner shall be responsible for providing the equipment, installation, and maintenance of said equipment in a manner to strengthen the radio signal. The radio signal shall meet the minimum input/output strengths according to the emergency radio system's provider and system manager. All large structures built after the effective date of this code shall be evaluated prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for adequacy of emergency communications inside the structure. If the evaluation fails, the building owner shall at his expense install an approved communications system that will allow emergency responders (fire and police) to communicate from within the building to other responders outside the building. 
(ggg)  Section 603.3.1, "Exception," of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 603.3.1 Fuel Oil Storage Outside, Above Ground Tanks. Where connected to a fuel-oil piping system, the maximum amount of fuel oil allowed outside above ground without additional protection shall be 660 gallons (2498 L). The storage of fuel oil above ground exceeding 660 gallons (2498 L) shall comply with NFPA 31 and Chapter 57. 
(hhh)  Section 603.3.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 603.3.2 Fuel Oil Storage Inside Buildings Fuel oil storage inside buildings shall comply with Sections 603.3.2.1 through 603.3.2.5 and Chapter 57. 
Section 603.3.2.1 Quantity Limits. One or more fuel oil storage tanks containing class II or III combustible liquid shall be permitted in a building. The aggregate capacity of all tanks shall not exceed the following: 
1.  660 gallons (2498 L) in un-sprinkled buildings, where stored in a tank complying with UL 80, UL 142 or UL 2085 for class III liquids, and also listed as a double-wall/secondary containment tank for Class II liquids. 
2.  1,320 gallons (4996 L) in un-sprinkled buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1, where stored in a tank complying with UL 142 or UL2085 as a double-wall/secondary containment tank. 
3.  3000 gallons (11,356 L) where stored in protected above-ground tanks complying with UL 2085 and Section 5704.2.9.7 and the room is protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
(iii)  Section 604.5 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 605.5.5 to read as follows: 
Section 604.5.5. Plug adaptors. Grounded plug adaptors shall not be allowed. 
(jjj)  Section 604.7 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 604.7.1 to read as follows: 
Section 604.7.1 . All appliances that heat and cool shall be plugged directly into an approved receptacle. 
(kkk)  Sections 807.5.2.2 and 807.5.2.3; of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 807.5.2.2. Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings, and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area. 
(lll)  Sections 807.5.5.2 and 807.5.5.3; of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 807.5.5.2. Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings, and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area. 
Section 807.5.5.3. Artwork in Classrooms . Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
(mmm)  Section 901.6.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 901.6.1.1 to read as follows: 
Section 901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years: 
1.  The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be backflushed when foreign material is present, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems. 
2.  For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system. 
3.  Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised. 
4.  If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official. 
5.  Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as "Fifth Year" for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read "5 Year Standpipe Test" at a minimum. 
6.  The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed. 
7.  Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25. 
8.  Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions. 
9.  Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All sandpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official. 
(nnn)  Section 901.6.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 901.6.4 False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given, signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner, 
(ooo)  Section 901.7 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 901.7. Systems Out of Service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in the event of an excessive number of activations, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the fire code official , the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shut down until the fire protection system has been returned to service. … {remaining text unchanged} 
(ppp)  Section 901.9 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 901.9. Termination of monitoring service. Notice shall be made to the Fire Code Official whenever contracted alarm services for monitoring of any fire alarm system are terminated for any reason, or a change in alarm monitoring provider occurs. Notice shall be made in writing to the Fire Code Official by the building owner and monitoring service provider prior to the service being terminated. 
(qqq)  Section 903.1.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.1.1. Alternative Protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard, or as approved by the fire code official . 
(rrr)  Section 903.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOW ED." 
(sss)  Section 903.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to delete the exception. 
(ttt)  Section 903.2.9 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.9.3. Self-Service Storage Facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities. 
(uuu)  Section 903.2.11 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to amend Section 903.2.11.3 and add Sections 903.2.11.7, 903.2.11.8, and 903.2.11.9 to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.11.3. Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings that have one or more stories, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1510 of the International Building Code, located 35 feet or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor. 
Exception: Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage. 
Section 903.2.11.7. High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4572 mm), see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply. 
Section 903.2.11.8. Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
Section 9.3.2.11.9. Buildings Over 5,000 sq. ft. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all buildings with a building area 5,000 sq. ft. or greater and in all existing buildings that are enlarged to be 5,000 sq. ft. or greater. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings. 
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code. 
(vvv)  Section 903.3.1.1.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.1.1. Exempt Locations. When approved by the fire code official , automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such… {text unchanged} … because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction, or contains electrical equipment. 
1.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard. 
2.  Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the code official. 
3.  Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
4.  {Delete} 
5.  Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. 
6.  {Delete.} 
(www)  Section 903.3.1.2.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.2.3. Attics and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attached garages, and in the following attic spaces. 
1.  Attics that are used or intended for living purposes or storage shall be protected by an automatic sprinkler system. 
2.  Where fuel fire fired equipment is installed in an un-sprinkled attic, not fewer than one quick-response intermediate temperature sprinkler shall be installed above the equipment. 
3.  Attics spaces of buildings two or more stories in height above grade plane or above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
4.  Group R-4, Condition 2 occupancy attics not required by item 1 or 3 to have sprinklers shall comply with one of the following: 
4.1  Provide automatic sprinkler system protection. 
4.2  Provide a heat detection system throughout the attic that is arranged to activate the building fire alarm system. 
4.3  Construct the attic using noncombustible materials. 
4.4  Construct the attic using fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section 2303.2 of the International Building Code. 
4.5  Fill the attic with noncombustible insulation. 
(xxx)  Section 903.3.1.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.3. NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings ; Group R-3; Group R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law. 
(yyy)  Section 903.3.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 903.3.1.4 to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.4. Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section. 
Section 903.3.1.4.1. Attics. Only dry-pipe, pre-action, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces. 
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces where: 
1.  The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the building, and 
2.  Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard, and 
3.  The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level. 
Section 903.3.1.4.2. Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved by the fire code official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe. 
(zzz)  Section 903.3.5 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of the respective standards; however, every water-based fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference Section 507.4 for additional design requirements. 
(aaaa)  Section 903.3.7 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.7. Fire department connections : The fire department connection shall be located within five feet of the fire lane and shall be within 50 feet of a fire hydrant and on the same side of the roadway. All fire department connections shall be remotely located away from the building. The height of shall be between 18" and 36". The FDC shall be equipped with a Knox brand 5" Storz Connection, a 30 degree down angle, and locking Knox cap, unless otherwise approved. The Fire Marshal shall approve the location. 
(bbbb)  Section 903.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
(cccc)  Section 903.4.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. 
(dddd)  Section 903.6 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 903.6.1 to read as follows: 
Section 903.6.1. Spray booths and rooms . New and existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Section 2404. 
(eeee)  Section 905.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
905.2 Installation Standard . Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm. 
(ffff)  Section 905.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 905.3.9 to read as follows: 
Section 905.3.9. Buildings Exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60960 mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, approved Class I standpipes shall be provided. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14. 
2.  R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors. 
(gggg)  Section 905.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to amend Items 1, 3, and 5, and to add an Item 7 to read as follows: 
1.  In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
2.  {No change.} 
3.  In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building. 
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an interior exit stairway hose connection by a…{ No change to remaining text }… 
4.  {No change.} 
5.  Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the roof or at the highest landing of an exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1011.12. 
6.  {No change.} 
7.  When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
(hhhh)  Section 905.9 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a second paragraph after the exceptions, to read as follows: 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
(iiii)  Section 907.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 907.1.4 to read as follows: 
Section 907.1.4. Design Standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 alarm initiating devices will require analog initiating devices. 
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building remodel or expansion initiated after the effective date of this code, as adopted, exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building remodel or expansion exceeds 50% of the building, must comply within 18 months of permit application. 
(jjjj)  Section 907.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 907.1.5 to read as follows: 
Section 907.1.5. Required Installations. All commercial occupancies shall be protected by an approved manual and automatic fire alarm system. The system shall be monitored by an approved remote supervising station. Approved systems shall include full audio/visual notification services and manual pull stations at all exits. The Fire alarm control panel shall be installed in an approved location. 
(kkkk)  Section 907.2.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 907.2.1. Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3. 10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. 
Exception: {No change.} 
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall: 
1.  Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking surface level, and 
2.  Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions. 
(llll)  Section 907.2.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 907.2.3. Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
Exceptions: 
1.  {No change.} 
1.1.  Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2 1/2 or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6.) { No change to remainder of exceptions } 
(mmmm)  Section 907.2.12 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 907.2.12. High-rise buildings. Buildings having any floor used for human occupancy located more than 55 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall be provided with an automatic fire alarm system and an emergency voice alarm communications system in accordance with Section 907.2.12.3. 
Exceptions: 
1.  {no change} 
2.  {no change} 
3.  Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of the International Building Code ; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants, and similarly enclosed areas. 
4.  {no change} 
5.  {no change} 
6.  {no change} 
(nnnn)  Section 907.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a second paragraph and a new Section 907.4.2.7 to read as follows: 
Manual alarm actuating devices shall be an approved double action type. In a building or strip of buildings consisting of multiple suites or businesses, each occupancy shall have a manual actuating device installed. 
Section 907.4.2.7. Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type. 
(oooo)  Section 907.6.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 907.6.1.1 to read as follows: 
Section 907.6.1.1. Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from an addressable input (monitor) module may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the addressable module to the initiating device is ten feet or less. 
(pppp)  Section 907.6.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to delete all four exceptions. 
(qqqq)  Section 907.6.6 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a sentence to read as follows: 
See Section 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station. 
(rrrr)  Section 907.6.6 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 907.6.6.3 to read as follows: 
Section 907.6.6.3. Communication requirements . All alarm systems (new or replacement) shall transmit alarm, supervisory, and trouble signals descriptively to the approved central station, remote supervisory station, or proprietary supervising station as defined in NFPA 72, with the correct device designation and location of addressable device identification. Alarms shall not be permitted to be transmitted as a General Alarm or Zone condition. 
(ssss)  Section 909 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 909.22 to read as follows: 
Section 909.22. Stairway or Ramp Pressurization Alternative . Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization alternative is chosen for compliance with Building Code requirements for a smoke proof enclosure, interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with Section 909, including the installation of a separate fire-fighter's smoke control panel as per Section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required from the fire department as per Section 105.7. 
Section 909.22.1. Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved location at the entrance to the smoke proof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, the mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3. 
Section 909.22.1.1. Ventilation Systems. Smoke proof enclosure ventilation systems shall be independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following: 
1.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building and directly connected to the smoke proof enclosure or connected to the smoke proof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
2.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the smoke proof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or through ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
3.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable system. 
2.  Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete. 
3.  Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit protective system with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
Section 909.22.1.2. Standby Power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 2702 of the Building Code. 
Section 909.22.1.3. Acceptance and Testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the system shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is operating in compliance with these requirements. 
(tttt)  Section 910.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to modify Exceptions 2. and 3. to read as follows: 
2.  Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited. 
3.  Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*S)1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited. 
(uuuu)  Section 910.2; of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 910.2.3 to read as follows: 
Section 910.2.3. Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as follows: 
1.  In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square feet (1394 m2) in a single floor area. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
2.  In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
(vvvv)  Section 910.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 910.3.4 to read as follows: 
Section 910.3.4. Vent Operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3. 
Section 910.3.4.1. Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically. 
The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
Section 910.3.4.2. Nonsprinklered Buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a heat- responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above ambient. 
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents. 
(wwww)  Section 910.4.3.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 910.4.3.1. Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust. 
(xxxx)  Section 910.4.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 910.4.4. Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated automatically by the automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual controls shall also be provided. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
(yyyy)  Section 912.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 912.2.3 to read as follows: 
Section 912.2.3. Hydrant Distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 50 feet, on same side of the fire lane of the fire department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path unless approved by the Fire Marshal. 
(zzzz)  Section 913.2.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a second paragraph and add an exception to read as follows: 
When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as required by Section 506.1. 
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by Section 506.1. 
(aaaaa)  Section 914.3.1.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 914.3.1.2. Water Supply to required Fire Pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (128 m) in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate. 
Exception: {No change to exception.} 
(bbbbb)  Section 1006.2.2.of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add the a new Section 1006.2.2.6 to read as follows: 
Section 1006.2.2.7. Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the Electrical Code as adopted. 
(ccccc)  Section 1009.8 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add an Exception 7 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
{previous exceptions unchanged} 
7.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1009 and chapter 11. 
(ddddd)  Section 1010.1.9.5 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to modify Exceptions 3 and 4 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
3.  Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M, or S occupancy. { Remainder unchanged } 
4.  Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M, or S occupancy { Remainder unchanged } 
(eeeee)  Section 1020.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Exception 6 to read as follows: 
6.  In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate self-annunciating alarms audible in all areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm system where such system is provided. 
(fffff)  Section 1023.11 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 1023.11. Smokeproof enclosures. In buildings required to comply with Section 403,405, or 412 of The International Building Code, each of the exits of a building that serves stories where any floor surface is located more than 55 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access or more than 30 feet below the level of exit discharge serving such floor levels shall be a smoke proof enclosure or pressurized stairway in accordance with Section 909.20 of the International Building Code. 
(ggggg)  Section 1029.1.1.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby deleted. 
(hhhhh)  Section 1031.2 of the International Fire Code ,2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 1031.2. Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits and exit discharges shall be continuously maintained free from obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or other emergency. An exitor exit passageway shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with a means of egress. 
(iiiii)  Section 1103.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a sentence to read as follows: 
Provide emergency signage as required by Section 606.3 
(jjjjj)  Section 1103.5.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a sentence to read as follows: 
Section 1103.5.1. Group A2. Fire sprinkler addition shall be completed within 24 months from the date of notification by the fire code official. 
(kkkkk)  Section 1103.7 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add new a Section 1103.7.8 and 1103.7.8.1 to read as follows: 
Section 1103.7.7. Fire Alarm System Design Standards. Where an existing fire alarm system is upgraded or replaced, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke and/or heat detectors shall have analog initiating devices. 
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building, or fire alarm system, remodel or expansion exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building, or fire alarm system, remodel or expansion initiated after the date of original fire alarm panel installation exceeds 50% of the building, or fire alarm system, the fire alarm system must comply within 18 months of permit application. 
Section 1103.7.7.1. Communication requirements. Refer to Section 907.6.6 for applicable requirements. 
(lllll)  Section 1203 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 1203.1.3 Installation. Emergency power systems and standby power systems shall be installed in accordance with the International Building Code , NFPA 70, NFPA 110 and NFPA 111. Existing installations shall be maintained in accordance with the original approval, except as specified in Chapter 11. 
Sections 1203.1.4. through 1203.1.9. {No changes to these sections.} 
Section 1203.1.10. Critical Operations Power Systems (COPS). For Critical Operations Power Systems necessary to maintain continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities that require continuous operation for the reasons of public safety, emergency management, national security, or business continuity, see NFPA 70. 
Section 1203.2. Where Required. Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required by Sections 1203.2.1 through 1203.2.26 or elsewhere identified in this code or any other referenced code. 
Sections 1203.2.1. through 1203.2.3. {No changes to these sections.} 
Section 1203.2.4. Emergency Voice/alarm Communications Systems. Emergency power shall be provided for emergency voice/alarm communications systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 907.5.2.2.5. The system shall be capable of powering the required load for a duration of not less than 24 hours, as required in NFPA 72. 
- Covered and Open Malls, Section 907.2.20 and 914.2.3 
- Group A Occupancies, Sections 907.2.1 and 907.5.2.2.4. 
- Special Amusement Buildings, Section 907.2.12.3 
- High-rise Buildings, Section 907.2.13 
- Atriums, Section 907.2.14 
- Deep Underground Buildings, Section 907.2.19 
Sections 1203.2.5. through 1203.2.13. {No changes to these sections.} 
Section 1203.2.14. Means of Egress Illumination. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Sections 1008.3 and 1104.5.1. (90 minutes) 
Section 1203.2.15. Membrane Structures. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs in temporary tents and membrane structures in accordance with Section 3103.12.6. (90 minutes) Standby power shall be provided for auxiliary inflation systems in permanent membrane structures in accordance with Section 2702 of the International Building Code. (4 hours) Auxiliary inflation systems shall be provided in temporary air-supported and air-inflated membrane structures in accordance with section 3103.10.4. 
Section 1203.2.16. {No changes to this section.} 
Section 1203.2.17. Smoke Control Systems. Standby power shall be provided for smoke control systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 909.11: 
- Covered Mall Building, International Building Code, Section 402.7 
- Atriums, International Building Code, Section 404.7 
- Underground Buildings, International Building Code, Section 405.8 
- Group I-3, International Building Code, Section 408.4.2 
- Stages, International Building Code, Section 410.2.5 
- Special Amusement Buildings (as applicable to Group A's), International Building Code, Section 411.1 
- Smoke Protected Seating, Section 1029.6.2. 
Section 1203.2.18. {No changes to this section.} 
Section 1203.2.19 Covered and Open Mall Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.19 and 914.2.3. 
Section 1203.2.20. Airport Traffic Control Towers. A standby power system shall be provided in airport traffic control towers more than 65 ft. in height. Power shall be provided to the following equipment: 
1.  Pressurization equipment, mechanical equipment and lighting. 
2.  Elevator operating equipment. 
3.  Fire alarm and smoke detection systems. 
Section 1203.2.21. Smoke proof Enclosures and Stair Pressurization Alternative. Standby power shall be provided for smoke proof enclosures, stair pressurization alternative and associated automatic fire detection systems as required by the International Building Code , Section 909.20.6.2. 
Section 1203.2.22. Elevator Pressurization. Standby power shall be provided for elevator pressurization system as required by the International Building Code , Section 909.21.5. 
Section 1203.2.23. Elimination of Smoke Dampers in Shaft Penetrations. Standby power shall be provided when eliminating the smoke dampers in ducts penetrating shafts in accordance with the International Building Code , Section 717.5.3, exception 2.3. 
Section 1203.2.24. Common Exhaust Systems for Clothes Dryers. Standby power shall be provided for common exhaust systems for clothes dryers located in multistory structures in accordance with the International Mechanical Code, Section 504.10, and Item 7. 
Section 1203.2.25. Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms. Standby power shall be provided for mechanical ventilation and gas detection systems of Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms in accordance with the International Building Code , Section 421. 
Section 1203.2.26. Means of Egress Illumination in Existing Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Section 1104.5 when required by the fire code official. (90 minutes in I-2, 60 minutes elsewhere.) 
Sections 1203.3. through 1203.6. {No changes to these sections.} 
Section 1203.7. Energy Time Duration. Unless a time limit is specified by the fire code official, in this chapter or elsewhere in this code, or in any other referenced code or standard, the emergency and standby power system shall be supplied with enough fuel or energy storage capacity for not less than 2-hour full-demand operation of the system. 
Exception: Where the system is supplied with natural gas from a utility provider and is approved. 
(mmmmm)  Section 2304.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 2304.1. Supervision of dispensing. The dispensing of fuel at motor fuel dispensing facilities shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Conducted by a qualified attendant; 
2.  Shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant; or 
3.  Shall be an unattended self-service facility in accordance with Section 2304.3. 
At any time the qualified attendant of item Number 1 or 2 above is not present, such operations shall be considered as an unattended self-service facility and shall also comply with Section 2304.3. 
(nnnnn)  Section 2401.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby deleted. 
(ooooo)  Section 3103.3.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby deleted. 
(ppppp)  Table 3206.2, footnote h of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to modify the text to read as follows: 
h.  Where storage areas are protected by either early suppression fast response (ESFR) sprinkler systems or control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50 (m •s) ½ or less that are listed to control a fire in the stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers, installed in accordance with NFPA 13, manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas. 
(qqqqq)  Section 3310.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a sentence to read as follows: 
When fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure. 
(rrrrr)  Section 5003.3.1.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 5003.3.1.4. Responsibility for hazardous material(s) incident. Any party(ies) who accidentally, negligently, or intentionally causes or is responsible for a hazardous material{s) incident within the Town shall institute and complete all actions necessary to abate and remediate the effects of such an event at its sole cost. In addition, any such party(ies) shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred by the fire department, police department, health department, public works department, or other departments or agencies which respond to or assist to abate such an event. The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(sssss)  Section 5003.3.1.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 5003.3.1.4.1 and Section 5003.3.1.4.2 to read as follows: 
Section 5003.3.1.4.1. Costs Incurred. Costs incurred by the fire department, police department, health department, public works department, or other departments of the Town shall include, but not be limited to, expenses attributable to the abatement or cleanup of any hazardous materials incident, including costs of personnel, costs of equipment operations, costs of materials and supplies, costs of specialists, experts or other contract labor not in the full-time employment of the Town, disposal costs, overhead costs, overtime costs and any other incidental costs incurred by the Town. Basic costs associated with the fire department services shall be $300.00 per hour for each engine or truck company and $150.00 per hour for each medical unit or utility vehicle. The responsible party(ies) shall be billed for the recovery of the costs described above as follows: 
1.  For the first hour of an incident, measured from the time the first fire department vehicle arrives at the incident scene, only the cost of materials, supplies, disposal, and specialists/experts not in the full- time employment of the Town shall be billed. 
2.  Beginning one hour after the first fire department vehicle arrives at the incident scene, all costs described in this section shall be billed. 
Section 5003.3.1.4.2. Legal Action and Collection of Damages. Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the Town Attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the Town, the Fire Chief or his authorized representative or both as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter and for the collection of damages as provided herein. 
(ttttt)  Section 5601.1.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 5601.1.3. Fireworks . The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling, or use of fireworks is prohibited. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Only when approved for fireworks displays, storage, and handling of fireworks as allowed in Sections 5604 and 5608. 
2.  The use of fireworks for approved fireworks displays as allowed in Section 5608. 
{Delete remainder of text.} 
(uuuuu)  Section 5601.1.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding the following sentences to read as follows: 
The use of model and high-power rockets ("Rockets"), to the extent allowed or authorized, shall be subject to the issuance of a permit by the Fire Code Official. The storage, operation and use of Rockets shall be performed in strict compliance with criteria obtained from the Fire Code Official. 
(vvvvv)  Section 5605.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 5605.1. General. The manufacture, assembly, and testing of explosives, ammunition, blasting agents, and fireworks are prohibited within the limits of the Town. 
Exception: The hand loading of small arms ammunition prepared for personal use and not offered for resale. { remainder of exceptions deleted } 
(wwwww)  Section 5608 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 5608.11 to read as follows: 
Section 5608.11. Ignition. Aerial shells shall be ignited by lighting the tips of fuses by an electrical ignition source. Operators shall not place any part of their bodies over the throat of the mortar. 
(xxxxx)  Section 5703.6 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 5703.6. Piping systems. Piping systems, and their component parts, for flammable and combustible liquids shall be in accordance with Sections 5703.6.1 through 5703.6.11. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
(yyyyy)  Section 5704.2.9.5 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to modify Section 5704.2.9.5 and add a new Section 5704.2.9.5.3 to read as follows: 
(zzzzz)  Section 5704.2.11.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 5704.2.11.4. Leak Prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with Sections 5704.2.11.4.1 through 5704.2.11.4.3. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
(aaaaaa)  Section 5704.2.11.4.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 5704.2.11.4.2 Leak Detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be provided with an approved method of leak detection from any component of the system that is designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 30 and as specified in Section 5704.2.11.4.3. 
(bbbbbb)  Section 5704.2.11.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add Section 5704.2.11.4.3 to read as follows: 
Section 5704.2.11.4.3. Observation Wells. Approved sampling tubes of a minimum 4 inches in diameter shall be installed in the backfill material of each underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tank. The tubes shall extend from a point 12 inches below the average grade of the excavation to ground level and shall be provided with suitable surface access caps. Each tank site shall provide a sampling tube at the corners of the excavation with a minimum of 4 tubes. Sampling tubes shall be placed in the product line excavation within 10 feet of the tank excavation and one every 50 feet routed along product lines towards the dispensers, a minimum of two are required. 
(cccccc)  Section 5706.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 5706.3. Well drilling and operating. Wells for oil and natural gas shall be drilled and operated in accordance with Sections 5706.3.1 through 5706.3.8 and Town Ordinance No. 26-03, as amended. 
(dddddd)  Section 5704.2.11.4.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a paragraph to read as follows: 
Mobile fueling sites shall be restricted to commercial, industrial, governmental, or manufacturing, where the parking area having such operations is primarily intended for employee vehicles. Mobile fueling shall be conducted for fleet fueling or employee vehicles only, not the general public. Commercial sites shall be restricted to office-type or similar occupancies that are not primarily intended for use by the public. 
(eeeeee)  Section 6103.2.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 6103.2.1.8 to read as follows: 
Section 6103.2.1.8. Jewelry Repair, Dental Labs and Similar Occupancies. Where natural gas service is not available, portable LP-Gas containers are allowed to be used to supply approved torch assemblies or similar appliances. Such containers shall not exceed 20-pound (9.0 kg) water capacity. Aggregate capacity shall not exceed 60-pound (27.2 kg) water capacity. Each device shall be separated from other containers by a distance of not less than 20 feet. 
(ffffff)  Section 6104.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended by adding an Exception No. 2 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  {existing text unchanged} 
2.  Except as permitted in Sections 308 and 6104.3.2, LP-gas containers are not permitted in residential areas. 
(gggggg)  Section 6104.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add a new Section 6104.3.3 to read as follows: 
Section 6104.3.3. Spas, Pool Heaters and other listed devices . Where natural gas service is not available, an LP-Gas container is allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or other listed devices. Such container shall not exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot. See Table 6104.3 for location of containers. 
Exception: Lots where LP can be off-loaded wholly on the property where the tank is located may install 500 gallon above ground or 1,000 gallon underground approved containers. 
(hhhhhh)  Section 6107.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 6107.4. Protecting Containers from Vehicles. Where exposed to vehicular damage due to proximity to alleys, driveways or parking areas, LP-gas containers, regulators and piping shall be protected in accordance with Section 312. 
(iiiiii)  Table B105.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to modify footnote a. to read as follows: 
a.  The reduced fire-flow shall be not less than 1,500 gallons per minute. 
(jjjjjj)  Chapter 80 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to add the following sentence to the existing introductory paragraph to read as follows: 
All reference standards from the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA, will be referenced in the fire code from the NFPA's latest published edition for compliance within the fire code. 
(kkkkkk)  Appendix D, Section D102.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section D102.1. Access and Loading. Facilities, buildings, or portions of buildings hereafter constructed shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way of an approved fire apparatus access road with an asphalt, concrete, or other approved driveway surface capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 85,000 pounds (38,556 kg). 
(llllll)  Appendix D, Section D103.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section D103.2. Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 8 percent in grade. 
Exception: Grades steeper than 8 percent as approved by the Fire Code Official. 
(mmmmmm)  Appendix D, Section D103.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section D103.3. Turning radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be a minimum of 25 feet inner radii and 45 feet exterior radii or as determined by the Fire Code Official. 
(Code 1989, ch. 5, § 1.03; Ord. No. 83-99, § 2, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 20-001, § 1, 2-21-2000; Ord. No. 12-05, § 3, 2-21-2005; Ord. No. 25-06, § 2, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 64-08, § 3, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 19-14, § 3, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 31-16 , § 3, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 33-19 , § 3, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 38-3. - Registration required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to install, alter, repair, replace, or remodel any system specified by this chapter, or regulated by the fire code, without having first registered with the town. Registration shall be upon forms supplied by the fire marshal and shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(b)  Contractors performing any of the following listed installations shall be registered before obtaining a permit or performing work in the town: 
(1)  Fire suppression system installation aboveground. 
(2)  Fire suppression system installation underground. 
(3)  Fire alarm notification and detection system installation. 
(4)  Wet or dry chemical hood installation. 
(5)  Mechanical exhaust kitchen hood systems installation. 
(6)  Underground/aboveground fuel tanks, or product line, or vapor recovery system installation. 
(7)  Liquid petroleum tanks over 100 gallons installation. 
(Ord. No. 65-01, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 12-05, § 4, 2-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-4. - Construction or repair permits required. 
No person shall begin any of the following listed activities without having first obtained a separate fire department construction permit and paid the appropriate fees for these building installation features as set forth in appendix A of this chapter for new and remodel construction: 
(1)  Fire suppression systems, underground or aboveground. 
(2)  Fire alarm notification and detection systems. 
(3)  Wet or dry chemical hood systems. 
(4)  Mechanical exhaust kitchen hood systems. 
(5)  Underground/aboveground fuel tanks, or product lines, or vapor recovery systems. 
(6)  Liquid petroleum gas (LPG) tanks over 100 gallons. 
(Ord. No. 65-01, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 12-05, § 5, 2-21-2005)  
Sec. 38-5. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-13. Each day any such violation or violations exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 65-01, § 5, 10-1-2001)  
Sec. 38-6. - Recovery costs relative to hazardous materials incidents. 
(a)  Engine or truck, per hour ..... $ 300.00 
(b)  Medic unit, per hour ..... 150.00 
(c)  Personnel costs shall include wages, retirement, employee compensation, etc. 
(d)  Equipment/supplies cost—Actual cost to replace utilized supplies and or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 25-06, § 3, 5-1-2006)  
Sec. 38-7. - Excessive fire alarm fee. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
Enforcement official. The fire chief, fire marshal or designee. 
False fire alarm. The activation of any alarm which results in the response of the fire department caused by the negligence or intentional misuse of a fire alarm system by the owner/occupant or employees, servants or agents, or by any other activation not caused by heat, smoke or fire, exclusive of a fire alarm malfunction. An alarm is not considered a false fire alarm if the alarm is activated due to obvious malicious causes beyond the control of the owner/occupant. 
False alarm malfunction. The activation of any alarm which results in the response of the fire department caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or lack of proper maintenance or any other response for which the fire department personnel are unable to gain access to the premises for any reason, or are unable to determine the apparent cause of the alarm activation. 
Fee. The assessment of a monetary charge payable to the Town of Flower Mound, authorized pursuant to this section, to defray the expenses of responding to a false alarm or malfunction. 
Fire alarm system. Any mechanical, electrical or radio controlled device which is designated to emit a sound or transmit a signal or message when activated or any such device which emits a sound and transmits a signal or message when activated because of smoke, heat or fire. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, alarm systems shall be deemed to include audible alarms at the site of the installation of the detection device, proprietor alarms and automatic telephone direct dial services or digital alarm communicator systems. A single station alarm device shall not be deemed to be a fire alarm system under this section. 
Fire alarm technician. Any person who inspects, installs, repairs or performs maintenance on fire alarm systems and who is licensed by the State of Texas or works under a state licensed alarm contractor. 
Nuisance alarm. An alarm caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or lack of proper maintenance, or an alarm activated by a cause that cannot be determined. 
Notification. Communication, whether verbal or written, made to the owner/occupant or authorized representative established by their emergency contact information provided via the alarm monitoring company. 
Owner/occupant. Any persons or authorized representative who own, lease, operate, occupy or manage the premises in which a fire alarm system is installed. 
Premises. Any building or structure, or combination of buildings or structures, including residential dwellings, and tenant or lease spaces located wholly or partially inside such buildings or structures classified by the International Fire Code as a group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R, S, or U occupancy, where a fire alarm system is installed. 
Required fire alarm system. A fire alarm system which the owner/occupant of premises is required to install and maintain in an operative condition pursuant to this code. 
Serve. The hand-delivery of written notification by a representative of the fire department to the owner/occupant or authorized representative who responds to the premises upon activation of a fire alarm system. In the event that the owner/occupant or authorized representative fails to respond to the premises within 30 minutes of the activation of the fire alarm system, "serve" shall also mean the placement of written notification, form or other documentation within the postal system operated by the United States Postal Service, addressed to the most current or last known address of the owner/occupant or authorized representative. 
(b)  Owner/occupant responsibility, response and notification. 
(1)  The responsibility for fire alarm system activation shall be that of the owner/occupant of the premises in which the fire alarm system is installed. 
(2)  The owner/occupant shall respond and report to the premises within 30 minutes of notification by fire and/or police dispatch personnel of a fire alarm system activation. Failure of the owner/occupant to appear at said premises within 30 minutes after being notified shall result in an assessment fee by the town issued to the owner/occupant of the premises in the amount identified in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(3)  The owner/occupant shall be served with a copy of a "Fire Alarm Activation Report." Such report shall indicate if the fire alarm activation was either a false fire alarm or false alarm malfunction. 
(4)  Once a false fire alarm of fire alarm malfunction has been responded to by the fire department, it shall be unlawful for the alarm panel to be reset by the owner/occupant of the premises, until authorization from the enforcement official has been obtained. 
(c)  False fire alarm and fire alarm malfunctions fee charges. 
(1)  All fees charged to an owner/occupant regarding false fire alarms and false alarm malfunctions shall be billed and collected by the town finance department. 
(2)  No fee shall be assessed for the first three false fire alarms or fire alarm malfunctions, or any combination thereof, (collectively referred to as "false alarm" or "false alarms") at the same premises within one calendar year. Beginning with the fourth false alarm and continuing through the seventh such false alarm within a single calendar year, a fee in the amount identified in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code shall be paid by the owner/occupant for each false alarm located in a group A, B, E, F, H, I M, U. R-1 and S occupancy. After the seventh false alarm has occurred at the premises within a single calendar year, the fee for each additional false alarm located in a group A, B, E, F, H, I M, U. R-1 and S occupancy during the remainder of the then current calendar year shall be an amount identified in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(3)  No fees shall be assessed for the first three false alarms at a group R-3 occupancy premises during each calendar year. Beginning with the fourth false alarm and continuing through the seventh such false alarm within a single calendar year, a fee in the amount identified in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code shall be paid by the owner/occupant for each false alarm. After the seventh false alarm has occurred at the premises within a single calendar year, the fee for each false alarm during the remainder of the then current calendar year shall be in the amount identified in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(4)  False alarms activated by any components connected to the fire alarm system shall be included to compute the total number of false alarms for purposes of this section. 
(5)  Should any fee assessed pursuant to this section remain unpaid in excess of 60 days from the date the charge is billed, a collection fee will be charged, in the amount identified in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. and interest in the amount of 12 percent per annum shall be assessed on the outstanding balance and shall be payable by the owner/occupant of the premises in addition to the original fee. The owner/occupant shall also be responsible for any legal fees or cost incurred by the town in the enforcement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 64-08, § 4, 10-20-2008)  
Chapter 42 - IMPACT FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 50-15 , §§ 8(Exhs. A—D) and 9(Exhs. E, F), adopted Sept. 8, 2015, repealed and replaced exhibits A—F to Chapter 42. Exhibits A—D are not set out herein, but are on file in the office of the town secretary. Exhibits E and F are set out in Appendix A of this Code.    Previously, Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, adopted Apr. 19, 2004, amended Ch. 42 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Ch. 42 derived from Code 1989, ch. 11, §§ 21.00(a), (b), (d)—(j), and §§ 25.00(a)—(e), (h)—(j); Ord. No. 87-00, §§ 1—6, adopted Dec. 18, 2000; Ord. No. 36-01, § 1, adopted May 21, 2001; and Ord. No. 37-01, § 1, adopted May 21, 2001. 
Cross reference— Fee schedule, app. A. 
State Law reference— Impact fees, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 395.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Land use assumptions and capital improvement plans adopted. 
(a)  The town council hereby adopts the land use assumptions as set forth in the 2015 Land Use Assumptions for Impact Fee Update dated July 2015, attached hereto as exhibit A and incorporated herein for all purposes allowed by law. 
(b)  The town council hereby adopts the water system capital improvement plan as set forth in the Water Impact Fee Update Report for 2015 dated July 2015, attached hereto as exhibit B and incorporated herein for all purposes allowed by law. 
(c)  The town council hereby adopts the wastewater system capital improvements plan as set forth in the Wastewater Impact Fee Update Report for 2015 dated July 2015, attached hereto as exhibit C and incorporated herein for all purposes allowed by law. 
(d)  The town council hereby adopts the roadway system capital improvement plan as set forth in the 2015 Roadway Impact Fee Update dated July 2015, attached hereto as exhibit D and incorporated herein for all purposes allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 08-10, § 2, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 50-15 , § 2, 9-8-2015) 
Editor's note— Exhibits A—D are not set out herein, but are on file in the office of the town secretary.  
Secs. 42-2—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND WASTEWATER IMPACT FEES 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Title. 
This article shall be officially known as the "Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Ordinance of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas." It may be cited as "this article." 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 42-32. - Authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the powers granted and limitations imposed by the constitution and laws of the state, specifically V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 42-33. - Purpose and intent of article. 
(a)  This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the town's comprehensive master plan and capital improvements plan. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to ensure that adequate water and wastewater facilities are available to serve new growth and development within the town and to regulate the use and development of land so that new growth and development bear a proportionate share of the cost of such new water and wastewater capital improvements needed to serve such new development. 
(c)  It is not the purpose of this article to collect any money from new development in excess of the actual amount necessary to offset the demand on the town's water and wastewater facilities generated by such new development activity. It is specifically acknowledged that this article has approached the calculation of proportionate share impact fees in a conservative and reasonable manner. 
(d)  It is in the interest of the public's health, safety, and general welfare for the town to regulate development and ensure the adequacy of water and wastewater facilities by requiring payment of proportionate share impact fees. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 42-34. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Capital improvement means any water supply, treatment and distribution facilities, or wastewater collection and treatment facilities that have a life expectancy of three or more years and are owned and operated by or on behalf of the town. 
Connection to water or sewer system means the filing with the town of a written application for a water or sewer tap and the payment of applicable fees, including purchase of a water meter. 
Equivalent residential connection means a service unit of demand for water and wastewater service equivalent to the demand generated by a typical single-family residence. 
Facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of an existing facility that serves the same function as an otherwise necessary new capital improvement, in order that the existing facility may serve new development. 
Service unit means a standardized measure of consumption, use, generation, or discharge, attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning principles for a particular category of capital improvements or facility expansions. For the purpose of water and wastewater impact fees, service units shall be expressed in terms of equivalent residential connections. 
Wastewater impact fee service area means a geographic area in which wastewater service is provided by the town. There are five wastewater service areas which are identified as the Long Prairie Service Area, Lakeside Service Area, Denton Creek Service Area, Prairie Vista Service Area, and Cross Timbers Conservation Service Area as identified in the town master plan, as amended. The Cross Timbers Conservation Area currently has no sewer service and there are no future plans to provide sewer to this area, thus there are no future system needs and no impact fees associated with this area. 
Water impact fee service area means a geographic area in which water service is provided by the town. For the purposes of this article, all land within the corporate limits of the town shall constitute one single water impact fee service area. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 08-10, § 3, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 50-15 , § 3, 9-8-2015)  
Sec. 42-35. - Applicability of article provisions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all development within the water and wastewater impact fee service areas. 
(b)  The total water impact fee required by this article shall be paid to the town in full at the time of application for building permit. The town will not furnish a water meter or allow connection to the water system if the applicant for such connection cannot furnish proof that the water impact fee has been paid in full to the town. 
(c)  The total wastewater impact fee required by this article shall be paid to the town in full at the time of application for building permit. The town will not allow connection to the wastewater system if the applicant for such connection cannot furnish proof that the wastewater impact fee has been paid in full to the town. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 42-36. - Timing of fee assessment. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) below, the water and wastewater impact fees shall be based on the cost per service unit in effect at the time application of building permit. 
(b)  The water and wastewater impact fees applicable to a lot or tract of land platted after the effective date of the article originally establishing water and wastewater impact fees for the town shall be based on the water and wastewater impact fees per service unit in effect at the time of such plat recordation, provided that the applicant shall submit evidence of the date of plat recording at the time of connection to the water or wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 42-37. - Fee calculation. 
(a)  Fee base. The water and wastewater impact fees shall be based on the size of the water meter determined by the town engineer to be necessary to serve the development and the number of service units associated with that size of water meter. If the town allows a development to connect to the wastewater system without connecting to the water system, the town engineer shall determine the size of the water meter that would be required if the development did connect to the water system. The number of service units associated with various water meter sizes are as follows: 
Meter Size 	Maximum 
Continuous 
Operating 
Capacity 
(gpm)** 	Service Unit 
Equivalent 
5/8 " × ¾" PD* 	10 	1 
¾" PD* 	15 	1.5 
1" PD* 	25 	2.5 
1½" PD* 	50 	5 
2" PD* 	80 	8 
2" compound 	80 	8 
2" turbine 	160 	16 
3" compound 	175 	17.5 
3" turbine 	350 	35 
4" compound 	300 	30 
4" turbine 	650 	65 
6" compound 	675 	67.5 
6" turbine 	1,400 	140 
8" compound 	900 	90 
8" turbine 	2,400 	240 
10" turbine 	3,500 	350 
 
* PD = Positive Displacement Meter (typical residential meter) 
** Operating capacities obtained from American Water Works Association (AWWA) C700-15, C701-15, and C702-15. Turbine and compound meter flows are based on Class II (in-line) meters. 
(b)  Water impact fees. Water impact fees per service unit shall be calculated by dividing the maximum recoverable cost for impact fee by the projected number of additional service units, less any water impact fee credits applicable to the property pursuant to section 42-38. Based upon the adopted land use assumptions and capital improvements plan, the maximum recoverable cost to provide water service to a service unit is based upon a single town-wide service area as provided in exhibit B to this chapter. Based upon this cost per service unit, the water impact fees by water meter size are as listed in exhibit E attached hereto and incorporated herein for all purposes allowed by law. 
Exception. Water impact fees for nonresidential development shall be assessed at 50 percent of the maximum fee per service unit as provided in exhibit E. Further, water impact fees for nonresidential development determined to have met the criteria of the SMARTGrowth program, economic development incentive policy shall be assessed at 25 percent of the maximum fee for equivalent residential connections as provided in exhibit E attached hereto and incorporated herein for all purposes allowed by law. 
(c)  Wastewater impact fees. Wastewater impact fees per service unit shall be calculated by dividing the maximum recoverable cost for impact fee by the projected number of additional service units, less any wastewater impact fee credits applicable to the property pursuant to section 42-38. Based upon the adopted land use assumptions and capital improvements plan, the maximum recoverable cost to provide wastewater service to a service unit is based upon the four service areas that provide sewer as provided in exhibit C to this chapter. The cost-per-service unit for wastewater impact fees by water meter size is as listed in exhibit E to this chapter. 
Exception. Wastewater impact fees for nonresidential development shall be assessed at 50 percent of the maximum fee per service unit as provided in exhibit E. Further, wastewater impact fees for nonresidential development determined to have met the criteria of the SMARTGrowth program, economic development incentive policy shall be assessed at 25 percent of the maximum fee as provided in exhibit E to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 08-10, § 4, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 50-15 , § 4, 9-8-2015) 
Editor's note— Exhibit E is set out in Appendix A of this Code. Exhibits B and C are not set out herein, but are on file in the office of the town secretary.  
Sec. 42-38. - Credits. 
(a)  If the town requires as a condition of development approval, or otherwise enters into an agreement with a developer, to have the developer construct, fund or otherwise contribute toward the cost of a capital improvement or facility expansion that is necessary to serve the developer's development and which is included in the adopted water or wastewater capital improvements plan, the town shall provide for reimbursement in the form of credits against impact fees that would otherwise be due from the development. Such credits shall run with the land and shall be used to reduce the amount of the impact fee that would otherwise be owed at the time of collection of impact fees. 
In determining the amount of such credits, the developer shall submit evidence of the actual, fair-market cost of the required improvements. The actual, fair-market cost shall then be reduced in the same manner and proportion as the actual assessed impact fee amounts charged by the town are reduced from the projected actual costs of impact fee capital projects of the same type facility (water or wastewater) in the same service area (the "reduced cost values"). Credits shall then be granted to the developer in an amount equal to such reduced cost values. Such credits shall only be applicable against the impact fees for the type of facility (water or wastewater) for which the capital improvement is made. 
(b)  The town may also enter into an agreement with a developer to have the developer construct, fund or otherwise contribute toward the cost of a capital improvement or facility expansion that is included in the adopted water or wastewater capital improvements plan and which is not necessary to serve the developer's development such as the oversizing of pipes, pumps or lift stations or the addition of extra facilities beyond the minimum standards required by the town's ordinances to serve the developer's development. The town may provide for reimbursement in the form of credits against impact fees that would otherwise be due from the development. Such credits shall run with the land and shall be used to reduce the amount of the impact fee that would otherwise be owed at the time of collection of impact fees. 
In determining the amount of such credits, the developer shall submit evidence of the actual, fair-market cost of the oversized improvements. If the amount of such credits would be insufficient to reimburse the developer for the cost of such oversized improvements or extra improvements beyond the minimum standards required by the town's ordinances to serve the developer's development, the town may provide for reimbursement to the developer up to the balance of the cost of such oversized required improvements from water or wastewater impact fees collected from other new development within the same service area. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 08-10, § 5, 2-1-2010)  
Sec. 42-39. - Accounting for fees and interest. 
(a)  All water and wastewater impact fees collected by the town shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts clearly identifying the category of capital improvements for which the fees were collected. 
(b)  Interest earned on water and wastewater impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all of the restrictions placed on use of impact fees under this article. 
(c)  Water and wastewater impact fee funds shall only be spent for the purposes for which they were imposed as shown by the capital improvement plan and as authorized by this article. 
(d)  The records of the water and wastewater impact fee accounts shall be open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours. 
(e)  Water and wastewater impact fee funds shall only be used to pay the costs of constructing water and wastewater capital improvements or facility expansions, including and limited to the following: 
(1)  Construction contract price; 
(2)  Interest charges or other finance costs; 
(3)  Surveying and engineering fees; 
(4)  Land acquisition costs, including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees and expert witness fees; and 
(5)  Fees actually paid or contracted to be paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant preparing or updating the capital improvements plan who is not an employee of the town. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 42-40. - Refunds. 
All or any portion of a water or wastewater impact fee payment that has been collected by the town and has not been spent as authorized by this article within ten years for the date such impact fee was collected shall be refunded by the town, subject to the following: 
(1)  The determination of whether an impact fee payment made for a particular piece of property has been spent shall be based on the "first-in, first-out" accounting principle. 
(2)  Any refund shall bear interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 302.002, or its successor statute. 
(3)  All refunds shall be made to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee payment was made at the time the refund is paid; provided, however, that if the impact fees were paid by another political subdivision or governmental entity, the refund shall be made to the political subdivision or governmental entity. 
(4)  The town shall provide a refund within 60 days of application for such refund, provided that the applicant provides all documentation necessary for the town to determine that the refund is due to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Secs. 42-41—42-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ROAD IMPACT FEES 
 
Sec. 42-71. - Title. 
This article shall be officially known as the "Road Impact Fee Ordinance of the town of Flower Mound, Texas." It may be cited as "this article." 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 42-72. - Authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the powers granted and limitations imposed by the constitution and laws of the state, specifically V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 42-73. - Purpose and intent of article. 
(a)  This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the town's comprehensive master plan, thoroughfare plan and capital improvements plan. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to ensure that adequate roadway facilities are available to serve new growth and development within the town and to regulate the use and development of land so that new growth and development bear a proportionate share of the cost of such new roadway capital improvements needed to serve such new development. 
(c)  It is not the purpose of this article to collect any money from new development in excess of the actual amount necessary to offset the demand on the roadway facilities generated by such new development activity. It is specifically acknowledged that this article has approached the calculation of proportionate share impact fees in a conservative and reasonable manner. 
(d)  It is in the interest of the public's health, safety and general welfare for the town to regulate development and ensure the adequacy of roadway facilities by requiring payment of proportionate share impact fees. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 42-74. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Capital improvement means any roadway facilities that have a life expectancy of three or more years and are owned and operated by or on behalf of the town. 
Facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of an existing facility that serves the same function as an otherwise necessary new capital improvement, in order that the existing facility may serve new development. 
New development means the subdivision of land; the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of the use of land; any of which increases the number of service units. 
Road impact fee service area means one of three geographic areas in which development is served by the roadway facilities designated in the capital improvements plan. Road impact fee service areas 1 through 3 are shown in exhibit D to this chapter. These service areas cover the entire corporate boundary of the Town of Flower Mound. The boundaries of the service areas consist of the town limits or the most distant right-of-way line of existing or planned roads. Where an existing or planned road serves as the boundary between two adjacent service areas, the boundary shall be interpreted as the centerline of the existing or planned road. 
Roadway facilities means arterial or collector streets or roads that have been designated on the town's adopted thoroughfare plan, including all necessary appurtenances, and including town contributions to roadways or associated improvements designated on the federal or state highway system. 
Service unit means a standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning principles for a particular category of capital improvements or facility expansions. For the purpose of road impact fees, service units shall be expressed in terms of vehicle-miles of travel during the p.m. peak hour. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 08-10, § 6, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 50-15 , § 5, 9-8-2015) 
Editor's note— Exhibit D is not set out herein, but is on file in the office of the town secretary.  
Sec. 42-75. - Applicability of article provisions. 
This article shall apply to all development within the road impact fee service areas. The total road impact fee required by this article shall be paid to the town in full at the time of issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy for new development. The town will not issue a building permit or certificate of occupancy if the applicant for such permit cannot furnish proof that the road impact fee has been paid in full to the town. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 42-76. - Fee assessment. 
(a)  Road impact fees shall be assessed at the maximum fee per service unit for each service area. Road impact fees shall be assessed at 50 percent of the maximum fee per service unit for nonresidential development for each service area. Further, road impact fees for nonresidential development determined to have met the criteria of the SMARTGrowth program, economic development incentive policy shall be assessed at 25 percent of the maximum fee per service unit. The impact fee per service unit for each service area is established in section 42-77 which shall be equal to the maximum impact fee per service unit. 
(b)  The maximum road impact fee per service unit is the sum of the eligible roadway impact fee CIP costs for the service area divided by the growth in travel attributable to new development projected to occur within the ten-year period as identified in the road impact fee capital improvements plan, based upon the land use assumptions for that service area. Based upon the adopted land use assumptions and the capital improvements plan, the maximum road impact fees per service unit for each service area are as listed in exhibit F to this chapter. 
(c)  For land platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and for which no replatting is necessary prior to issuance of a building permit, road impact fee assessment shall occur on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(d)  For land platted after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the road impact fee assessment shall occur at the date of recording of the plat. 
(e)  Following assessment of the road impact fee pursuant to this section, the amount of the road impact fee per service unit for that development shall not be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the approved development by submission of a new application for a record plat approval, in which case a new assessment shall occur at the assessment rate then in effect. 
(f)  Following the lapse or expiration of approval for a plat, a new assessment shall occur at the time a new plat is recorded. 
(g)  A plat amendment pursuant to section 90-152 shall not be subject to reassessment for road impact fees. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 08-10, § 7, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 50-15 , § 6, 9-8-2015) 
Editor's note— Exhibit F is set out in Appendix A of this Code.  
Sec. 42-77. - Fee calculation. 
(a)  The number of service units (vehicle-miles of travel during the p.m. peak hour) generated by a development shall be determined from exhibit F attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference for all purposes allowed by law, subject to the following: 
(1)  References to square feet refer to gross floor area, as defined in the town's Land Development Code, Subpart B of this Code. 
(2)  When a change of use, redevelopment, or modification of an existing use or building requires the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy, the number of service units generated by the development shall be based on the difference between the service units calculated for the previous use and the service units calculated for the proposed use. However, should the change of use, redevelopment or modification of an existing use or building result in a net decrease, no refund or credits for past road impact fees paid shall be made or created. 
(3)  In the event of a disagreement between the applicant and the town over the land use category applicable to a development, the applicant may present evidence supporting the appropriateness of a particular land use category, and the final decision shall be made by the town engineer. 
(4)  If the land use category is one of the "others not specified" categories, the applicant may present evidence in support of alternative trip rate and trip length factors, with the final decision to be made by the town engineer. 
(b)  Based on the adopted land use assumptions and capital improvements plan, the road impact fees assessed for each of the three service areas depicted in the service area map in exhibit C as referenced in section 42-1 are tabulated such that the net growth-related capital costs required to improve the road system to accommodate an additional service unit is dispersed uniformly within each service area. In no event shall the impact fees collected per service unit exceed the amounts provided for in section 42-76. 
(c)  Based upon the adopted land use assumptions and capital improvements plan, the road impact fees assessed for each of the three service areas depicted in the service area map in exhibit D as referenced in section 42-1 are tabulated such that the net growth-related capital costs required to improve the road system to accommodate an additional service unit is dispersed uniformly within each service area. In no event shall the impact fees collected per service unit exceed the amounts provided for in section 42-76. 
(d)  If the road impact fee has been calculated and paid based on error or misrepresentation, it shall be recalculated. If the original calculation resulted in a fee that was too high, the difference shall be refunded to the original fee payer. If additional road impact fees are owed, no permits of any type shall be issued by the town for the building or use in question, or for any other part of a development project of which the building or use in question is a part, while the fees remain unpaid, and the building official may bring any action permitted by law or equity to collect unpaid fees. 
(e)  Road impact fees in each of the three service areas shall be as set forth in the fee schedule, attached hereto as exhibit F to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 08-10, § 8, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 50-15 , § 7, 9-8-2015) 
Editor's note— Exhibit F is set out in Appendix A of this Code. Exhibit D is not set out herein, but is on file in the office of the town secretary.  
Sec. 42-78. - Credits. 
(a)  If the town requires as a condition of development approval, or otherwise enters into an agreement with a developer, to have the developer construct, fund or otherwise contribute toward the cost of a roadway facility that is necessary to serve the developer's development and which is included in the adopted road capital improvements plan, the town shall provide for reimbursement in the form of credits against impact fees that would otherwise be due from the development. Such credits shall run with the land and shall be used to reduce the amount of the impact fee that would otherwise be owed at the time of collection of impact fees. 
In determining the amount of such credits, the developer shall submit evidence of the actual, fair market cost of the required improvements. The actual, fair-market cost shall then be reduced in the same manner and proportion as the actual assessed impact fee amounts charged by the town are reduced from the projected actual costs of impact fee capital projects of the roadway facility in the same service area (the "reduced cost values"). Credits shall then be granted to the developer in an amount equal to such reduced cost values. Such credits shall only be applicable against road impact fees in the same service area in which the roadway facility was constructed. 
(b)  The town may also enter into an agreement with a developer to have the developer construct, fund or otherwise contribute toward the cost of a roadway improvement or roadway expansion that is included in the adopted roadway capital improvements plan and which is not necessary to serve the developer's development such as additional lanes, appurtenances and warranted signalization beyond the minimum standards required by the town's ordinances to serve the developer's development. The town may provide for reimbursement in the form of credits against impact fees that would otherwise be due from the development. Such credits shall run with the land and shall be used to reduce the amount of the impact fee that would otherwise be owed at the time of collection of impact fees. 
In determining the amount of such credits, the developer shall submit evidence of the actual, fair-market cost of the roadway improvements. If the amount of such credits would be insufficient to reimburse the developer for the cost of such extra improvements beyond the minimum standards required by the town's ordinances to serve the developer's development, the town may provide for reimbursement to the developer up to the balance of the cost of such oversized required improvements from road impact fees collected from other new development within the same service area. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 08-10, § 9, 2-1-2010)  
Sec. 42-79. - Accounting for fees and interest. 
(a)  All road impact fees collected by the town shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts clearly identifying the category of capital improvements for which the fees were collected. 
(b)  Interest earned on road impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all of the restrictions placed on use of impact fees under this article. 
(c)  Road impact fee funds shall only be spent for the purposes for which they were imposed as shown by the capital improvements plan and as authorized by this article. 
(d)  The records of the road impact fee accounts shall be open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours. 
(e)  Road impact fee funds shall only be used to pay the costs of constructing roadway facility capital improvements or facility expansions shown in the capital improvements plan, including and limited to the following: 
(1)  Construction contract price; 
(2)  Interest charges or other finance costs; 
(3)  Surveying and engineering fees; 
(4)  Land acquisition costs, including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees; and 
(5)  Fees actually paid or contracted to be paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant preparing or updating the capital improvements plan who is not an employee of the town. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 42-80. - Refunds. 
All or any portion of a road impact fee payment that has been collected by the town and has not been spent as authorized by this article within ten years for the date such impact fee was collected shall be refunded by the town, subject to the following: 
(1)  The determination of whether an impact fee payment made for a particular piece of property has been spent shall be based on the "first-in, first-out" accounting principle. 
(2)  Any refund shall bear interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 302.002. 
(3)  All refunds shall be made to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee payment was made at the time the refund is paid; provided, however, that if the impact fees were paid by another political subdivision or governmental entity, the refund shall be made to the political subdivision or governmental entity. 
(4)  The town shall provide a refund within 60 days of the application for such refund, provided that the applicant provides all documentation necessary for the town to determine that the refund is due to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004)  
Chapter 46 - LIBRARY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; library board, § 2-111 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Library fees. 
The library fee schedule is provided in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 7.00; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 2-21-2005)  
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to pass ordinances defining and prohibiting misdemeanors, § 3.07(t). 
Cross reference— Court, ch. 26; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Authority to define, prohibit and abate nuisances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 217.041, 217.042; authority to adopt police regulation for the good government, peace and order of the town, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.001; authority to adopt ordinances or regulations that are necessary for the government, interest, welfare or good order of the town, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.012; criminal mischief and reckless destruction of property, V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 28.03 and 28.04. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES REGARDING WEAPONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 50-31—50-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIREARMS 
 
Sec. 50-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air rifle, BB gun and pellet gun means any device designed to expel a projectile through a barrel using the energy generated by a compression of gases or that is generated by the release of a coiled spring. 
Firearm means any device designed, made or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosion or burning substance or any device readily convertible to that use. 
Handgun means any firearm that is designed to fire a solid projectile or multiple projectiles through a rifled barrel and is made or adapted to be fired with one hand. 
Person means any corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust partnership, association, or any other legal entity, as now or hereafter may be included in the definition of "person" contained in the Texas Code Construction Act. 
Rifle means any firearm designed to fire a solid projectile or multiple projectiles through a rifled barrel and is designed to be fired from the shoulder. 
Shotgun means any firearm designed to fire a solid or multiple projectiles through a smooth barrel. 
Sport shooting range means a business establishment, private club, or association that operates an area for the discharge or other use of firearms for silhouette, skeet, trap, black powder, target, self-defense, or similar recreational shooting. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 4.01; Ord. No. 14-14, § 1, 4-7-2014) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-52. - Discharging firearms. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to fire or shoot, or cause to be fired or shot, any firearm, rifle, shotgun, automatic rifle, handgun or any weapon designed for the purpose of firing or discharging any shell or cartridge, whether such shell is blank or live ammunition, in any place within the corporate limits of the town, except as otherwise may be specifically permitted for self-defense or other purposes under the laws of the state, or by the exceptions set forth in this division. It shall further be unlawful and an offense for any person to fire or shoot, or cause to be fired or shot, any air rifle, BB gun or pellet gun in any place within the corporate limits of the town, except as permitted in this division. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 4.02)  
Sec. 50-53. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This division does not apply to either military personnel or peace officers of the United States or the state, or any of its political subdivisions while in the performance of their official duties, and shall not apply to blank cartridges for show or theatrical productions or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletic or sporting events. 
(b)  Discharging of a pellet or BB gun is permitted on private property, and then only with sufficient backstop to prevent the projectile from falling onto or over the property of another. 
(c)  The discharging of a shotgun is permitted under the following conditions: 
(1)  On private property or with the express written permission of the property owner, if: 
a.  The person discharging the shotgun has express written permission from the owner of any property on or over whose property any projectile would fall; 
b.  The property from which the shotgun is discharged is no less than five acres in size; and 
c.  The size of shot that can be used is restricted to number six and smaller. 
d.  Hunting shall be allowed on private property with a shotgun with the express written consent of the owner, and pursuant to the terms outlined in subsections (c)(1)a, (c)(1)b and (c)(1)c of this section. Hunting shall not be allowed on public property, except in those areas clearly defined and marked, in any area of the town. 
(2)  For the purpose of defending oneself or for the purpose of defending domestic animals against other animals; 
(3)  Persons discharging shotguns on private shotgun ranges which were in existence and operating on the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(d)  Section 50-52 does not apply to the discharge of a firearm or air gun at a sport shooting range. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 4.03; Ord. No. 14-14, § 2, 4-7-2014)  
Secs. 50-54—50-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES REGARDING MINORS  
DIVISION 1. - ELECTRONIC VAPING DEVICES 
 
Sec. 50-81. - Possession of electronic vaping devices by minors prohibited. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if the minor possesses, purchases or attempts to purchase an electronic vaping device. 
(b)  A minor commits an offense if the minor falsely represents himself or herself to be 18 years of age or older for the purpose of purchasing or receiving an electronic vaping device. 
(c)  It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section if at the time of the purchase, the minor: 
(1)  Was in the presence of an adult parent or legal guardian of the minor; 
(2)  Was in the course and scope of the minor's employment and the purchase of the electronic vaping device was a part of the duties of such employment; or 
(3)  Was participating in an inspection or test of compliance in conjunction with local law enforcement. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, the term "electronic vaping device" shall mean any electronically powered or battery powered device designed to simulate the smoking of tobacco, cigarettes, pipes or cigars. An electronic vaping device includes personal vaporizers, electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes), electronic pipes (e-pipes), electronic cigars (e-cigars) and any other type of electronic nicotine delivery system or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 05-14, § 4, 2-3-2014)  
Secs. 50-82—50-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22-16 , § 1, adopted April 4, 2016, provides that the juvenile curfew regulations of the Town of Flower Mound are hereby continued as is with no changes. 
 
Sec. 50-101. - Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew hours means between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on the following day; and 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other legal entity operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or 
(2)  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Police department means the town police department or any successor thereto. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, restaurants, theaters, gamerooms and shops, shopping centers, or any other place that offers for sale services or merchandise. 
Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer, or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 5.01; Ord. No. 42-01, § 2(a), 6-18-2001; Ord. No. 05-19 , § 1, 2-18-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-102. - Offenses. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the town during curfew hours. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the town during curfew hours. 
(c)  The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 5.02; Ord. No. 42-01, § 2(b), 6-18-2001; Ord. No. 05-19 , § 1, 2-18-2019)  
Sec. 50-103. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 50-102 that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or accompanied by another adult approved by the parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel or transportation through which passage through the curfew area is the most direct route; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On an errand made necessary by an illness, injury or medical emergency; 
(7)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
(8)  Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and/or sponsored by the town, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and/or sponsored by the town, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(9)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or 
(10)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code ch. 31. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 50-102(c) that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 5.03; Ord. No. 42-01, § 2(c), 6-18-2001; Ord. No. 05-19 , § 1, 2-18-2019)  
Sec. 50-104. - Enforcement of division provisions. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this division, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and the reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this division unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in section 50-103 is present. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 5.04; Ord. No. 42-01. § 2(d), 6-18-2001; Ord. No. 05-19 , § 1, 2-18-2019)  
Sec. 50-105. - Penalties for violation of division. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this division is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  When required by V.T.C.A., Family Code § 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 50-102(a) and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
(c)  In assessing punishment for either a parent or minor, municipal court judges are encouraged to consider a community service program. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 5.05; Ord. No. 42-01, § 2(e), 6-18-2001; Ord. No. 05-19 , § 1, 2-18-2019)  
Secs. 50-106—50-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY 
 
Sec. 50-200. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Day care center means a facility providing care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for 13 or more children for less than 24 hours a day. 
Minor means any person younger than 17 years of age. 
Permanent residence means a place where a person abides, lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Premises include all improved and unimproved areas on the lot where a public park, public playground, private or public school, public swimming pool, semipublic swimming pool, day care center or video arcade facility is located. 
Temporary residence means a place where a person abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calen dar year, and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent address. 
(Ord. No. 61-07, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 50-201. - Offenses. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to establish a permanent or temporary residence within 2,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather if the person is required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database (the "database") because of a conviction(s) involving a minor. 
(b)  It is unlawful to lease, rent, or otherwise provide any residence, dwelling, place, structure or part thereof, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent or temporary residence under this article. The determination of the distance between the residence and the premises where children commonly gather shall be measured as provided in this article. 
(c)  For purposes of this article, premises where children commonly gather are deemed to be public parks including the town's multi-use trail system, public playgrounds, private or public schools, public libraries, public swimming pools, semipublic swimming pools, public or private youth centers, day care centers, amusement parks and video arcade facilities, as those terms are or may be defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.134, as amended. For purposes of this article, landscaped street medians are not public parks, and equestrian trails are not multi-use trails. 
(Ord. No. 61-07, § 2, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 54-15 , § 1, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 50-202. - Evidentiary matters; measurements; affirmative defenses. 
(a)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this article applies to a person if that person's record appears on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than 17 years of age. 
(b)  For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein above, or, in the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein. 
(c)  A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the town. The town shall review the map at least annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public for inspection at the Flower Mound Police Department. 
(d)  Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this article. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under this article that any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the state prior to the date of the adoption of this article; 
(2)  The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person required to register on the database is a minor. 
(4)  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 1,500 feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the state. 
(5)  The information on the Database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this article would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on the database. 
(6)  The person was at the time of the violation subject to community services supervision pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 42.12, section 13B, as amended, and the court reduced or waived the 1,000-foot restriction for a child-free zone under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 42.12, section 13B(a)(1)(B), as amended, as it applies to the person's residence. 
(Ord. No. 61-07, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 50-203. - Penalty. 
A person who violates any of the provisions of section 50-201 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, and each and every violation or day such violation shall continue or exist, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 61-07, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Secs. 50-204—50-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SUBSTANCES 
 
Sec. 50-300. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Person shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
Restricted smoking material shall mean any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the following chemicals or a comparable chemical: 
(1)  Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(2)  2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol (also known as CP47,497) and homologues; 
(3)  (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
(4)  1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018); 
(5)  1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073); or 
(6)  1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-081). 
Products containing some or all of the above substances are currently being marketed under the following commercial names: 
"K-2," "K-2 SUMMIT," "K-2 SEX," "GENIE," "DASCENTS," "ZOHAI," "SAGE," "SPICE," "KO KNOCK-OUT 2," "SPICE GOLD," "SPICE DIAMOND," "YUCATAN FIRE," "SOLAR FLARE," "PEP SPICE," "FIRE N' ICE," and "SALVIA DIVINORUM." 
Any product containing any of the chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the provisions of this article, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names. 
Restricted smoking material paraphernalia shall mean any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be used in ingesting or inhaling illegal smoking materials and may include: 
(1)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  A water pipe; 
(3)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  A chamber pipe; 
(6)  A carburetor pipe; 
(7)  An electric pipe; 
(8)  An air-driven pipe; 
(9)  A chillum; 
(10)  A bong; or 
(11)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
( Ord. No. 51-10 , § 2, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 50-301. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the sale or delivery of restricted smoking materials as herein defined within the town limits of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, and to prohibit the possession of restricted smoking materials within the town limits of the Town of Flower Mound. Any form of delivery, including a gift of same, constitutes a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 51-10 , § 2, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 50-302. - Sale, delivery, offer, or gift. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any restricted smoking material to any person. 
( Ord. No. 51-10 , § 2, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 50-303. - Use or possession of restricted smoking material. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or to use restricted smoking materials within the corporate limits of the Town of Flower Mound. 
( Ord. No. 51-10 , § 2, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 50-304. - Use or possession of restricted smoking paraphernalia. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any restricted smoking paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to ingest, inhale or otherwise consume restricted smoking material. It is a violation of this article if a person is found in possession of restricted smoking paraphernalia and appropriate forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia showing traces of restricted smoking material are present on the restricted smoking paraphernalia. 
( Ord. No. 51-10 , § 2, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 50-305. - Defenses to prosecution. 
(a)  It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this article if the use of the restricted smoking material is at the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances within the State of Texas. 
(b)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this article if an individual charged with a violation can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy or a spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas. 
( Ord. No. 51-10 , § 2, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 50-306. - Offenses and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  Every act in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein allegation and evidence of culpable mental state are not required for the proof of an offense of this article. 
( Ord. No. 51-10 , § 2, 9-7-2010)  
Chapter 54 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; standards for parks and recreational areas in subdivisions, § 90-441 et seq.; vegetation, ch. 94; park lands, § 98-201 et seq.; WR water recreation district, § 98-751 et seq.; REC recreational district, § 98-781 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Naming and renaming of parks, trails, greenbelts and facilities. 
(a)  Park property may be named or renamed after streets, geographical locations, ecological features, historical figures, events, concepts, local, state or national leaders or in memoriam for public servants or residents who perished in the line of duty. Park property may also be named for individuals or groups where major donations of land, funds or other exceptional contributions toward the development, maintenance and/or operation of a park or facility have been made by the nominated individual or group. 
(b)  Parts or areas within a park or recreation facility may be given a name which is different than the park or building. Such parts or areas may include (but are not to be limited to) gardens, playgrounds, athletic fields, structures, swimming pools and meeting rooms. Names for such facilities shall be established by the same guidelines and procedures applied to parks and buildings. 
(c)  Names for new parks shall typically be established within 90 days from the date of land acquisition or at the earliest possible time. The name of new facilities shall be established prior to the completion of construction. Names for parts or areas of parks and facilities may be established at any time. 
(d)  The chairman of the parks board shall name a committee that will be responsible for recommending a name for all parklands and facilities to the board. 
(e)  The committee shall be responsible for research, study, and recommendation of a proposed name to the board. Rationale for the selection of the recommended name shall be given in writing. Any recommendation which involves the name of a person shall include the following: 
* A biographical or informational sketch; 
* Rationale supporting the nomination; 
* The names(s) of the person(s) or supporting group(s) responsible for the nomination. 
(f)  The parks board shall approve or disapprove of the name recommended by the committee. 
(g)  If the committee's recommendation is disapproved by the board, then the matter may be referred back to the committee for further action. 
(h)  All recommended names for such facilities must be approved by a majority vote of the members of the parks board. 
(i)  Upon approval, the recommended name shall be forwarded to the town council for their consideration and final decision. 
(Ord. No. 68-02, § 1, 10-21-2002; Ord. No. 85-04, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 13-09, § 2, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 2, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 54-2. - Fees.[2] 
(a)  Participation/user fees: Sports leagues. 
(1)  Definitions. 
Adult league means any town-operated sports league utilizing town-owned or -leased facilities. 
Nonresident means a person who lives outside the territorial jurisdiction of the town. 
Organization means any organized group that has entered into a sports facility agreement with the town utilizing town-owned or -leased facilities. 
Resident means a person who lives in the territorial jurisdiction of the town. 
Season means a recurrent period of time characterized by league practices and games associated with registration fees for a particular sport. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-02, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2002, assigned an alphabetic designation to the definitions listed above, beginning with (a) and ending at (e). To facilitate supplementation and ensure continuity with the balance of the Code, the alphabetic designation was removed at the editor's discretion. 
(2)  Fees. 
a.  The fee for residents participating in an organization shall be $2.00 per player per season. The fee for nonresidents participating in an organization shall be $14.00 per player per season. 
b.  The fee for adult leagues shall be $60.00 per team for adult softball, $30.00 per team for adult basketball, and $40.00 per team for adult flag football. 
(b)  Ball field reservations: Game fields. 
(1)  Definitions. 
Game field means any portion of a public park as defined in section 11.01(b) of the town's Code of Ordinances that is either owned or leased by the town that has been designated as an area in which town-sponsored or cosponsored athletic activities are played. Game fields are designated by the recreation and leisure services division to be used for the purpose of conducting league or tournament play for town-sponsored or cosponsored athletic events. This includes game fields for football, soccer, softball, baseball, and other sports activities sponsored or co-sponsored by the recreation and leisure services division. 
Nonresident means a person who lives outside the territorial jurisdiction of the Town of Flower Mound. 
Resident means a person who lives in the territorial jurisdiction of the Town of Flower Mound. 
Tournament means any event with three or more teams participating in multiple games. 
Note— See Editor's note following subsection (a). 
(2)  Reservations. 
a.  Game fields can be reserved through the recreation and leisure services division to guarantee availability. Time slots for reservations are available in one-and-one-half-hour increments as seasonal conditions and field availability permit. The game field reservation policy is available at the recreation and leisure services division. 
b.  The tournament and league rental rate includes initial field preparation for each day of the tournament or league i.e., dragging, chalking, bases, as well as lights and scoreboard usage. The recreation and leisure services division must approve all tournaments and leagues. Tournament and league directors must submit a tournament or league schedule and payment of fees in full, no later than three business days prior to the scheduled tournament or league. Tournament and league directors must submit a certificate of liability insurance for commercial general liability insurance, which provides bodily injury, and property damage coverage at limits not less than $1,000,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence. The town shall be named as an additional insured on the certificate, listing the date(s) and location of the tournament or league. 
c.  Organizations that have a sports facility agreement with the town are granted block times for scheduling in accordance with the terms of their agreement. This may limit the time slots available for game field reservations. 
d.  The recreation and leisure services division reserves the right to deny reservations on any game field showing signs of overuse or turf damage. All game fields are subject to availability depending on weather conditions and seasonal maintenance. 
(3)  Fees and refunds. 
a.  The fee for each game field shall be $10.00 (without lights) and $15.00 (with lights) per session for residents and $15.00 (without lights) and $25.00 (with lights) per session for nonresidents. Game soccer fields may be subdivided for reservations at the discretion of the recreation and leisure services division. Each session shall be for no longer than one and one-half hours in accordance with the reservation schedule maintained by the recreation and leisure services division. This includes any league play that is not sanctioned or cosponsored by the town. 
b.  The reservation fee for tournaments is $100.00 per field, per day. A $100.00 refundable tournament deposit is required for potential damage to the facility and scoreboards. If no damage is done to the facility and scoreboards, as determined by the recreation and leisure services division, the deposit shall be returned. The town retains all concession rights, selling any food and drink products, during leagues and tournaments. 
c.  Refunds are available due to inclement weather; provided however, that a request for a refund is submitted to the recreation and leisure services division, in writing, no later than seven days after the scheduled reservation. Failure to timely submit a request for refund forfeits the refund. Rescheduling in lieu of a refund is permitted based upon the availability of time slots and the reservation has to be rescheduled no later than seven days after the scheduled reservation to be considered. Failure to timely submit a request to reschedule forfeits the opportunity for rescheduling. 
d.  Maintenance fees will be assessed for any custodial, maintenance, or grounds work that is required outside of regular working hours for leagues and tournaments (i.e. weekends and evenings) for an additional fee of $25.00 per hour per employee. There will be a minimum charge of two hours per employee, per day requested. This includes any field preparation such as dragging and chalking after the initial field preparation for each day of the tournament or league. If a mound is required or one has to be removed for a tournament and subsequently rebuilt, a $100.00 fee for mound clay would be charged for each mound. Organizations that have a sports facility agreement with the town are not exempt from paying maintenance fees. 
(c)  Flower Mound Community Activity Center: Usage fees. 
(1)  Definitions. 
Adult means a person who is equal to or between the ages of 18 and 59 years old. 
Annual pass is valid for 365 days from the date of purchase. 
Daily pass is valid only on the date of purchase. 
Family means persons who live in the same household and who are related by either blood or marriage such that they may be claimed as a spouse or dependent based upon applicable IRS regulations. 
Monthly pass is valid for one month from the date of purchase. 
Nonresident means a person who lives outside the territorial jurisdiction of the town. 
Resident means a person who lives in the territorial jurisdiction of the town. 
Resident business means a business having a physical location situated within the territorial jurisdiction of the town and includes those persons working at the location situated in the territorial jurisdiction of the town. Members of the Flower Mound Chamber of Commerce, Flower Mound Summit Club and/or Flower Mound Rotary Club are included within this definition. (Any person seeking a resident business membership shall provide proof of qualifying employment or qualifying membership for CAC membership and/or renewal of a CAC membership. 
Senior means a person who is 60 years of age or older. 
Usage fees means those fees that are charged to persons desiring to use the Flower Mound Community Activity Center. Such usage fees shall be established for daily use admission, membership fees, and facility rentals. 
Youth means a person who is equal to or between the ages of three and 17 years old. 
(2)  Fees and refunds. 
a.  Fees 
i.  Usage fees for the Flower Mound Community Activity Center are hereby established. Such usage fees are set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
ii.  All other charges or fees, including but not limited to classes and programs held at the Flower Mound Community Activity Center will be determined by town policy as approved by the parks board. 
b.  Refunds. 
i.  Nonrefundable . For those individuals choosing to purchase an annual membership by paying for one year in full, an annual pass is non-refundable after a 30-day opt-out period. 
ii.  30-day opt-out period. All annual pass membership holders have 30 days from the date of purchase of the annual pass membership to request a refund. An amount equal to one month's membership, at the current monthly membership rate, will be deducted from the annual pass refund amount at time of refund. 
iii.  Electronic transfer. For those individuals choosing to pay membership fees via electronic funds transfer, a 30-day written notice is required to discontinue membership. 
c.  Deposits. 
i.  A deposit for the rental of all or a portion of the Flower Mound Community Activity Center is required. Applicable deposits are set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
ii.  Refundable deposit is required on facility rentals, and on an entire facility rental, along with the completion of a facility reservation agreement and full payment. The deposit will be refunded if the area used has been left in good order and all conditions of the contract have been met. Refundable deposits may be reduced by any and all damage caused by user or user's guests or invitees. 
d.  Reservations. 
i.  Reservations will be accepted on a first come, first serve basis based on availability and must be made a minimum of three days in advance. Flower Mound residents may book a reservation up to 12 months in advance. Nonresidents are allowed to book reservation up to six months in advance. 
ii.  All current members of the community activity center will be given a ten-percent discount off of the current resident rate for facility rentals. To receive the discount, the membership holder must have a current membership at the time of reservation and their membership must be current on the actual date of the facility rental. 
iii.  In order to receive a full refund for a facility rental, notice must be given no less than 14 days prior to the date of the rental. If notice is not given 14 days prior to the rental date the full amount of the rental will be retained; however, the deposit will be refunded in full. 
(d)  Seniors in motion. 
(1)  All participants involved in the town's seniors in motion program shall pay an annual membership fee to attend and/or participate in the events, activities and programming of seniors in motion. The membership fee shall cover one full year from the date of purchase. 
(2)  Membership fees must be paid as a condition of participation in seniors in motion activities. Membership fees are non-transferable and non-refundable. 
(3)  Membership fees for persons living within the territorial jurisdiction of the town (residents) shall be the greater of $10.00 per person per year or the amount set forth in appendix A "fee schedule." Membership fees for persons living outside the territorial jurisdiction of the town (nonresidents) shall be the greater of $20.00 per person per year or the amount set forth in appendix A "fee schedule." 
(4)  Non-members of seniors in motion may purchase a day pass to participate in events, activities and programming of seniors in motion. The day pass will be valid from the time of purchase until the end of business that day. Non-members must complete a waiver of liability form and turn this form into the Flower Mound Senior Center staff. The day pass fee will be $1.00 per day for residents and $2.00 per day for nonresidents. 
(e)  Pavilion rentals (excluding CAC). 
(1)  Outdoor pavilions located in the town's various parks may be reserved and rented through the recreation administration office situated at the community activity center. 
(2)  Pavilion rental fees, in the amount set forth in appendix A, "fee schedule," for reservations by residents and/or nonresidents shall be paid in advance at the time of reservation of any pavilion(s). Pavilion rental fees shall not be refunded, exchanged, transferred or assigned except as specifically provided herein below due to inclement weather only. 
(3)  Refunds are available due to inclement weather; provided however, that a request for a refund is submitted to the recreation and leisure services division, in writing, no later than seven days after the scheduled reservation. Failure to timely submit a request for refund forfeits the refund. Rescheduling in lieu of a refund is permitted based upon the availability of time slots and the reservation has to be rescheduled no later than seven days after the scheduled reservation to be considered. Failure to timely submit a request to reschedule forfeits the opportunity for rescheduling. 
(4)  Reservations may be rescheduled to another available time and date provided that any such revision or rescheduling is completed at least two weeks in advance of the original reservation date. 
(5)  Use of a pavilion through a reservation shall take priority over any other use of the same pavilion by any other person(s) or parties. 
(f)  Flower Mound Senior Center banquet rooms rental policy. 
(1)  Definitions. 
Nonresident means a person who lives outside the territorial jurisdiction of the town. 
Operating hours mean those hours the Flower Mound Senior Center is open for normal use. Operating hours are as follows: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday, Wednesday, and Friday and 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Tuesday and Thursday. 
Rental fees mean those fees that are charged to persons desiring to rent the senior center. Such rental fees shall be established for hourly use. 
Resident means a person who lives in the territorial jurisdiction of the town. 
(2)  Availability. The senior center banquet rooms are available for rental use by town residents outside of normal operating hours. 
(3)  Fees and refunds. 
a.  Fees. Rental fees for the senior center are hereby established. Such rental fees are set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
b.  Deposits. 
1.  A deposit for the rental of all or a portion of the senior center is required. Applicable deposits are set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
2.  Refundable deposit is required on senior center rentals, and on an entire senior center rental, along with completion of a rental agreement and full payment. The deposit will be refunded if the area used has been left in good order and all conditions of the rental agreement have been met. Refundable deposits may be reduced due to any and all damage caused by user or user's guests or invitees. 
c.  Refunds. 
1.  In order to receive a full refund for a senior center rental, notice must be given no less than 14 days prior to the date of the rental. If notice is not given 14 days prior to the rental date, the full amount of the rental will be retained; however the deposit will be refunded in full. 
d.  Reservations. 
1.  Reservations will be accepted on a first come, first serve basis based on availability and will be limited to one reservation per day. 
2.  Each reservation can be made no more than 60 days in advance. 
e.  Kitchen. 
1.  Rental fees for the use of the senior center kitchen are hereby established. Applicable fees are set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
2.  Use of the senior center kitchen is limited to catering, warming and/or staging. 
(g)  Disc golf courses. 
(1)  Definitions. 
Disc golf course means any portion of a public park as defined in section 11.01(b) of the town's Code of Ordinances that is either owned or leased by the town that has been equipped for the purpose of and designated as an area for playing disc golf. 
Organization means any organized group that has entered into a disc golf course rental agreement with the town for the purpose of hosting a tournament. 
(2)  Reservations. 
a.  Disc golf courses can be reserved for tournaments through the town parks and recreation department to guarantee availability. Tournaments are limited to a maximum of six hours per day and may, upon applicant's request, receive exclusive use of the disc golf course. The organization applicant must be 18 years of age or older to reserve the disc golf course. 
b.  Rental applications may be made up to 12 months in advance but must be submitted no later than 45 days prior to the tournament start date. Applications will be processed on a first-come, first-serve basis. Any necessary amendments or revisions to the rental application must be received seven days before the tournament date. 
c.  The parks and recreation department must approve all tournaments. Applicants must indicate any outside equipment, facilities, or vendors, such as food trucks, amplification equipment, or tents, which will be used during tournaments. Organizations may be required to apply for a special use permit through the town's environmental services division as determined by the director of parks and recreation or their designee based on the scope, size, and site plan of the tournament. 
d.  The frequency of two tournaments on the same disc golf course must be at least 45 days apart unless permission is granted by the director of parks and recreation or their designee. This policy does not apply to town organized or town sponsored tournaments. 
e.  Organizations must submit a certificate of liability insurance for commercial general liability insurance, which provides bodily injury and property damage coverage at limits not less than $1,000,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence. The town shall be named as an additional insured on the certificate, listing the date(s) and location of the tournament. 
f.  The parks and recreation department reserves the right to deny any rental-permit application on any disc golf course. 
(3)  Rental fees. 
a.  The reservation fees for tournaments are $200.00 for a one-day tournament and $360.00 for two-day tournaments. 
b.  A $200.00 deposit is required upon reservation of the disc golf course. 
(4)  Cancellation and refunds. 
a.  The town reserves the right to cancel or postpone any activities due to weather, unsafe playing conditions, or any other reasons that might endanger the safety of the players or public. 
b.  In the event the parks and recreation department cancels a tournament due to severe weather conditions or course playability, a full refund will be provided to applicant. 
c.  Cancellations must be made in writing and submitted to the parks and recreation department. If a cancellation is received 60 days or more prior to the scheduled tournament date, the applicant will receive a full refund minus a $35.00 processing fee. All cancellations received with less than 60 days' notice but more than 30 days' notice will not be entitled to a refund for the rental fee. Deposit will be refunded in full. No refunds will be granted for cancellations within 30 days of event. 
d.  Requests for a refund must be received, in writing, no later than 14 days after the scheduled tournament. Rescheduling in lieu of a refund is permitted based on course availability. To be considered for approval, the tournament must be rescheduled no later than 14 days after the date of the originally scheduled tournament. Failure to submit a request for a refund or to reschedule in the time frame noted forfeits the opportunity for a refund or rescheduling in lieu of a refund. 
(5)  Rules and regulations. 
a.  Organizations must comply with all applicable rules and regulations found in section 54-72 of the town Code of Ordinances. 
b.  Hours. Disc golf course use may not extend outside the hours of the approved rental request. No rentals will be allowed to continue 30 minutes after sunset. 
c.  Closed course. It shall be unlawful for any person to go on a course that has been designated and posted as a "closed course," except for the purpose of course maintenance. 
d.  Intended use. It shall be unlawful for any person to use the disc golf course for any activity other than its intended use except as authorized in writing by the director of parks and recreation or their designee. 
e.  Activity disruption. It shall be unlawful for any individual or group that has not received a disc golf course rental permit to prevent, interfere with, or obstruct in any manner any permitted activities, programs, or uses on a disc golf course. 
f.  Failure to comply with park rules and regulations may cause the cancellation of the rental and possible denial of future use of the disc golf course. 
(Ord. No. 87-02, § 1, 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 103-07, § 1, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 13-09, § 2, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 55-10, §§ 2—5, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 10-16 , § 1, 2-15-2016; Ord. No. 04-18 , § 1, 3-5-2018; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 2, 12-19-2016; Ord. No. 58-19 , § 1, 12-2-2019) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-02, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2002, added § 43.00, Parks and Recreation Fees, to Appendix A, Fee Schedule. Because each entry in the fee schedule has an accompanying section in the Code of Ordinances, and to ensure continuity with the remainder of the Code, said provisions have been added to read as herein set out and have been redesignated as Ch. 54 in appendix A. 
 
Secs. 54-3—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARK REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-31. - Glass containers and alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means alcohol and any beverage containing more than one-half of the percent of alcohol by volume which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. 
Beach area means all of the area contiguous to Grapevine Lake located within the town between 542 feet mean sea level and the edge of the water of Grapevine Lake. 
Glass beverage container means a container for the holding of a liquid for drinking purposes, which container is made of glass. 
Public park means all parks, playgrounds and recreational areas owned, leased, operated or under the control of the town, by ordinance or agreement and shall include the area contiguous to Grapevine Lake, commonly known as Murrell Park and any other public lands within the corporate limits of the town. The term "public park" includes all athletic fields, beach areas (as defined in this section), shore area (as defined in this section), swimming pools, gymnasiums, tennis courts, and other similar facilities owned, leased or operated by the town, and any other public lands over which the town, by agreement or otherwise, has assumed enforcement responsibilities. 
Shore area means all of the area from the edge of the water of Grapevine Lake at the shoreline, to any point within the public water 50 feet off the shoreline. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  Glass containers. It shall be unlawful to possess glass beverage containers in any portion of a public park or recreation facility. 
(2)  Alcohol. It shall be unlawful to possess alcoholic beverages in any portion of a public park or recreation facility, with the exception that the use of alcoholic beverages may be permitted during designated activities upon recommendation of the town's parks board and with approval of the town council. 
(c)  Exceptions. The prohibitions in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply where: 
(1)  Any such glass beverage container is used or possessed within the immediate enclosed confines of any privately owned or operated business, lease space, or inside a motor vehicle. 
(2)  Any such beverage is transported or carried in a closed container, such as a cooler, to a location where possession or consumption is permitted by this article or another town ordinance. For this exception to apply, during such transportation or carriage, the alcoholic beverage may not be in plain view. 
(d)  Signs to be posted. The director of parks and recreation or his designee is authorized and directed to place or cause to be placed appropriate signage in public parks or recreation facilities as from time to time may be necessary to advise persons of the prohibitions contained in this section and to effectively enforce the prohibitions. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, §§ 6.01—6.04; Ord. No. 27-98, § 1, 5-4-1998; Ord. No. 20-01, §§ 3, 4, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 13-09, § 2, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 2, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 54-32. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
Law enforcement officers shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 11.05; Ord. No. 27-98, § 2, 5-4-1998)  
Sec. 54-33. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Generally. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues to occur. 
(b)  Mental state. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state are not required for the proof of an offense defined by this article. 
(c)  Damage assessment. Any person convicted of damaging or defacing any improvements, equipment, structures or authorized materials in any public park or recreation facility, regardless of whether such items are the property of the town or of an individual or entity, or convicted of removing such items from any public park or recreation facility, shall be required to pay damage fees to include the cost of materials and labor for repair or replacement. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 11.04; Ord. No. 27-98, § 2, 5-4-1998)  
Sec. 54-34. - Signage authorized. 
The director of parks and recreation or his designee is authorized and directed to place or cause to be placed appropriate signage in public parks or recreation facilities as from time to time may be necessary to advise persons of the prohibitions contained in this article and to effectively enforce such prohibitions. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 11.03; Ord. No. 27-98, § 2, 5-4-1998)  
Secs. 54-35—54-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITED ACTS 
 
Sec. 54-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motor vehicle or vehicle means all motorized vehicles including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, dirt bikes, minibikes, mopeds, scooters, go-carts, snowmobiles, dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles, three-wheel and four-wheel off-road vehicles, golf carts, and boats, gliders and airplanes, including model airplanes; provided, however, that motorized wheelchairs or similar devices for handicapped and/or disabled persons and battery-powered remote and/or radio- controlled toy or model vehicles or boats incapable of carrying passengers are specifically excluded from the term "motor vehicle or vehicle," as defined in this section. 
Public park or recreation facility (when used together or separately) means all parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities and recreational areas owned, leased, operated or under the control of the town. The term "public park or recreation facility" includes, but is not limited to, all multiuse and/or multipurpose or equestrian linear trail systems, athletic fields, gymnasiums, tennis courts, natural areas and/or open spaces, and other similar playground, athletic and/or recreational facilities owned, leased and/or operated by the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 11.01; Ord. No. 27-98, § 2, 5-4-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-72. - Enumeration of prohibited acts. 
(a)  Motor vehicle operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in, on, upon, over, across and/or through any public park or recreation facility, including any portion of any multiuse or equestrian trail or multipurpose linear trail system, other than on a public street or thoroughfare, except by special permission issued in writing by the director of parks and recreation or his designee. The off-road operation of motor vehicles in, on, upon, over, across, and/or through any public park is expressly prohibited; provided, however, that the prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply to town officials, employees or agents performing maintenance or other authorized activities or the operation of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(b)  Parking of motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle in any area not designated for such purpose. If designated parking areas do not exist and if not prohibited by appropriate signage, motor vehicles shall be parked on street, adjacent to the curb, or, if there is not a curb, adjacent to the edge of the roadway, whether improved or unimproved. 
(c)  Parking obstruction. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle in any public park or on or along any street in or adjacent to a public park in such a manner as to block, obstruct or otherwise render inaccessible or unusable a vehicle entryway or exit or traffic circulation lane or any designated point of ingress/egress on multipurpose or equestrian trails, or any access ramp, curb ramp or any other architectural improvement designed to aid or accommodate handicapped or disabled or pedestrian traffic. The town shall be authorized to have such vehicle removed. 
(d)  Activity disruption. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, disrupt, interfere with or obstruct in any manner any authorized, permissible and/or organized activities, programs or uses in any public park or recreation facility. 
(e)  Fees charges or solicitation of donations. It shall be unlawful for any person to charge fees or solicit donations or contributions for any activity; to sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, confections, merchandise or commercial services; to conduct any commercial business activities of any kind; and/or to post, place or erect on any public park or recreation facility any advertising, notice, billboard, paper or other advertising device without the written consent and approval of the town's parks board; provided, however, that the prohibitions contained in this subsection shall not apply to town officials, employees or agents performing authorized activities or providing notice of official town meetings or functions. 
(f)  Overnight camping and parking. It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, to park a vehicle or to place camping equipment overnight in any public park, except in areas designated by signage for such purpose or use unless authorized in writing by the director of parks and recreation or his designee. The town shall be authorized to cause such person to discontinue camping activities and to have the vehicle and/or equipment removed. 
(g)  Swimming and pollution. It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe in or otherwise pollute, the water in any fountain, pond, lake or stream in any public park, except swimming is permitted in areas designated by signage for such purpose 
(h)  Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to make or kindle a fire in any public park or recreation facility except in picnic stoves, grills or other receptacles provided for such purpose, or as authorized in writing by the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(i)  Animal control. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any animal, as defined in chapter 6 of this Code, into any public park or recreation facility that is not under the immediate control of the person by means of a cage, leash or rope no longer than six feet. This subsection shall not apply to guide dogs or other animals used to assist handicapped or disabled persons, to penned animals that are part of an activity authorized by the town's parks board or the director of parks and recreation or his designee, in park areas or recreation facilities designated as leashfree by the town's parks board, or in a dog park, as that term is defined in section 54-73. 
(j)  Animal protection. It shall be unlawful to hunt, trap, kill, injure, remove or release any animal (fish excluded) in any public park, except with written approval of the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(k)  Pooper scooper. If a pet defecates in a public park or recreation facility, it shall be unlawful if the person in control of the animal does not immediately remove any excrement from park premises or dispose of it in a town provided trash receptacle. If an animal running at large defecates in a public park or recreation facility, the owner of the animal shall bear the foregoing responsibilities. Horses in designated equestrian areas are specifically excepted from the provisions of this subsection. 
(l)  Livestock. It shall be unlawful to ride or allow any type of livestock upon any public park or recreation facility except in areas designated for such purpose or with written authorization of the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(m)  Weapon possession. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a federal, state or local law enforcement officer or agent, to possess a loaded or unloaded firearm, (excluding handguns as authorized by the state concealed handgun statute), ammunition, bow and arrow, cross bow and arrows, any other type of loaded or unloaded projectile firing devices, in any public park or recreation facility. This subsection shall not apply to sponge or soft-tipped toy projectiles and related firing devices specifically designed for children's play. 
(n)  Construction. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct or place any structure or improvement, temporary or permanent, in any public park without the written consent and approval of the town's parks board. 
(o)  Refuse/litter. It shall be unlawful to leave garbage, cans, paper or other refuse in a public park or recreation facility anywhere other than in the receptacles provided. It shall be unlawful to place within a public park or recreation facility household garbage, lawn or garden cuttings or other refuse originating outside of the public park or recreation facility or to place such items in trash receptacles located on public park premises, except with written approval of the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(p)  Damage/defacement. It shall be unlawful to damage or deface any trees, plants, turf, structure, fence, bench, table, apparatus, or paved surface or other area, without written permission from the director of parks and recreation or his designee; provided, however, that the prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply to town officials, employees or agents performing maintenance or other authorized activities. 
(q)  Park closures and unauthorized trespass. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to enter any portion of a public park or recreation facility posted as "Closed - Do Not Enter $50.00 - $500.00 Penalty for Violation" or to enter any public park closed for the night, as described below, unless approved in writing by the executive director of community services or his designee. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remain, stay, walk, run, stand, drive or ride in or about any public park while public parks are closed for the night, as provided below, except by special permit issued by the executive director of community services. 
a.  Public parks shall be closed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. each day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. 
b.  The executive director of community services, or his designee, is authorized to erect such signage deemed necessary to advise the public of park hours and to erect such physical barriers as shall be necessary to prevent entry, and all city law enforcement personnel are authorized to enforce state criminal trespass laws against those who violate this section. 
c.  Special permission may be granted by the executive director of community services, or his designee, for organized sports or special events which last past the designated hours of operation for the parks; and in such event, any park containing the permitted activity shall remain open until the activity shall cease, at which time the park shall be closed. 
d.  This provision regarding park closing shall not prevent any person from using the town's trail system, even if such trail passes through a town park, provided that while in the park, such person remains on the trail and is continually and expeditiously traveling along the trail through the park. 
(r)  Reckless speed. It shall be unlawful to operate wheeled conveyances, such as bicycles, skateboards, in-line skates or wagons in a public park or recreation facility at a speed or in a manner that causes danger or harm to others. 
(s)  Uses of opposite sex restrooms. It shall be unlawful in a public park or recreation facility for persons over age six to use a restroom intended for persons of the opposite sex except to accommodate needs of handicapped or disabled persons when authorized in writing by the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(t)  Loudspeakers/amplifiers. It shall be unlawful to use loudspeakers and/or sound amplification equipment in any public park or recreation facility without the written approval of the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 11.02; Ord. No. 27-98, § 2, 5-4-1998; Ord. No. 13-09, § 2, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 51-14 , § 2, 9-15-2014; Ord. No. 67-15 , § 1, 11-16-2015; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 2, 12-19-2016)  
DIVISION 3. - DOG PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 54-73. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means the person designated by the town to represent and act for the town in the impoundment of animals, in the controlling of stray animals, and all other matters as otherwise required by this article and chapter 6 of this Code. 
Dog means a domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family. 
Dog park means a public park that is specifically designated by the town as a place for dogs to exercise and play off-leash in a controlled environment under the supervision, possession, or control of their owner(s). 
Owner means any person who supervises, controls, or possesses any dog confined in a dog park. Any person supervising, controlling, or possessing any dog confined in a dog park is rebuttably presumed to be the owner of such dog for the purpose of this division. 
( Ord. No. 67-15 , § 2, 11-16-2015)  
Sec. 54-74. - Enforcement of division provisions. 
Law enforcement officers and animal control officers are authorized to enforce the provisions of this division. 
( Ord. No. 67-15 , § 2, 11-16-2015)  
Sec. 54-75. - Running at large. 
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary in this Code, any dog confined within a dog park and located in view and voice control of its owner is not considered to be running at large. 
( Ord. No. 67-15 , § 2, 11-16-2015)  
Sec. 54-76. - Dog park rules. 
The following rules govern the use and enjoyment of the dog park: 
(a)  The dog park shall be open every day, except Wednesday, from 7:00 a.m. until dusk, unless closed due to inclement weather conditions, dangerous conditions, or other maintenance requirements by order of the director of parks and recreation or his designee. The park will be closed every Wednesday for general maintenance. 
(b)  Dogs must display current identification tags in the manner provided by section 6-82, and must be healthy, parasite free, and properly vaccinated, as required by chapter 6 of this Code. If requested by an animal control officer, owners must provide current vaccination and registration information. 
(c)  In the event of dog bite or injury, the owners must exchange current identification tag information, addresses, phone numbers, and any other information that may be helpful in locating the dog(s). If the dog bite involves a human, the incident must be reported immediately in accordance with Texas law by calling the town animal services division or town police department. 
(d)  No animals other than dogs are permitted in the dog park. 
(e)  No puppies under four months of age are allowed in the dog park. 
(f)  A maximum of two dogs per owner are permitted in the dog park at any one time. 
(g)  Dogs must be leashed when entering or leaving the dog park and off-leash while inside of the dog park. 
(h)  Upon entering the dog park, dogs must be unleashed only after entering the double-gated holding areas, not while inside the off-leash areas of the dog park. The outside gate must remain closed while the inside gate is open. Upon exiting the off-leash area of the dog park, dogs must be leashed inside the double-gated holding areas prior to exiting the dog park. 
(i)  Dog handlers or owners must be at least 14 years of age or older. 
(j)  Children under the age of 14 years are prohibited from entering the dog park without adult supervision. 
(k)  Children are not allowed to run with or chase dogs in the dog park. 
(l)  Only dogs weighing 30 pounds or less are allowed in the area designated for small dogs; however, the remainder of the dog park is open to dogs of all sizes, including dogs weighing 30 pounds or less. 
(m)  Dogs that are aggressive, in heat, sick, or have open wounds are not allowed in the dog park. 
(n)  Owners are required to pick-up and dispose of their dog's feces both inside and outside of the dog park. 
(o)  No carriages, bicycles, skate boards, scooters, skates, roller blades, sport activities, children's toys, wading pools, or any motorized vehicles are allowed in the dog park, unless necessary by reason of handicap or disability. 
(p)  No smoking, alcoholic beverages, food, glass containers, or dog treats are allowed in the dog park. 
(q)  Digging is not allowed in the dog park. Owners must repair any damage caused by digging. If the owner fails to repair any damage caused by digging, the town may assess any damages and costs against the owner as provided in section 54-33. 
(r)  Dog grooming is not permitted in the dog park. 
(s)  Owners must remain in the park and keep their dog in voice and sight control at all times. 
(t)  Spiked, prong, choke, or pinch collars are not allowed in the dog park. 
(u)  Shoes must be worn at all times in the dog park. 
(v)  Balls and plastic discs are the only toys allowed in the dog park; no other dog toys are allowed. 
(w)  No commercial use of the dog park is allowed, including dog training classes, solicitations and/or advertisements except as provided by section 54-72(e) of this Code. 
(x)  Violators of this article maybe subject to removal and suspension from the dog park, by the director of parks and recreation or his designee, or any animal control officer. 
(y)  Any dog designated, declared, or found to be a "dangerous dog" or "dangerous animal" in accordance with chapter 6 of this Code, under state law, or under the ordinances of any governmental entity in this state is not allowed in the dog park. 
(z)  All other general park rules and town ordinances must be obeyed while using the dog park. 
( Ord. No. 67-15 , § 2, 11-16-2015)  
Secs. 54-77—54-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RECREATION AREAS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 54-101—54-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLAYING FIELDS, GAMEFIELDS AND TENNIS COURTS 
 
Sec. 54-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closed field means a playing field or game field that has been closed for use due to inclement weather conditions, or maintenance requirements by order of the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
Game field means a field that has been designated by the director of parks and recreation or his designee to be used for the purpose of conducting league play or tournament play for town sponsored or co-sponsored league athletic events. 
Playing field means any portion of a public park as defined in section 54-71 that is either owned or leased by the town that has been designated as an area in which town sponsored, or co-sponsored athletic activities are played. This includes fields for football, soccer, softball, baseball, and other sports activity sponsored or co-sponsored by the parks and recreation department. 
Tennis court means a designated area for the purpose of playing the game of tennis. 
Town co-sponsored athletic event means an athletic event which is authorized, organized or scheduled with the assistance of the parks and recreation department by a nonprofit organization. 
Town sponsored athletic event means an athletic event which is authorized, organized or scheduled, in whole or in part, by the parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 27-98, § 3(13.01), 5-4-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-122. - Penalty for violation of division. 
(a)  Generally. Any person violating any provision of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues to occur. 
(b)  Mental state. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state are not required for the proof of an offense defined by this division. 
(c)  Damage assessment. Any person convicted of damaging or defacing any improvements, equipment, structures or authorized materials in any public park or recreation facility, regardless of whether such items are property of the town or of an individual or entity, or convicted of removing such items from any public park or recreation facility, shall be required to pay damage fees to include the cost of materials and labor for repair or replacement. 
(Ord. No. 27-98, § 3(13.05), 5-4-1998)  
Sec. 54-123. - Enforcement of division provisions. 
Law enforcement officers shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 27-98, § 3(13.06), 5-4-1998)  
Sec. 54-124. - Authority to designate game fields. 
(a)  The director of parks and recreation is authorized to designate fields as game fields. 
(b)  Game fields shall display signage stating: "Game Field - Restricted to Town Authorized Athletic Events Only $50.00-$500.00 Fine for Violation." 
(Ord. No. 27-98, § 3(13.02), 5-4-1998)  
Sec. 54-125. - Authorization to close. 
(a)  The director of parks and recreation or his designee is authorized to designate any playing field or game field a "closed field" for the purpose of maintenance or to protect the surface of the field from damage. 
(b)  Closed fields shall display signage stating: "Closed - Do Not Enter $50.00-$500.00 Penalty for Violation." 
(Ord. No. 27-98, § 3(13.03), 5-4-1998)  
Sec. 54-126. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon a field which has been designated a game field and has been posted thereon, unless for the purpose of participating in league play or tournament play in a town sponsored or co-sponsored athletic event, or with written permission from the director of parks and recreation or his designee; provided, however, that the prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply to town officials, employees or agents performing maintenance or other authorized activities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon a playing field or game field which has been designated a "closed field" and has been posted thereon, unless for the purpose of field maintenance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, possesses or keeps an animal, as defined in chapter 6 of this Code, to permit or by insufficient control allow the animal to be on any playing field, game field or tennis court, except as authorized in writing by the director of parks and recreation. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any game field or tennis court for any other sport or activity other than its intended use, except as authorized in writing by the director of parks and recreation or his designee. Examples: golf on softball fields, softball on soccer fields, skateboarding on tennis courts. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wear any footwear other than tennis shoes upon tennis courts. Prohibited footwear includes, but is not limited to, cleats, skates and in-line skates. 
(Ord. No. 27-98, § 3(13.04), 5-4-1998)  
Secs. 54-127—54-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - UNITED STATES ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS PROPERTY RULES AND REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, adopted Nov. 7, 2011, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 54-161—54-178, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to United States Army Corps Of Engineers property rules and regulations and derived from Ord. No. 20-01, § 2, adopted 3-19-2001. 
 
Sec. 54-161. - Scope of article provisions. 
This article shall apply to the Grapevine Lake and the reservoir area, including the reservoir area property, and any other United States Army Corps of Engineers property within the corporate town limits. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-162. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage shall mean alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, as defined in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverages Code § 1.04, as amended. 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the Town of Flower Mound or his designated representative. 
District engineer means the district engineer of the United States Army Corps of Engineers, or his designated representative. 
Town manager means the town manager for the Town of Flower Mound, or his/her designated representative. 
Posted restrictions means any and all restrictions, rules, and regulations promulgated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers which govern the use of Grapevine Lake, the reservoir area, or the reservoir area property. 
Reservoir area means the following: 
(1)  Grapevine Lake and Grapevine Dam which are owned by the federal government and/or are leased to the town and which are within the corporate limits of the town; 
(2)  The area surrounding Grapevine Lake and below Grapevine Dam which is owned by the federal government and not leased by the town and which lies within the corporate limits of the town; and 
(3)  Any reservoir area property located on or at the areas described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition. 
(4)  Such reservoir area shall include those lands that fall within the cooperative agreement. 
Reservoir area property means any and all personal property facilities, or buildings which are owned by the federal government which are located in the reservoir area at Grapevine Lake. 
Shore area means all of the area from the edge of the water of Grapevine Lake at the shoreline, to any point within the public water 50 feet off the shoreline. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-163. - Adoption of rules, regulations, and standards. 
(a)  Texas Water Safety Act. The Town Council hereby adopts and incorporates by reference, the rules, regulations, and standards of V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31, the Texas Water Safety Act, as amended. 
(b)  Inland navigation rules. The town council hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the rules, regulations, and standards of the Inland Navigation Rules of the Navigation and Navigable Waters provisions of 33 USC 34 and the 33 CFR Parts 1-124, as amended. 
(c)  Public use of Corps of Engineers water resources development project. The town council hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the rules, regulations, and standards relative to the public use of Corps of Engineers water resources development project as set forth in 36 CFR 327, as amended. 
(d)  The town council hereby authorizes the town manager to establish administrative rules and procedures for operations and use of Twin Coves Park located within the reservoir area. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-164. - Conflict between rules and regulations. 
In the event of a conflict between this article and the statute or rules adopted in section 54-163, the federal or state statute and rules, as they may be amended, shall control. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-165. - Operation and parking of vehicles. 
(a)  This section pertains to all vehicles including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, minibikes, trail bikes, snowmobiles, dune buggies, all terrain vehicles, bicycles, and trailers, campers, or any other such equipment. 
(b)  Vehicles shall not be parked in violation of posted restrictions and regulations. In addition, vehicles shall not be parked in such a manner as to obstruct or impede normal or emergency traffic movement or the parking of other vehicles, create a safety hazard, or endanger any person, property or environmental feature. Vehicles parked in violation of this article are subject to removal and impoundment at the owner's expense, in addition to any other remedies or enforcement options available to the town. 
(c)  The operation of a vehicle off roadways is prohibited except at locations and times designated by the town manager. 
(d)  The operation or placement of any vehicle through, around, or beyond a restrictive sign, barricade, fence, or traffic control device is prohibited. 
(e)  Vehicles shall be operated only in accordance with posted regulations and in compliance with this article. 
(f)  No person shall operate any vehicle in a careless, negligent, or reckless manner as to endanger Grapevine Lake, the reservoir area, or any environmental feature. 
(g)  At developed areas, vehicles shall be used only for ingress and egress unless otherwise permitted by posted regulations. 
(h)  Except as authorized by the town manager no person shall operate any motorized vehicle without a proper and effective exhaust muffler, or with an exhaust muffler cutout open, or in any other manner which renders the exhaust muffler ineffective in muffling the sound of the engine exhaust. 
(i)  If any vehicle is found in violation of any provision of this section or of any state statute regulating the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle is the person who committed the violation. This presumption is rebuttable and shall have the effects and consequences set forth in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 2.05. 
(j)  The state department of transportation's computer-generated record of the registered vehicle owner is prima facie evidence of the contents of the record. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 66.  
Sec. 54-166. - Camping. 
(a)  Camping is permitted only at sites and/or areas designated by the town manager. 
(b)  Camping, at one or more campsites at the reservoir area for a period longer than 14 consecutive days is prohibited without the written permission of the town manager. Written permission is required to camp at any site in excess of 14 days during any 30-day period. 
(c)  The placement of camping equipment on a campsite or intermittent personal appearance at a campsite for the purpose of reserving a designated campsite for future occupancy is prohibited without the written permission of the town manager. 
(d)  The digging or leveling of any ground or the construction of any structure without written permission of the town manager is prohibited. 
(e)  Campers shall keep their campsites free of trash and litter during the period of occupancy and shall clean their campsites and remove all personal equipment upon departure. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-167. - Fires. 
(a)  Gasoline and other fuels, except that which is contained in storage tanks or vehicles, vessels, camping equipment, or hand portable containers, shall not be carried onto or stored within Grapevine Lake or the reservoir area without written permission of the town manager. 
(b)  Fires shall be confined to those areas designated by the town manager, and shall be confined to fireplaces, grills, or other facilities designed for this purpose. Fires shall not be left unattended and must be completely extinguished prior to departure. 
(c)  The gathering of wood is prohibited without written permission of the town manager except for the gathering of dead material on the ground for use in recreation areas designated by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.  
Sec. 54-168. - Control of animals. 
(a)  No person shall bring or allow horses, cattle, or other livestock in camping, picnic, swimming, or other recreation areas except in areas designated by the town manager. 
(b)  No person shall bring dogs, cats, or other pets into developed recreation areas unless penned, caged, or on a leash less than six feet in length, or otherwise under physical restraint at all times. 
(c)  No animals or pets are permitted in designated swimming beach areas. Unclaimed or unattended animals are subject to immediate impoundment and removal by the chief of police in accordance with state and local laws. 
(d)  Allowing unauthorized livestock to enter upon or to be upon Grapevine Lake or the reservoir area and failing or refusing to remove unauthorized livestock from Grapevine Lake or the reservoir area when requested by the chief of police shall be a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6.  
Sec. 54-169. - Explosives, firearms, other weapons and fireworks. 
(a)  The possession of loaded firearms, ammunition, loaded projectile firing devices, bows and arrows, cross bows, and explosives of any kind is prohibited unless: 
(1)  In the possession of a state or local law enforcement officer on official business. 
(2)  In the possession of a federal government employee with law enforcement authority and on official business as approved by the chief of police. 
(3)  Written permission has been received from the chief of police. 
(b)  The possession or use of fireworks is prohibited unless written permission has been received from the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-170. - Abandonment of personal property. 
Personal property of any kind shall not be abandoned or left unattended upon Grapevine Lake or the reservoir area. Abandoned or unattended personal property is subject to impoundment and sale by the chief of police in accordance with state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-171. - Advertisements. 
Advertising by the use of billboards, signs, markers, audio devices, or any other means whatsoever including handbills, circulars, and posters is prohibited without written permission of the town manager, a copy of which written permission shall be provided to the chief of police. Vessels and vehicles with semi-permanent or permanent paint installed signs are exempt as long as they are used for authorized recreational activities and comply with all other rules and regulations pertaining to vessels and vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-172. - Unauthorized structures. 
The construction, placing, or continued existence of any structure of any kind under, upon, in, or over Grapevine Lake or the reservoir area is prohibited without written permission of the district engineer and town manager, a copy of which shall be provided to the chief of police. The design, construction, placing, existence, or use of structures in violation of the terms of the written permission is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-173. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, or any other waste material or waste liquid generated at or on Grapevine Lake or the reservoir area and incidental to authorized recreational activities shall be either removed from Grapevine Lake and the reservoir area, or deposited in receptacles provided for the purpose. The improper disposal of such wastes in or on Grapevine Lake or the reservoir area is prohibited. 
(b)  The use of refuse containers or other refuse facilities for dumping or disposal of household or commercial garbage, trash, rubbish, debris, sewage, dead animals, or litter of any kind brought onto Grapevine Lake or the reservoir area is prohibited. 
(c)  It is a violation to bring onto Grapevine Lake or the reservoir area any material for the purpose of disposal without written permission of the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-174. - Alcoholic beverage and glass container regulations. 
(a)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess any glass beverage container in any reservoir area, shore area or reservoir area property within the town. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in any reservoir area, shore area or reservoir area property within the town. 
(b)  Exceptions. The prohibitions in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply where: 
(1)  Any such glass beverage container is used or possessed within the immediate enclosed confines of any privately owned or operated business, lease space, or inside a motor vehicle. 
(2)  Any such beverage is transported or carried in a closed container, such as a cooler, to a location where possession or consumption is permitted by this article or another town ordinance. For this exception to apply, during such transportation or carriage, the alcoholic beverage may not be in plain view. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-175. - Swimming. 
Swimming, diving, snorkeling, or scuba diving at one's own risk is permitted, except at launching sites, designated mooring points and other areas so designated by the town manager. Diving or jumping from bridges or other structures which are adjacent to or cross project waters is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-176. - Special events. 
(a)  Special events including, but not limited to, fishing tournaments, music festivals, dramatic presentations, parades, races or other special recreation events are prohibited unless a permit is obtained and approved by the town. All areas permitted shall be restored to the pre-event condition. 
(b)  The chief of police and/or the town manager shall have the authority to revoke the permit and require the removal of any equipment upon failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-177. - Watercraft. 
(a)  The placement and/or operation of any vessel or watercraft for a fee or profit upon Grapevine Lake or at the reservoir area is prohibited except as authorized by permit, lease, license, or concession contract with the Department of the United States Army, which permit shall be kept on the vessel or watercraft at all times while in operation on or at Grapevine Lake or the reservoir area. 
(b)  Vessels or other watercraft may be operated in Grapevine Lake, except in prohibited or restricted areas, in accordance with posted regulations and applicable federal, state, and local laws. 
(c)  The operation of vessels or other watercraft in a careless, negligent, or reckless manner so as to endanger any property or person (including the operator and/or user(s) of the vessel or watercraft) is prohibited. 
(d)  All vessels or other watercraft, when in use, shall have safety equipment on board in compliance with U.S. Coast Guard boating safety requirements. 
(e)  Vessels or other watercraft while moored in commercial facilities, community or corporate docks, or at any fixed or permanent mooring point may only be used for overnight occupancy when such use is incidental to recreational boating. Vessels or other watercraft are not to be used as a place of habitation or residence. 
(f)  Water skis and similar devices are permitted in nonrestricted areas, except that they may not be used in a careless, negligent, or reckless manner so as to endanger any property or person, including the user or operator of the towing vessel or other watercraft. 
(g)  All vessels or other watercraft, when not in actual use, shall be removed from Grapevine Lake and the reservoir area unless securely moored at mooring facilities approved by the district engineer. The placing of floating or stationary mooring facilities to, or interfering with, a buoy, channel marker, or other navigational aid is prohibited. 
(h)  The use at Grapevine Lake and the reservoir area of any vessel or other watercraft not constructed or maintained in compliance with the standards and requirements established by the National Safe Boating Act of 1971, and any amendments thereto, or promulgated pursuant to such act, is prohibited. 
(i)  The discharge or placing of sewage, galley waste, garbage, refuse, metal cans, or pollutants into Grapevine Lake or upon the reservoir area from any vessel or other watercraft is prohibited. 
(j)  Except as authorized by the district engineer, no person shall operate any vessel or other watercraft without a proper and effective exhaust muffler, or with an exhaust muffler cutout open, or in any other manner which renders the exhaust muffler ineffective in muffling the sound of engine exhaust. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-178. - General restrictions. 
(a)  Quiet shall be maintained in all public use areas between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or those hours designated by the town manager. Excessive noise during such times which unreasonably disturbs persons is prohibited. 
(b)  Any act or conduct by any person which interferes with, impedes, or disrupts the use of Grapevine Lake and the reservoir area, including the reservoir area property, or impairs the safety of any person is prohibited. Individuals who are boisterous, rowdy, disorderly, or otherwise disturb the peace in or on Grapevine Lake and the reservoir area, including the reservoir area property, may be requested to leave the Grapevine Lake and the reservoir area, including the reservoir area property. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 11-17 , § 2, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 54-178.1. - Recreational use fees. 
(a)  The town will collect fees for the use of boat ramps, picnic pavilions, park entrance, camping, or other activities and/or facilities as provided in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to fail to pay authorized recreation use fees as established herein, and is punishable as a violation of this article as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, adopted Nov. 7, 2011, enacted provisions intended for codification as §§ 54-179—54-181. To facilitate indexing, said provisions have been codified herein as §§ 54-178.1—54-178.4.  
Sec. 54-178.2. - Written permission. 
Written permission of the district engineer, chief of police, or the town manager when required by the provisions of this article unless specifically stated otherwise by the terms and provisions of this article, shall be carried by and be in the possession of the person to whom it was issued and shall be made available for inspection by the chief of police at all times while at or on Grapevine Lake or the reservoir area. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Note— See editor's note at § 54-178.1.  
Sec. 54-178.3. - Enforcement and jurisdiction. 
(a)  The chief of police and/or town manager is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this article. 
(b)  Jurisdiction for any violation of the provisions of this article shall be in the municipal court no. 1 of the town unless otherwise provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Note— See editor's note at § 54-178.1.  
Sec. 54-178.4. - Penalty and enforcement. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense relating to fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping refuse, nor to exceed $500.00 for each offense for all other violations, unless otherwise provided by state law. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. 
(b)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense or conviction of an offense defined by this article. 
(c)  The chief of police and/or the town manager shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article and shall have authority to issue citations or to eject from any park any person in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 56-11, § 2, 11-7-2011) 
Note— See editor's note at § 54-178.1.  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC TREE CARE 
 
Sec. 54-179. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not specifically defined shall have the meanings given in Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised. 
Public trees shall mean any trees, shrubs, bushes, and all woody vegetation in town parks or town-owned property and rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 48-09, § 2, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 54-180. - Care of public trees. 
(a)  The parks and recreation director and/or his designee shall have the responsibility to plant, prune, maintain, and remove public trees. 
(b)  No person shall remove, destroy, or cause the removal or destruction of a tree on town property or in any town park without first having obtained written permission for such removal or destruction from the parks and recreation director and/or his designee. 
(c)  All planting, pruning, maintenance, or removals of public trees shall be done in accordance with approved industry practices and in accordance with specifications set forth by the parks and recreation director and/or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 48-09, § 2, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 54-181. - Trees—Generally. 
(a)  It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to knowingly maintain a tree which adversely affects the health of public trees or that may adversely affect the safety of the public. 
(b)  The parks and recreation director and/or his designee may recommend the removal of any tree which is affected by any injurious fungus insect or other pest disease. 
(c)  The parks and recreation director and/or his designee may, in appropriate cases and upon consultation with a property owner, require a property owner to remove or prune a tree on private property which threatens the safety of those who may use a town street or town park. 
(d)  The town may take all necessary action to enforce this section, including but not limited to the rights and remedies set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 54. 
(Ord. No. 48-09, § 2, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 54-182. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00, unless otherwise provided by state law. Each day any such violation or violations exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 48-09, § 2, 12-7-2009)  
Secs. 54-183—54-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STANDARDS OF CARE FOR YOUTH RECREATION PROGRAMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 64-11, §§ 2—8, adopted Dec. 19, 2011, deleted the former Art. VI, §§ 54-201—54-207, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to standards of care for youth recreation programs and derived from Ord. No. 01-11, §§ 2—8, adopted Jan. 20, 2011. 
 
Sec. 54-201. - Authority. 
The town council adopts local standards of care for the parks and recreation division ("division") youth recreation programs in compliance with the requirements of V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.041(b)(14) and pursuant to its home rule authority. 
(Ord. No. 64-11, § 2, 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 66-12, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 54-202. - Adoption. 
The local standards of care ("standards of care"), as set forth in exhibit "A" which is attached to the ordinance adopting the standards of care are incorporated by reference for all purposes as if written word for word herein, and are hereby adopted by the town council as the standards of care for the parks and recreation services department of the Town of Flower Mound. The standards of care are available for inspection in the office of the town secretary and in the town parks and recreation services department office. 
(Ord. No. 64-11, § 3, 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 66-12, § 3, 12-17-2012; Ord. No. 62-13, § 3, 12-16-2013; Ord. No. 67-14 , § 3, 12-15-2014; Ord. No. 72-15 , § 3, 12-21-2015; Ord. No. 68-16 , § 3, 12-19-2016; Ord. No. 44-17 , § 3, 12-18-2017; Ord. No. 37-18 , §§ 2, 3, 12-3-2018; Ord. No. 62-19 , § 3, 12-2-2019) 
State Law reference— Required license, V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.041(b)(14).  
Sec. 54-203. - Program administration. 
(a)  The division shall operate all youth recreation programs ("youth programs") in compliance with the standards of care. 
(b)  The division director, or designee (collectively or singly referred to herein as "director"), shall administer the youth programs and ensure compliance with the standards of care. 
(Ord. No. 64-11, § 4, 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 66-12, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 54-204. - Program rules; monitoring. 
(a)  The director may adopt rules relating to the operation of the youth programs. A rule adopted by the director may be more restrictive than the minimum standards adopted under the standards of care, after notice is provided to youth programs participants. 
(b)  The director shall monitor the youth programs to ensure compliance with the standards of care. 
(c)  The state department of family and protective services will not regulate the youth programs nor be involved in any complaint investigation related to the youth programs. 
(d)  Any parent, visitor, or staff may register a complaint by calling the parks and recreation division office at 972-874-6300 during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
(Ord. No. 64-11, § 5, 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 66-12, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 54-205. - Distribution of standards. 
(a)  The division shall post and make available copies of the standards of care in this article or by rules adopted under this article. 
(b)  The division shall inform parents or guardians of each participant that the youth programs are not licensed by the state. The youth programs may not be advertised as child-care facilities. 
(Ord. No. 64-11, § 6, 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 66-12, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 54-206. - Recommendation for amendment or re-adoption. 
Each year the director shall make recommendations to the town council regarding the adoption or amendment of the standards of care. 
(Ord. No. 64-11, § 7, 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 66-12, § 7, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 54-207. - Request for exemption. 
The mayor is authorized to take all necessary actions to ensure that the exemption from the state department of family and protective services for the youth programs is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 64-11, § 8, 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 66-12, § 8, 12-17-2012)  
Chapter 58 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street or public way saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(5); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(7); any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(10); any ordinance authorizing street maintenance agreements saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(17); aviation, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; street numbers, § 14-301 et seq.; excavations, § 14-451 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; road impact fees, § 42-71 et seq.; library, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; speed limits in alleys, § 66-211; speed limits on streets, highways or alleys under repair, § 66-212; enumeration for specific streets, § 66-213; utilities, ch. 70; development standards, ch. 82; landscaping for sidewalks, § 82-321 et seq.; signs, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; street posts and markers in subdivisions for improvements, § 90-215; standards of street in subdivisions, § 90-301 et seq.; standards of alleys and easements in subdivisions, § 90-341 et seq.; standards of private streets and alleys in subdivisions, § 90-371 et seq.; vegetation, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 98; restoration of public ways, app. B, § 3.3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 43-03, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 4, 2003, amended art. II in its entirety and enacted new provisions as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to sidewalks, driveways, alleys, streets and curbs and derived from Code 1989, ch. 7, §§ 3.01—3.07. 
 
Sec. 58-31. - General provisions. 
(a)  The purpose of these provisions is to promote reinvestment in neighborhoods to maintain property values through a town-sponsored sidewalk repair and replacement program. 
(b)  These provisions will encourage proper sidewalk maintenance to protect the safety and welfare of the citizens and improve the town's quality of life by encouraging a pedestrian-friendly environment. 
(Ord. No. 43-03, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2003)  
Sec. 58-32. - Definitions. 
Commercial sidewalk means a sidewalk located in a parkway as defined herein, adjacent to nonresidential developments. 
Driveway approach means an area or facility between the roadway of a public street and private property intended to provide access for vehicles from the roadway of a public street to private property. 
Director means the director of public works or his designee. 
Parkway means the area between the curb and the right-of-way. 
Residential sidewalk means a sidewalk less than six feet in width located in a parkway as defined herein, adjacent to a residence. 
Sidewalk means an improved walkway constructed of concrete or other durable, impervious material and includes sidewalks designed, constructed, and defined in sections 82-321 through 82-325 of the town and development regulations, as amended. 
Trail system means an improved pathway six feet or greater in width, designed to facilitate pedestrian and non-motorized wheeled traffic. 
(Ord. No. 43-03, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2003)  
Sec. 58-33. - Permit required for certain alterations; construction specifications. 
(a)  Sidewalks may not be changed, altered, graded, or sloped except upon written permission from the director. Such permit shall describe with particularity the portion of the sidewalk to be altered and specify the changes and alterations permitted. In no event may approaches, obstructions, or structures be placed in the street to enable approach to or crossing of a sidewalk for any other purpose. 
(b)  All sidewalks constructed, reconstructed, or repaired shall conform with all sidewalk specifications in the Flower Mound Engineering Standards Manual, as amended, and all accessibility standards. 
(Ord. No. 43-03, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2003; Ord. No. 17-18 , § 4, 5-21-2018)  
Sec. 58-34. - Responsibility for construction and repair; repair program of defective sidewalks. 
(a)  All sidewalks in the town shall be constructed, reconstructed, and kept in good repair by the owners of property fronting upon the sidewalks, at their own expense. If any portion of a sidewalk is defective and does not meet the town's standards, the director may require that the owner of the sidewalk or property adjacent to the sidewalk repair or replace the non-complying portion to bring it into conformity with town standards. 
(b)  And defective sidewalk or portions thereof shall be reconstructed or replaced: 
(1)  Where any vertical displacement of the adjoining sidewalk section exceeds one-half inch; 
(2)  Where any lateral separation of adjoining sidewalk exceeds one-half inch; 
(3)  Where the surface condition of the sidewalk has deteriorated, cracked, settled, chipped, and/or is spalling, so as to create or constitute a hazard or unsafe condition to the public; or 
(4)  Where the transverse slope of the sidewalk exceeds three percent or in which the combination of transverse or longitudinal slope is insufficient for adequate drainage of the sidewalk. Inadequate drainage would include the ponding of more than one-quarter inch of water in small areas for a period of time after the end of a rain event. 
(c)  Repair program. 
(1)  If the director determines that a sidewalk is defective and does not conform to town standards, the director shall notify the property owner of the duty to repair or replace and that such owner has 30 days from the date of the notice to commence such repair or replacement and has 60 days from the date of notice to complete such repair or replacement. The director may alter the time limit upon good cause shown by the owner. Notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the known owner of the property on the records of the current town tax roll or hand-delivered to the owner of the property. 
(2)  The director may include in the notice, as an alternative, an agreement whereby the town will make the repairs and the owner will pay to the town the amount specified in the agreement within 12 months of completion of the repairs. The agreement shall include an interest rate equal to the rate payable by the town on its most recently issued general obligation bonds. 
(3)  The director may include in the notice to a homeowner's association or commercial property owner that owns, controls, or maintains a sidewalk, as an alternative, an agreement whereby the town will make the repairs and the homeowner's association or commercial property owner will pay to the town the town's costs to make such repairs. The amount to be paid by the homeowner's association or commercial property owner will be the town's estimate of the needed repairs, and payment will be made by the homeowner's association or commercial property owner prior to the town's beginning any work to make the repairs. 
(d)  When a sidewalk adjacent to common area dedicated to a homeowner's association is found to be defective, it shall be the duty of the homeowner's association to abate said deficiency by grading, reconstructing, or repairing the sidewalk, as provided in this article, and nothing in this article will be deemed to contradict or conflict with either sections 90-181 through 90-186 of the Code of Ordinances of the town, as amended, or any provision in the homeowner's association declarations, covenants, and restrictions filed with county deed records. 
(e)  When a sidewalk adjacent to commercial property is found to be defective, it shall be the duty of the owner of the commercial property to abate said deficiency by grading, reconstructing, or repairing the sidewalk. 
(f)  The town shall maintain the following: 
(1)  All trails designated as part of the town's trial [trail] system and trails not adjacent to or part of commercial development. 
(2)  Sidewalks along arterial and collector roadways abutting a single-family residential structure. 
(3)  Handicap ramps located on a public street. 
(g)  When a sidewalk is under repair or reconstruction, an alternative accessible route around the sidewalk being repaired or reconstructed shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 43-03, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2003; Ord. No. 62-03, § 2, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 17-18 , § 5, 5-21-2018)  
Sec. 58-35. - Civil liability of abutting property owners for injuries upon sidewalks. 
(a)  In the event the abutting property owner fails to comply with the terms of this article or otherwise permits a sidewalk to become hazardous or in a state of disrepair, the owner or occupant shall be liable for resulting damages or injuries. Any civil liability for injuries caused by the condition of the sidewalk or the failure to comply with this article shall be imposed solely upon the owner or occupant of the property and not upon the town. 
(b)  The town shall not be held as assuming any such liability by reason of inspection or notice to the abutting property owner as authorized herein or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any access, facilities, surfacing, or appurtenances not made in accordance with the town's applicable design standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 43-03, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2003)  
Sec. 58-36. - Liability of persons making special use of sidewalks. 
It shall be the duty of any property owner, landlord, tenant, lessee, sublessee, person, firm, or corporation making special use of any sidewalk for the purpose of ingress or egress, for loading elevators, for downspout drains, or for any other special use of whatever kind or character, to keep such sidewalk and driveway abutting such property in a good and safe condition and free from any defects or hazards of whatever kind and character. Such special user shall be liable in damages for any loss or damages sustained as a result of any condition of the sidewalk, driveway, loading elevator, downspout drain, or any other special use or facility of whatever kind or character. 
(Ord. No. 43-03, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2003)  
Sec. 58-37. - Repair by town; costs to be assessed against abutting property. 
If any person fails to comply with the provisions of section 58-34 within the time specified, the town may, in its discretion, but assumes no duty to, enter upon such property and do or cause to be done the work necessary to repair or replace the sidewalk to meet the construction standards of section 58-33 and assess the abutting property owner for the improvement as provided by this article, the town's ordinances, and state law. 
(Ord. No. 43-03, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2003)  
Sec. 58-38. - Cleaning up sidewalks, driveway approaches, and alleys when construction completed. 
After the sidewalks, driveway approaches, streets, alleys, or curbs are completed in a subdivision, any debris, construction materials such as rock, dirt, and all unsightly and non-original debris of any nature will be removed from the sidewalk, driveway approach, street, alley, or curb, as necessary, by the developer, contractor, owner, occupier of the premises, or source of such materials. This includes, but is not limited to, the sweeping and removal of dirt and debris from all sidewalks, driveway approaches, alleys, streets, and curbs. 
(Ord. No. 43-03, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2003)  
Sec. 58-39. - Reconstruction or repair of defects specifically caused. 
If the defect in the sidewalk, driveway approach, street, alley, or curb has been caused by actions of a developer, contractor, owner, or occupier of the premises, such developer, contractor, owner, or occupier shall be and hereby is required to reconstruct or repair the defect at his own cost. The developer, contractor, owner, or occupier failing to make such reconstruction or repair shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  
Secs. 58-40—58-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FLOWER MOUND MUNICIPAL PLAZA 
 
Sec. 58-71. - Special election for referendum on location of town offices. 
(a)  Authority. A special election for the purpose of referendum on the preferred location for the town hall and other administrative offices of the town was duly and legally held in the town on March 16, 1991, pursuant to an order of the 367th Judicial District County Court, and in compliance with the election laws of the state. 
(b)  Election returns. The election returns of the special election, duly and legally made, showed that there were cast at such election a total of 1,638 valid and legal votes, and that each of the propositions in the election received the following votes: 
_____ 
Proposition Number 1. Shall the town council of the Town of Flower Mound designate by ordinance 2250 Morris Road (Stone Creek Plaza) as the "Flower Mound Municipal Plaza" for the location of the town hall and other administrative offices at that site until a change of designation and site is approved by a majority of votes cast in an election called for such purpose? 	Votes Cast 
Yes: 441 
No: 889 
Proposition Number 2. Shall the town council of the Town of Flower Mound designate by ordinance 2121 Cross Timbers Road (FM 1171 at Morriss Road) as the "Flower Mound Municipal Plaza" for the location of the town hall and other administrative offices at that site until a change of designation and site is approved by a majority of votes cast in an election called for such purpose? 	Votes Cast 
Yes: 1121 
No: 450 
 
_____
(c)  Results. The results of the special election described in subsection (b) of this section demonstrated that the preferred location for the town hall and other administrative offices of the town is 2121 Cross Timbers Road (FM 1171 at Morriss Road), proposition number 2 in the election. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 12.01)  
Sec. 58-72. - Designation. 
(a)  Pursuant to the results of the special election held on March 16, 1991, 2121 Cross Timbers Road (FM 1171 at Morriss Road), and more fully described as follows, is hereby designated as the "Flower Mound Municipal Plaza" for the location of the town hall and other administrative offices of the town: 
Being all that certain lot, tract or parcel of land situated in the J. Eads Survey, Abstract 391 in the Town of Flower Mound, Denton County, Texas, and being a part of a called six acre tract described in deed from the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development to the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, as recorded in Volume 889, Page 455 of the Deed Records of Denton County, Texas, and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at an iron rod in the east line of such six acre tract in the south line of FM 1171, such point being S 00° 20' 30? W, 10.06 feet from the northeast corner of such six acre tract; 
THENCE S 00° 20' 30? W, 520.56 feet along such east line to an iron rod for the southeast corner of such tract; 
THENCE N 89° 45' 25? W, 497.43 feet along the south line of such tract to an iron rod for the southwest corner of such tract; 
THENCE N 00° 10' 12? E, 534.43 feet along the west line of such tract to an iron rod for corner in the south line of FM 1171, such point being S 00° 10' 12? W, 11.57 feet from the northwest corner of such six acre tract; 
THENCE N 57° 37' 54? E, 8.57 feet along such south line to an iron rod for corner; 
THENCE S 78° 06' 43? E, 46.28 feet along such south line to an iron rod for corner; 
THENCE S 81° 40' 06? E, 92.47 feet along such south line to an iron rod for corner; 
THENCE S 85° 16' 02? E, 92.50 feet along such south line to an iron rod for corner; 
THENCE S 88° 47' 38? E, 92.47 feet along such south line to an iron rod for corner; 
THENCE N 87° 37' 28? E, 92.51 feet along such south line to an iron rod for corner; 
THENCE N 84° 01' 57? E, 46.27 feet along such south line to an iron rod for corner; 
THENCE N 84° 05' 24? E, 32.01 feet along such south line to the PLACE OF BEGINNING and continuing approximately 5.906 acres of land. 
(b)  The designation of 2121 Cross Timbers Road (FM 1171 at Morriss Road) as the "Flower Mound Municipal Plaza" shall not be changed until a change of designation and site is approved by a majority of votes cast in an election called for such purpose pursuant to the initiative and referendum provisions of article VII of the Charter of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 12.02)  
Chapter 62 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the town saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(2); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessments for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(11); administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Budget establishes property tax rate, § 9.12; town council's authority to tax, § 9.15; property subject to taxation, § 9.16; town's participation in single-member appraisal district, § 9.17; appraisal of property, § 9.17.1; certifications and adoption of tax roll, § 9.17.2; taxes when due and payable, § 9.18; tax liens, § 9.19. 
State Law reference— Property taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.01 et seq.; authority to levy property taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.001; homestead exemption for disabled persons and persons 65 or older, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13(d), (e); levy of taxes to appropriate budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.009(a). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-31. - Delinquent taxes additional penalty. 
(a)  Real property taxes that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent and taxes imposed on tangible personal property that remain delinquent on April 1 of the year in which they become delinquent shall incur an additional penalty to defray costs of collection so long as the town has contracted with an attorney, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.30, for collection of the taxes against which the additional penalty is imposed. 
(b)  The amount of additional penalty imposed in this section shall be equal to 15 percent of the amount of taxes, penalty and interest due. 
(c)  A tax lien shall attach to the property on which the tax is imposed to secure payment of the penalty. 
(d)  If a penalty is imposed pursuant to this section, the town may not recover, in addition thereto, attorney's fees in a suit to collect delinquent taxes subject to the penalty. 
(e)  The town shall have delivered a notice of the delinquency and of the penalty imposed in this section to the property owner at least 30 days and not more than 60 days before July 1 of the year in which the taxes become delinquent. 
(f)  Should the town contract with another taxing unit for the collection of taxes, then the provisions of this section shall survive and be applicable to the delinquent taxes collected by the taxing unit collecting taxes for the town; and, in such event, the notice required by subsection (e) of this section shall be delivered by the tax collector for the contracting taxing unit. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 7.04; Ord. No. 29-06, § 2, 5-15-2006) 
State Law reference— Additional penalty for collection costs, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 3307.  
Sec. 62-32. - Taxation of tangible personal property in transit. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms have the same meaning as defined in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.253, as amended. 
(1)  The terms "dealer's motor vehicle inventory," "dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory," "dealer's heavy equipment inventory," and "retail manufactured housing inventory" have the meanings assigned by V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 23, subch. B, as amended. 
(2)  The term "goods-in-transit" is defined to mean tangible personal property that: 
a.  Is acquired in or imported into this state to be forwarded to another location in this state or outside this state; 
b.  Is stored under a contract of bailment by a public warehouse operator at one or more public warehouse facilities in this state that are not in any way owned or controlled by the owner of the personal property for the account of the person who acquired or imported the property; 
c.  Is transported to another location in this state or outside this state not later than 175 days after the date the person acquired the property in or imported the property into this state; and 
d.  Does not include oil, natural gas, petroleum products, aircraft, dealer's motor vehicle inventory, dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory, dealer's heavy equipment inventory, or retail manufactured housing inventory. 
(3)  The term "location" means a physical address. 
(4)  The term "petroleum product" means a liquid or gaseous material that is an immediate derivative of the refining of oil or natural gas. 
(5)  The terms "bailee" and "warehouse" have the meanings assigned by V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code § 7.102, as amended. 
(6)  The term "public warehouse operator" means a person that: 
a.  Is both a bailee and a warehouse; and 
b.  Stores under a contract of bailment, at one or more public warehouse facilities, tangible personal property that is owned by other persons solely for the account of those persons and not for the operator's account. 
(b)  A person is not entitled to an exemption from taxation of the appraised value of that portion of the person's property that consists of goods-in-transit. A person's property consisting of goods-in-transit is hereby subject to ad valorem taxation pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code 11.253, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 93-07, § 2, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 55-11, § 2, 10-17-2011)  
Secs. 62-33—62-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EXEMPTIONS 
 
Sec. 62-51. - Homestead exemption for elderly. 
(a)  The Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, shall, and hereby does, exempt $100,000.00 of the appraised value of residence homesteads for married or unmarried persons 65 years of age or older on or before January 1 of the tax year in which such exemption shall be applied, including those living alone, from ad valorem taxes levied and hereafter to be levied by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, such amount exempted being not less than $3,000.00. 
(b)  All persons 65 years of age or older on or before January 1 of the tax year in which such exemption is to be applied shall file an application for the exemption with the central appraisal district. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 7.01; Ord. No. 18-02, § 1, 4-1-2002; Ord. No. 52-02, § 1, 8-29-2002; Ord. No. 49-04, § 1, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 23-05, § 1, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 18-06, § 1, 3-20-2006) 
State Law reference— Homestead exemption for elderly, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13(d), (e).  
Sec. 62-52. - Homestead exemption for disabled. 
As provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code 11.13(d), (e) for each fiscal year, until otherwise provided, a $100,000.00 ad valorem tax exemption for disabled persons on the assessed value of residential homesteads within the corporate limits of the town shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 22-99, § 1, 3-15-1999; Ord. No. 24-05, § 1, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 19-06, § 1, 3-20-2006) 
State Law reference— Homestead exemption for the disabled, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13(d).  
Sec. 62-53. - Freeport goods exemption. 
The exemption from ad valorem taxation for freeport goods pursuant to article VIII, section 1-J of the Texas Constitution and V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.251 shall be effective in the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, §§ 7.02, 7.03; Ord. No. 61-98, § 2, 11-16-1998) 
State Law reference— Exemption for freeport goods, Tx. Const. art. VIII, § 1-J.  
Sec. 62-54. - Exemption for travel trailers. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Travel trailer means a house trailer-type vehicle or a camper trailer, regardless of whether the vehicle is affixed to real property, that is: 
(1)  Less than 400 square feet in area; and 
(2)  Designed primarily for use as temporary living quarters in connection with recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use and not as a permanent dwelling. 
(b)  Exemption. The town council hereby exempts from ad valorem taxes levied and hereafter to be levied by the town council a travel trailer that, on January 1 of the applicable tax year, is registered in the state in compliance with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 502, and that is not held or used for the production of income. 
(Ord. No. 19-02, §§ 1, 2, 4-1-2002)  
Sec. 62-55. - Residence homestead exemption. 
In addition to any other exemption provided by Texas law or Flower Mound ordinance, the owner of a residence homestead shall be entitled to an exemption from Flower Mound ad valorem taxation in an amount equal to the greater of $5,000.00 or 2.5 percent of the appraised value of the residence homestead, subject to the limitations set forth in Texas law, including V.T.C.A., Texas Tax Code § 11.13(n), as it exists or may be amended. The exemption shall be granted to any such residential homestead and the improvements qualifying for same as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 33-18 , § 2, 10-15-2018)  
Secs. 62-56—62-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt municipal sales tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.101; authority to levy sales tax on gas and electricity for residential use, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.105; authority to adopt local sales and use tax on telecommunications services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210. 
 
Sec. 62-81. - Authorized. 
In accordance with an election held on January 15, 1977, a local sales and use tax of one percent for the town is hereby adopted. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 8.01(a))  
Sec. 62-82. - Gas and electricity tax retained. 
By a majority vote of the town council, the town voted to retain the taxes authorized by the Local Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq., on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of, and the use, storage, or other consumption of, gas and electricity for residential use, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.105. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 8.01(b))  
Sec. 62-83. - Telecommunications sales tax retained. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized and imposed on all receipts from the sale of telecommunications services within the town as is provided for by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210 is hereby repealed by the town as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210. 
(c)  The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same rate imposed by the town of all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state. 
(Code 1989, ch. 1, § 8.01(c)(1)—(c)(3))  
Secs. 62-84—62-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
Sec. 62-100. - Definitions. 
(a)  Consideration means the cost of a room in a hotel and does not include: 
(1)  The cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying the room or space for occupancy; or 
(2)  Any tax assessed by any other governmental agency for occupancy of the room. 
(b)  Director means the chief financial officer of the town or the designated representative. 
(c)  Hotel means any building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house, or bed and breakfast. The term does not include: 
(1)  A hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; or 
(2)  A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education, as those terms are defined by the Texas Education Code, § 61.003, as amended, that is used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in educational program or activity at the institution. 
(d)  Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel. 
(e)  Occupant means any person who, for consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement. 
(f)  Tax means the hotel occupancy tax levied in this section pursuant to chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(g)  Tourist means an individual who travels from the individual's residence to a different municipality, county, state, or country for pleasure, recreation, education, or culture. 
(h)  Visitor information center means a building or a portion of a building used to distribute or disseminate information to tourists. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 12-16-2002)  
Sec. 62-101. - Levy and amount of tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupant of any room that: 
(1)  Is in a hotel within the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction; 
(2)  Is ordinarily used for sleeping; and 
(3)  The cost of occupancy of which is $2.00 or more each day. 
(b)  The tax is equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of the room to the hotel. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 12-16-2002)  
Sec. 62-102. - Exemptions and refunds. 
(a)  A person described in § 156.101 or § 156.103(d) of the Texas Tax Code, as amended, is exempt from the payment of the tax imposed under this section. 
(b)  A governmental entity excepted from the tax imposed by chapter 156 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended, under § 156.103(a)(1) or (a)(3) of that chapter shall pay the tax imposed by this section but is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(c)  A person described in § 156.103(c) of the Texas Tax Code, as amended, shall pay the tax imposed by this section, but the state governmental entity with whom the person is associated is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(d)  To receive a refund of tax paid under this section, the governmental entity entitled to the refund must file a refund claim with the director on a form prescribed by the state comptroller and provided by the director. A governmental entity may file a refund claim with the director only for each calendar quarter for all reimbursements accrued during that quarter. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 12-16-2002)  
Sec. 62-103. - Responsibility for collection, reporting, and payment of tax. 
Every person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax for the town and report and pay the tax to the town in accordance with all requirements and procedures set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 12-16-2002)  
Sec. 62-104. - Reports; payments; fees. 
(a)  On the fifteenth day of the month following each month in which a tax is earned, every person required by this section to collect the tax shall file a report with the director showing: 
(1)  The consideration paid for all occupancies in the preceding month; 
(2)  The amount of the tax collected on the occupancies; and 
(3)  Any other information the director may reasonably require. 
(b)  Every person required by this section to collect the tax shall pay the tax due on all occupancies in the preceding month to the director at the time of filing the report required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Every person collecting a tax under this section may deduct a one percent collection fee from the gross amount of tax collected on all occupancies in the preceding month if the tax is paid to and received by the director no later than the fifteenth day of the month following the month in which the tax is required to be collected. If the fifteenth day falls on a weekend or holiday, the director must receive the tax by the next business day. If the tax is paid by mail, the date of receipt by the director is the date postmarked by the U.S. Postal Service. 
(d)  Each remittance of a tax required by this section must contain the following statement and representation signed by the person required by this section to collect the tax: 
The tax remitted and paid to the town with this report was collected pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 62, Section 62-103, Flower Mound Municipal Code, as amended. 
(e)  The director shall maintain a record that accurately identifies the receipt and expenditure of all revenue derived from the tax imposed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 12-16-2002)  
Sec. 62-105. - Tax collection on purchase of a hotel. 
(a)  If a person liable for the payment of a tax under this article is the owner of the hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the seller or the seller's assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the tax due until the seller provides a receipt from the director showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate stating that no tax is due. 
(b)  The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required by this subsection is liable for the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price. 
(c)  The purchaser of a hotel may request that the director issue a certificate stating that no tax is due or issue a statement of the amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The director shall issue a certificate or statement not later than 60 days after receiving the request. 
(d)  If the director fails to issue the certificate or statement within the period provided by subsection (c) of this section, the purchaser is released from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 12-16-2002)  
Sec. 62-106. - Rules and regulations. 
The director is authorized to make any rules and regulations necessary to effectively collect the tax. The director shall, upon giving reasonable notice, have access within five business days of notice to all books and records necessary to enable the director to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this section and the amount of taxes due under this section. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 12-16-2002)  
Sec. 62-107. - Use and allocation of revenues. 
(a)  The revenue derived from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by this section may be used only to promote tourism in the convention and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the following: 
(1)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities or visitor information centers, or both; 
(3)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(4)  Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the town or its vicinity; 
(5)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and draft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording, and other arts relating to the presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms; and 
(6)  Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums: 
a.  At or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities or visitor information centers; or 
b.  Located elsewhere in the town or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists and convention delegates. 
(b)  Revenue from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by this section may not be used for the general revenue purposes for general governmental operations of the town. 
(c)  Allocations of the hotel occupancy tax revenue by the town for the purposes set out by subsection (a) above must comply with the provisions of chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 12-16-2002)  
Sec. 62-108. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Fails to collect the tax imposed by this section; 
(2)  Fails to file a report as required by this section; 
(3)  Fails to pay the director the tax when payment is due; 
(4)  Files a false report; or 
(5)  fails to comply with section 62-105 when purchasing a hotel. 
(b)  An offense committed under subsection (a) of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(c)  In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under subsection (b) of this section, a person failing to pay the tax to the director by the twenty-fifth day of the month following the month in which the tax is required by this article to be collected shall pay an amount equal to 15 percent of the tax due as a penalty. Delinquent taxes draw interest at the rate of ten percent per year beginning 30 days from the date the tax is due to the director. 
(d)  In addition, the town is authorized to file legal proceedings against the hotel for noncompliance seeking any other remedies provided by state law. 
(e)  In addition to the amount of any tax owed, a person is liable to the town for all reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the town in enforcing this article against the person and in collecting any tax owed by the person under this section. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 12-16-2002)  
Chapter 66 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(8); court, ch. 26; junked, wrecked vehicles, § 34-221 et seq.; offenses, ch. 50; operation and parking of vehicles in Grapevine Lake, § 54-165; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; traffic, § 82-111 et seq.; traffic signs in subdivisions, § 90-216. 
State Law reference— Uniform traffic control law, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq.; powers of local authorities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways adopted. 
There is hereby established and adopted within the town the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, as amended and supplemented in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 2.00) 
State Law reference— State traffic control laws are uniform and mandatory throughout the state, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.201.  
Secs. 66-2—66-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Traffic signs, signals and markings, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 66-31. - Conformance to manual. 
All traffic control devices including signs, signals and pavement or curb markings installed or used for the purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the town shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, which is published by the state department of transportation. All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the town shall be uniform and be located so far as practicable according to the directions shown in the manual. All traffic control devices of the town consistent with the manual, state law and this article shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 1.01) 
State Law reference— Limitation on powers of local authorities regarding traffic control devices, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.203.  
Sec. 66-32. - Installation. 
(a)  The town engineer shall have control and direction of the traffic zone marking personnel, traffic control device installation and maintenance personnel, the marking of all traffic zones and the installation of signals, signs and other traffic control devices and road markers relating to direction and control of traffic. The town engineer also shall make continuous studies of the movement of traffic on the streets of the town and shall make periodic recommendations to the town manager as to necessary regulations, practices and controls for the safe and prompt movement of traffic in the town. The town engineer shall perform such other duties as may be required by the town manager. 
(b)  The town engineer shall direct the location of all future traffic control signs, signals and markings. The town engineer shall have the duty of erecting or installing upon, over, along or beside any highway, street or alley, signs, signals and markings, or cause the same to be erected, installed or placed in accordance with this article and consistent with the state Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(c)  The town engineer is authorized to erect or install upon, over, along or beside any highway, street or alley, signs, signals and markings or cause to be erected or installed or placed in accordance with this article and consistent with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices from time to time as may be deemed necessary to regulate or guide traffic in and through the town during unusual circumstances or situations where it is necessary to alter the flow of traffic on a temporary basis to protect the health, life, order and security of the town or its inhabitants. The town engineer shall remove such signs, signals and markings with a reasonable time after the unusual circumstance or situation ceases to exist. 
(d)  All records pertaining to traffic zone markings and traffic control device installation, including placement, replacement, repairs of such traffic control devices and studies conducted of a particular intersection, shall be maintained by the office of the town engineer and shall be available for review by the public during regular business hours. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 1.05)  
Sec. 66-33. - Prima facie evidence of authorized installation. 
It is unlawful for any person other than the town manager, acting pursuant to an ordinance of the town, to install or cause to be installed any traffic control device, sign, signal or marking purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles, motor vehicles or animals. It shall be proof in any prosecution for a violation of this article or any traffic ordinance of the town that any traffic control device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that such device, sign, signal or marking was installed by the town manager or his designee pursuant to the authority of this article and of the ordinance directing the installation of such device, sign, signal or marking. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 1.06)  
Sec. 66-34. - Duty to obey. 
The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle or animal shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device, sign, signal or marking applicable thereto placed in accordance with this article, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle as provided for in the state motor vehicle laws. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 1.07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.004.  
Secs. 66-35—66-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE SIZE AND WEIGHT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate weight limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 621.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 66-71—66-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
Sec. 66-91. - Designation. 
(a)  Town manager and/or chief of police. The town manager and/or the chief of police are authorized by the town council to designate truck routes, regulate truck traffic and erect "No Thru Trucks" signs as may be necessary to provide for the proper flow of truck traffic in and through the town. 
(b)  Enumeration. Truck routes within the town shall be as follows: 
(1)  Farm to Market Road 407. 
(2)  Farm to Market Road 1171. 
(3)  Farm to Market Road 3040. 
(4)  Farm to Market Road 2499. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, §§ 3.01, 3.02)  
Sec. 66-92. - Duty to use. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person shall operate or cause to be operated on, along or over any highway, street, roadway or alley within the corporate limits of the town any commercial vehicle, truck, tractor, trailer, semitrailer, combination thereof and/or other motor vehicle with a rates load capacity in excess of 2,000 pounds (one ton) except on such highways, streets and roadways as are specifically designated as truck routes. 
(b)  Excepted from the provisions of this division are vehicles that are: 
(1)  Making delivery or pickup within the town limits; 
(2)  Using the shortest practicable route to or from a designated truck route within the town; 
(3)  Using concrete thoroughfares whenever possible rather than local residential asphalt streets; and 
(4)  Not using any highway, street, roadway or alley marked with a sign which indicates "No Thru Trucks," unless such operation is on, along or over the only possible route to or from a destination or point of origin. 
(c)  Excepted from the provisions of this division are authorized emergency vehicles operating within the normal scope of their duties. 
(d)  Excepted from the provisions of this division are vehicles operated by a public utility while cruising in any area of the town for the purpose of inspecting the facilities of such public utility and/or providing maintenance or service to such facilities. 
(e)  Exempted from the provisions of this division are vehicles owned by a municipality or other government entity. 
(f)  Excepted from the provisions of this division are vehicles of private businesses which are under contract to the town to provide the pickup of trash and other refuse. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 3.03)  
Sec. 66-93. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the terms of this division shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500.00. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 3.04)  
Secs. 66-94—66-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WICHITA TRAIL BOULEVARD BRIDGE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to designate truck routes, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202. 
 
Sec. 66-111. - Load limit established. 
There is hereby established a 15,000 pound load limit for the bridge located on Wichita Trail Boulevard, 1,000 feet west of Skillern Road in the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 4.01; Ord. No. 41-97, § 1(4.01), 8-4-1997; Ord. No. 42-99, § 1(4.01), 7-8-1999)  
Sec. 66-112. - Exceeding bridge load limit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or cross the bridge located on Wichita Trail Boulevard 1,000 feet west of Skillern Road, with a load in excess of 15,000 pounds in weight. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 4.02; Ord. No. 41-97, § 1, 8-4-1997; Ord. No. 42-99, § 1(4.02), 7-8-1999)  
Sec. 66-113. - Warning signs authorized to be installed. 
The town engineer is hereby authorized to erect warning signs indicating the load limit applicable to Wichita Trail Boulevard Bridge at the east and west end of the bridge and to erect advance warning signs at remote locations indicating the load limit applicable to the Wichita Trail Boulevard Bridge. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 4.03; Ord. No. 41-97, § 1, 8-4-1997)  
Sec. 66-114. - Penalty for violation of division. 
(a)  Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(b)  For subsection (a) of this section, the court may take judicial notice of an owner's manual, dealer's brochure, registration and other such similar literature, which may constitute a presumption of the size weight of a vehicle violating the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 42-99, § 1(4.03), 7-8-1999)  
Secs. 66-115—66-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Off-street parking and loading, § 82-71 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of town to regulate parking, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(2); authority of town to regulate parking on private property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 431.001; overnight parking in residential areas, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.307; parking spaces for the disabled, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 502.253, 521.102, 681.009—681.011, 684.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 66-151. - Parking zones enumerated. 
(a)  The Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets and highways within the town, and no person shall allow, suffer or permit any vehicle to stand or be parked in or upon any street or highway in the town in violation of any of the provisions of this section regulating stopping, standing or parking of vehicles. 
(b)  No person shall permit a vehicle to stand or be parked at a location where signs or markings prohibit such standing or parking. 
(c)  The parking prohibition provided in this section shall not be in effect until appropriate signs or markings have been provided at the location giving notice to motorists. The town manager, town engineer, chief of police or their authorized representative is directed to cause such signs to be erected or appropriate markings to be made on the curbs at such locations in accordance with the Texas Manual for Traffic Signs and Signals. 
(d)  The town may take into custody and dispose of any vehicle found in violation of this section in the manner and pursuant to the procedures provided for abandoned motor vehicles in subdivision III, division 2, article IV of chapter 34 of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 5.03)  
Secs. 66-152—66-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL PARKING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 66-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automobile means a four-wheeled, self-propelled vehicle designed for passenger transportation. 
Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
Commercial motor vehicle means any motor vehicle designed or used for the transportation of property, or for delivery purposes, operating primarily for profit, not including a passenger automobile, passenger bus, motorcycle, panel delivery truck, pickup truck or vehicle used in the delivery of the United States mail. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled by mechanical power such as automobiles, trucks, motorcycles or buses designed to carry one or more persons; but excluding construction equipment, forklifts and farm implements. 
Oversized commercial vehicle means any vehicle designated in this definition, or any vehicle designed for the transport of property or cargo with a gross vehicle weight or registered weight, as those terms are defined by state law, of more than 7,500 pounds, the equivalent of 3.75 tons, or any vehicle that has a rated capacity in excess of 1½ tons, or any vehicle that is more than 20 feet in length from end to end, more than seven feet in width at their widest point, or more than seven feet in height at their highest point including, but not limited to, the following designated vehicles: dump trucks, truck-tractors, tractor-trailers, semitrailers, concrete mixing trucks, stake-bed trucks, buses, trailers, or other similar vehicles. The term "oversized vehicle" shall exclude any self-contained recreational vehicle, which has a kitchen, bath or sleeping quarters and is designed for recreational purposes. 
Parking area means a privately owned or publicly owned off-street area meeting the paving standards as defined in article III of chapter 82 of this Code, for the temporary parking, storage or placement of vehicles. 
Recreational vehicle/travel trailer/camper means a vehicular portable structure designed for a temporary or shortterm occupancy for travel, recreation or vacation. The term "recreational vehicle/travel trailer/camper" does not include mobile homes and/or HUD-Code manufactured homes, as these terms are defined by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f, which are designed for yearround occupancy. 
Semitrailer means every vehicle without motor power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by the motor vehicle including, but not limited to, lowboys, goosenecks, fifth wheels and other similar vehicles. 
Tractor-trailer means a combination of a truck-tractor and semitrailer. 
Trailer means every vehicle without motor power, designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure exclusively and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle including, but not limited to, pop-up campers/tent trailers, flatbeds and other similar vehicles. 
Truck-tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing/hauling other vehicles and not constructed to carry a load other than part of the weight of the vehicle and load being drawn or that is engaged with a semitrailer in the transportation of automobiles or boats and that transports the automobiles or boats on part of the truck-tractor. 
Vehicle means every mechanical device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn or moved upon a street, highway, waterway or airway, except devices moved exclusively by human power, or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle, truck-tractor-trailer or semitrailer. 
To the extent not otherwise defined, all words and phrases used in this section shall have the same meaning as set forth in pertinent sections of the V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 12.01; Ord. No. 61-99, § 3(12.01), 10-4-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-172. - Parking of commercial motor vehicles. 
Parking of commercial motor vehicles shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store, or allow to be parked or stored, any oversized commercial vehicle upon any public street, alley, parkway, boulevard, public place, public right-of-way or railroad right-of-way within the corporate limits of the town. This subsection shall not apply to street construction equipment, maintenance and repair equipment or trucks, rollers and implements, equipment trailers or vehicles used by public service utility companies engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities when used, or intended for use, in the general vicinity; motor buses when taking on or discharging passengers at the customary bus stops; vehicles parked in a designated loading zone while in the act of accepting from the immediate shipper or delivering to a consignee or addressee any transportable thing; or vehicles with mechanical defects during the time it takes to make emergency repairs. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store, or allow to be parked or stored, any oversized commercial vehicle upon property within any residentially zoned district or any property used for residential purposes, within the corporate limits of the town. This subsection shall not prevent the parking or standing of the above-described vehicles in such zoned areas for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise. 
(3)  For subsections (1) and (2) of this section, the court may take judicial notice of an owner's manual, dealer brochure and other such similar informational literature, which may constitute a prima facie presumption of the size and weight of the vehicle. This presumption is rebuttable and shall have the effects and consequences set forth in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 2.05. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 12.02; Ord. No. 61-99, § 3(12.02), 10-4-1999)  
Sec. 66-173. - Parking in nonresidential districts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store, or allow to be parked or stored, any vehicle not designed to operate under its own power on any public street, alley, parkway, boulevard, public right-of-way or public thoroughfare in any nonresidentially zoned district for a period longer than a two-hour duration. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 12.03; Ord. No. 61-99, § 3(12.03), 10-4-1999)  
Sec. 66-174. - Parking in residential districts. 
(a)  Parking in residential districts shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  No recreational vehicle including, but not limited to, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, boats, boat trailers, utility trailers or other trailers, in excess of eight and one-half feet in width, or 14 feet in height, or 36 feet in length shall be stored or parked on any public thoroughfare or private property in any residential district. No vehicle shall encroach upon public sidewalks or alleys. 
(2)  No recreational vehicle, travel trailer, boat, boat trailer, or stock trailer shall be parked or stored on a public thoroughfare in any residential district. The provisions of this section shall not prevent the parking or standing of such vehicles upon the public thoroughfare in such zoned district for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, freight or merchandise for a period not to exceed 24 hours. 
(3)  No automobile, truck, camper, camper top, recreation vehicle, travel trailer, boat trailer or boat, utility trailer or other trailer or vehicle shall be parked or stored on any surface not meeting the paving standards, as defined in article III of chapter 82 of this Code, unless completely screened from ordinary public view. In residential subdivisions approved prior to the adoption of required street section widths (that is, where the roadway is less than 24 feet wide from edge of pavement to edge of pavement and does not have curbs and gutters), motor vehicles may be temporarily parallel parked, for a period not to exceed 24 hours, on an unimproved surface immediately adjacent to the roadway to allow for sufficient traffic flow and provide for safe travel on the internal residential roadways of such subdivision(s). In no event shall the closest pair of wheels of any such temporarily parallel-parked motor vehicle be situated more than three feet away from the closest edge of pavement into the yard of the residence. 
(4)  No junked vehicle, as defined in article IV of chapter 34 of this Code, shall be parked or stored in violation of article IV of chapter 34 of this Code. Any such vehicle shall be subject to the procedures set forth in article VII of this chapter. 
(5)  For purposes of this section, the term "screened from ordinary public view" means completely out of view from private or public property, or public right-of-way from average grade of the surrounding property including, but not limited to, recreational vehicles that exceed the screening fence in height, fences constructed that persons can see through into the area surrounded by the fence or areas that can be viewed from neighboring properties from average grade. 
(6)  For purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be considered stored if it has remained parked at or nearly the same location for a continuous period of time in excess of five days. A stored vehicle is deemed to be a vehicle, which is illegally parked on public property, and such vehicle shall be subject to removal and disposal as an abandoned vehicle according to subdivision III, division 2, article IV of chapter 34 of this Code. 
(7)  No recreational vehicle, travel trailer, boat, boat trailer, camper, camper top, or any other type of vehicle shall be connected to utilities except for the purpose of maintenance. Utilities shall only include electricity and water. Habitation and/or temporary occupancy is prohibited. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the court may take judicial notice of an owner's manual, dealer brochure and other such similar information literature, which may constitute a prima facie presumption of the size and weight of the vehicle. This presumption is rebuttable and shall have the effects and consequences set forth in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 2.05. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 12.04; Ord. No. 61-99, § 3(12.04), 10-4-1999; Ord. No. 93-04, § 2, 11-15-2004; Ord. No. 10-13, § 2, 3-18-2013)  
Sec. 66-175. - Declared a public nuisance. 
The presence of any vehicles within the corporate limits of the town in violation of this division is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 12.05; Ord. No. 61-99, § 3(12.05), 10-4-1999)  
Sec. 66-176. - Penalties for violation of division. 
(a)  Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. When any person refuses to comply with the provisions of this division or in emergency circumstances, then pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 431.001, the offending vehicle may be impounded or the tires blocked to prohibit the vehicle from moving. The impounded vehicle shall be taken into custody and have fees assessed in the same manner as the procedures regarding abandoned motor vehicles in sections 34-274 through 34-283 of this Code. 
(b)  If any vehicle is found in violation of any provision of this division or of state statute regulating the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle is the person who committed the violation. This presumption is rebuttable and shall have the effects and consequences set forth in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 2.05. 
(c)  The state department of transportation's computer-generated record of the registered vehicle owner is prima facie evidence of the contents of the record. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 12.06; Ord. No. 61-99, § 3(12.06), 10-4-1999)  
Secs. 66-177—66-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SPEED LIMITS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of town to establish or alter prima facie speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(12); speed limits and procedure for alternating such limits by town, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 545.352, 545.356. 
 
Sec. 66-211. - Maximum; exceptions. 
The maximum prima facie speed limit for all vehicles shall be 30 miles per hour, except on the designated streets in this article where the prima facie speed limits shall be as indicated, which prima facie speed limits are hereby determined and declared to be reasonable and safe. Such speed limits are hereby fixed for vehicles traveling in such town, and any speeds in excess of such limits shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 6.00(a)) 
Cross reference— Enumeration for specific streets, § 66-214.  
Sec. 66-212. - Alleys. 
Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made, as authorized by the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 545.355 through 545.360, the prima facie speed limit of ten miles per hour for vehicles is determined and declared to be reasonable and safe on all alleys, or their parts, in the town, and the rate of ten miles per hour is hereby fixed as the speed limit for vehicles traveling upon such alleys or their parts. The term "alley" as used in this section shall mean any narrow street or public way, not to exceed 20 feet in width, where passage is primarily for the convenience of those who deal with such abutting owners of property. The town manager or his agent is hereby authorized to have speed limit signs erected, constructed and placed at such points along such alleys so that travelers there of will be reasonably notified of such speed. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 6.00(b)) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58.  
Sec. 66-213. - Streets, highways or alleys under repair. 
When, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, it is necessary that the speed limit on any street, highway or alley within the town, because of the maintenance, construction and/or repair of such street, highway or alley or its portion, be reduced, the town manager or his agent shall have the authority to erect signs at the beginning, end and other portions where such street, highway or alley is under maintenance, construction and/or repair limiting the speed to the maximum speed determined by the town manager or his agent. It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive any motor vehicle within such posted area at a speed in excess of such speed; such speed limit hereby being deemed to be the prima facie evidence of reasonable and prudent maximum speed at which a vehicle may travel on such portions of such street, highway or alley under construction, maintenance or repair. The town manager or his agent is hereby authorized to have speed limit signs erected, constructed and placed at such points along such highways, streets or alleys or their portions under construction, maintenance or repair so that travelers will be reasonably notified of such speed. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 6.00(c))  
Sec. 66-214. - Enumeration for specific streets. 
The maximum prima facie speed limits for the following streets shall be as indicated in this section. Such speed limits are hereby fixed for vehicles traveling in the town and are hereby determined and declared to be reasonable and safe and any speeds in excess of such limits shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful: 
_____ 
Location 	Speed 
(mph) 
Aberdeen Drive, between Canongate Drive and FM 2499, in the Woodlake Estates, Phase I Addition 	15 
Aberdeen Drive from its intersection with Spinks Road to its intersection with Lake Forest Boulevard when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Amador Court 	25 
Amber Court 	25 
Amhearst Lane from Forest Vista Drive to approximately 150 feet northwest of Warwick Avenue when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Amhearst Lane from approximately 70 feet west of Remmington Drive to approximately 40 feet east of Bennington Avenue when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Apache Trail 	20 
Appleton Lane 	25 
Aurora Court 	25 
Bainbridge Lane 	25 
Baldcypress Lane 	25 
Bancroft Way 	25 
Basswood Drive 	25 
Bayberry Street 	20 
Beach Place 	20 
Beacon Street from approximately 200 feet west of Bridlewood Boulevard to approximately 200 feet east of Bridlewood Boulevard when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Beckworth 	25 
Belstrum Drive from Bridlewood Boulevard to approximately 200 feet east of Bridlewood Boulevard when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Beringer Court 	25 
Birch Street 	20 
Birchmont Drive 	25 
Biscayne Drive 	25 
Black Walnut Drive 	25 
Blue Grass Court 	25 
Blue Grass Drive 	25 
Blue Leaf Drive 	25 
Bluffview Court 	25 
Bluffview Lane 	25 
Bosbury Drive 	25 
Bosque Court 	25 
Bradford Drive 	25 
Breezywood 	20 
Bridlewood Boulevard from Waketon Road to approximately 145 feet south of Beacon Street when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
Bridlewood Boulevard from approximately 460 feet north of West Windsor Drive to approximately 30 feet north of Mustang Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
Brighton Drive 	25 
Bristol Drive 	25 
Britt Drive 	25 
Brookwood Drive 	25 
Bruton Orand Boulevard from approximately 435 feet northwest of Brittany Drive/Sterling Parkway to approximately 270 feet south of Kenwood Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times posted on reduced speed limit sign while school is in session 	20 
	All other times is shall be 	40 
Bruton Orand Boulevard from approximately 310 feet north of Flower Mound Road to Flower Mound Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Bur Oak Drive 	25 
Burlington Drive 	25 
Camara Court 	25 
Cambridge Drive 	25 
Canongate 	25 
Canyon Falls Drive from approximately 250 feet southwest of Denton Creek Boulevard to approximately 250 feet southeast of Perdernales Falls Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Caruth Court 	25 
Cedar Street 	20 
Cherokee Trail 	20 
Cheyenne Circle 	20 
Chinaberry Drive 	25 
Chinn Chapel Road south of Justin Road (FM 407) to town limits 	35 
Choctaw Trail 	20 
Christopher Court 	25 
Churchill Drive from approximately 200 feet south of Oxford Lane to Windsor Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Clearpoint Drive 	25 
College Parkway from approximately 200 feet west of Morriss Road to Morriss Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
College Parkway from Morriss Road to approximately 200 feet east of Morriss Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
College Parkway from approximately 200 feet west of Timber Creek Road to approximately 200 feet east of Timber Creek Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
College Parkway from approximately 345 feet east of Cambridge Drive to approximately 180 feet west of Lansdale Drive/Prescott Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
Colony Street 	25 
Condor Street 	25 
Copper Hill Court 	25 
Cottonwood Drive 	20 
Cottrell Drive 	25 
Courtney Drive 	25 
Crandon Drive 	25 
Crepe Myrtle Drive 	25 
Crestbrook Drive 	25 
Cripple Creek Drive 	25 
Crownwood Court 	25 
Danley Court 	15 
Darcey Court 	25 
Denton Creek Boulevard from approximately 200 feet north of Canyon Falls Drive to approximately 1,200 feet south of Canyon Falls Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Diana Lane 	25 
Dixon Lane from Morriss Road to approximately 75 feet west of Ridgemont Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Dixon Lane from approximately 75 feet west of Ridgemont Drive to Long Prairie Road (FM 2499). 	40 
Dogwood Street 	20 
Dove Meadow Drive 	25 
Duncan Lane, southbound lanes, from its intersection with Flower Mound Road (FM 3040) to approximately 1,400 feet south of Flower Mound Road (FM 3040) when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Durango Place 	25 
Dwyer Lane 	25 
Eaton Street from approximately 130 feet west of Timber Creek Road to Timber Creek Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Elmwood Road from McPherson Road to North Park Road 	20 
Elmridge Drive 	25 
Falstaff Lane 	25 
Ferndale 	20 
Fieldcrest Road 	25 
Firewheel Drive from approximately 190 feet west of Shadow Wood Lane to approximately 250 feet east of Shadow Wood Lane when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
Firewheel Drive from approximately 200 feet southwest of Garden Road to approximately 270 feet northeast of Garden Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
Flamingo Drive 	25 
Flatwood Drive 	25 
Flower Mound Road from FM 2499 to Simmons Road 	40 
Flower Mound Road from approximately 250 feet west of Bruton Orand Boulevard/Simmons Road to approximately 215 feet east of Bruton Orand Boulevard/Simmons Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Flower Mound Road from 700 feet west of Old Settlers Road to 335 feet west of Stanford Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
FM Highway 407 	
	(1) 	Beginning at Chinn Chapel Road, MP 10.580, being the west city limits of the town, thence in an easterly direction along FM 407 to MP 11.517 being approximately 520 feet west of the intersection with Barnett Boulevard, a maximum speed of: 	45 
	(2) 	Thence continuing along FM 407 in an easterly direction to MP 11.670 being approximately 288 feet east of the intersection with Barnett Boulevard, from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. while school is in session, a maximum speed of: 	30 
	(3) 	Thence continuing along FM 407 in an easterly direction to MP 11.768, the intersection with Briarhill Drive/Country Meadows Drive, a maximum speed of: 	45 
	(4) 	Thence continuing along FM 407 in an easterly direction for a distance of 1.432 miles to the intersection of Selmeyer Lane, MP 13.200, being the east city limits of the town and Highland Village, a maximum speed of: 	40 
	All other times it shall be: 	45 
FM Highway 1171 	
	(1) 	Beginning at the intersection of Garden Ridge continuing along FM 1171 in a westerly direction for a distance of 1.093 miles (intersection with Fireside Drive). 	40 
	(2) 	Thence continuing along FM 1171 in a westerly direction for a distance of 2.000 miles (to the west of Glenwick Boulevard). 	45 
	(3) 	Thence continuing along FM 1171 in a westerly direction for a distance of 7.354 miles (intersection with U.S. 377). 	50 
	(4) 	Thence continuing in a westerly direction along FM 1171 in a westerly direction for a distance of 1.1679 miles. 	55 
FM Highway 2499 	
	(1) 	Beginning at the intersection of FM 407, thence southerly along FM 2499 a distance of approximately 1.411 miles a maximum speed of: 	55 
	(2) 	Thence, continuing along FM 2499 in a southerly direction approximately 4.700 miles, to Aberdeen Drive, a maximum speed of: 	45 
	(3) 	Thence, continuing along FM 2499, in a southerly direction approximately 1.199 miles, to the southern corporate limits of the town (Denton County/Tarrant County Line), a maximum speed of: 	55 
FM 2499 (that portion existing that will revert to the town for maintenance), from the south town limit to its intersection with the new FM 2499. 	45 
FM Highway 3040 	
	Beginning at the intersection of Old Orchard Lane/Duncan Lane to FM 2499, a maximum speed of: 	50 
Forest Hill Drive (285 feet south of Remington Park Drive) 	25 
Forest Meadow Drive 	25 
Forest Vista Drive from approximately 540 feet east of Thrush Road to approximately 75 feet east of Brookwood Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
Forest Vista Drive from approximately 200 feet west of Amhearst Lane to approximately 125 feet east of Lake Forest Boulevard when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
Forest Vista Drive from approximately 325 feet west of Morriss Road to approximately 200 feet east of Morriss Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
Foxborough Trail 	25 
Foxborough Trail from approximately 440 feet west of Roundrock Way to approximately 210 feet east of Meandering Creek Path when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	25 
Frost Lane 	25 
Fuller Drive 	25 
Fuqua 	25 
Gallant Court 	25 
Garden Ridge Boulevard from Kirkpatrick Lane to approximately 200 feet south of Kirkpatrick Lane when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
All other times it shall be: 	40 
Garden Ridge Boulevard from approximately 200 feet north of St. Gallen Lane to approximately 200 feet south of St. Gallen Lane when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Garden Ridge Road from approximately 60 feet south of Newport Drive to approximately 35 feet north of Saddleback Lane when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
Garden Road from FM 1171 to FM 3040 	40 
Garden Road from Firewheel Drive to approximately 225 feet southeast of Garden Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Garden Road from approximately 50 feet south of Springwood Road to Morriss Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Gatwick Court 	25 
Gentle Drive 	25 
Georgetown Drive 	25 
Glenshannon Lane 	25 
Glenshire Drive 	25 
Grapevine Road 	20 
Green Briar Lane 	20 
Greenleaf 	20 
Hackberry Street 	20 
Haley Drive 	25 
Halsey Drive 	25 
Hampshire Drive 	25 
Hanover Court 	25 
Hanover Drive 	25 
Hartford Drive 	25 
Hazel Street 	20 
Heather Wood Drive 	25 
Hemmingway Lane 	25 
Henley Court 	25 
Hickory 	20 
High Meadow Road 	40 
Horseshoe Falls Drive from approximately 200 feet north of Canyon Falls Drive to Canyon Falls Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Indale Way 	25 
Ingleside Drive 	25 
Inglewood Drive 	25 
Jennifer Drive 	25 
Jennifer Drive from Quail Run Road to approximately 250 feet south of Quail Run Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	25 
Joshua Drive 	25 
Jubilee Drive 	25 
Juniper Street 	20 
Kent Drive 	25 
Kenwood Drive from Bruton Orand Boulevard to approximately 60 feet northeast of Kimberly Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Kiley Lane 	25 
Kingston Lane 	25 
Kingston Lane from Timber Creek Road to approximately 125 feet east of Timber Creek Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	25 
Kingswood Drive 	25 
Kirkpatrick Lane from approximately 920 feet west of Timber Creek Road to approximately 480 feet east of Timber Creek Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Kirkpatrick Lane from Morriss Road to approximately 300 feet east of Morriss Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Kirkpatrick Lane from Garden Ridge Boulevard to approximately 900 feet west of Wager Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Kirkpatrick Road (north and south bound) 	40 
Kirkpatrick Road (east and west bound) 	30 
Kolenby Drive 	25 
Lake Bluff Court 	25 
Lake Bluff Drive 	25 
Lake Coves Drive 	20 
Lake Forest Boulevard from Forest Vista Drive to approximately 200 feet south of Forest Vista Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Lake Forest Boulevard from approximately 200 feet north of Amhearst Lane to approximately 200 feet south of Amhearst Lane when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Lakeshore Drive from approximately 165 feet north of Forest Vista Drive to approximately 100 feet north of Turtle Cove when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Lakeside Parkway from the south town limit to Sandy Lane. 	40 
Lakeside Parkway from the Sandy Lane to FM 2499. 	30 
Lakeside Parkway from FM 2499 to the east town limit. 	45 
Lakeside Road 	20 
Lakeview Lane 	20 
Lancashire Drive 	25 
Langley Court 	25 
Larkspur Street 	25 
Lavender Lane 	25 
Lazy River 	20 
Leanne Drive from Quail Run Road to approximately 225 feet south of Quail Run Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Liberty Court 	25 
Lloyd Court 	15 
Locke Drive 	25 
Manor Way 	25 
Marlow Drive 	25 
Matterhorn Lane from Winding Oaks Drive to approximately 240 feet north of Winding Oaks Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	25 
Mattise Drive 	25 
McKamy Creek Road from approximately 275 feet east of Kipling Drive to approximately 30 feet east of Columbia Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
McPherson Road from Heritage Lane to Shorecrest Road 	20 
Meadow 	20 
Meadow Glen Drive 	25 
Meadow Green Drive 	25 
Meadow Vista Drive 	25 
Meadow Wood Drive 	25 
Meadowbrook Lane 	25 
Mesquite Street 	20 
Meyerwood Lane N 	25 
Meyerwood Lane S 	25 
Mockingbird Lane 	25 
Mohawk Drive 	20 
Moonlight Bay 	20 
Moon River 	20 
Moorefield Drive from Morriss Road to approximately 75 feet west of Morriss Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Morningstar Circle 	25 
Morningstar Drive from Remington Park Drive to approximately 100 feet southwest of Remington Park Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	25 
Morriss Road from approximately 650 feet south of Cross Timbers Road to Justin Road 	40 
Morriss Road from approximately 200 feet north of Garden Road to approximately 210 feet south of Moorefield Drive from 7:45 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:45 p.m. to 4:45 p.m. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
Morriss Road from approximately 235 feet north of Forest Vista Drive to approximately 700 feet south of Forest Vista Drive from 7:45 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:45 p.m. to 4:45 p.m. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
Morriss Road from Flower Mound Road to Lake Bluff 	40 
Morriss Road from Lake Bluff to approximately 650 feet south of Cross Timbers Road 	35 
Morriss Road from 140 feet south of Waketon Road to approximately 200 feet north of Dixon Lane/Valley Ridge Boulevard when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Morriss Road from Woodview Drive to Morriss Court when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Morriss Road from approximately 200 feet north of Garden Road to approximately 210 feet south of Moorefield Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Morriss Road from approximately 235 feet north of Forest Vista Drive to approximately 700 feet south of Forest Vista Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Moss Haven Circle 	25 
Mulberry Drive 	20 
Mustang Trail 	25 
Newcomer Lane 	25 
Newport Drive 	25 
Newton Drive 	25 
North Park Road from Elmwood Road to the Corps of Engineer Property 	20 
Northshore Boulevard between Long Prairie Road and Woodpark Drive 	25 
Northshore Boulevard west of FM 2499 to approximately 170 feet south of Heather Wood Drive 	25 
Norwich Drive 	25 
Oakwood Court 	25 
Oak Meadow Drive 	25 
Old Settlers Road from approximately 600 feet north of Peters Colony Road to approximately 80 feet south of Walnut Grove Place when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Old Settlers Road from Fieldcrest, northward to Karnes Road. 	40 
Old Settlers Road from approximately 200 feet north of Flower Mound Road to 1,375 feet south of Flower Mound Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Old Settlers Road from McKamy Creek Road to approximately 200 feet north of McKamy Creek Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
Orchard Drive 	20 
Pack Saddle Way 	25 
Paisley Drive 	25 
Paisley Drive from 200 feet west of Garden Ridge Road to Garden Ridge Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	25 
Park Ridge Road northeast of Creekview Drive 	25 
Pecan Drive 	20 
Perdernales Falls Drive from approximately 200 feet north of Canyon Falls Drive to Canyon Falls Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
All other times it shall be: 	30 
Peters Colony Road from approximately 110 feet east of Kolenby Drive to approximately 530 feet east of Old Settlers Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Pinion Street 	20 
Plum Street 	20 
Pocahantas Drive 	20 
Ponderosa Pine Drive 	25 
Popular Drive 	20 
Prairie Ridge Road from approximately 200 feet north of Canyon Falls Drive to Canyon Falls Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
All other times shall be: 	30 
Primrose Drive 	25 
Princewood Drive 	25 
Quail Run Road from approximately 260 feet east of Flower Mound Road to approximately 35 feet west of Andrea Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Red Bud Cove 	20 
Red Bud Drive 	20 
Red Oak Lane 	20 
Red Rock Lane 	40 
Regency Drive 	25 
Remington Park Court 	25 
Remington Park Drive from approximately 20 feet east of Indale Way to approximately 30 feet southeast of Morningstar Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	25 
River Hill Drive 	25 
River Place Drive 	25 
Roadrunner Drive 	25 
Rocky Point Road 	40 
Rolling Oaks Drive 	25 
Russwood Drive 	25 
Sagebrush Drive east of Morriss Road 	25 
Sagebrush Drive from Old Settlers Road to approximately 475 feet east of Old Settlers Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Seminole Circle 	20 
Shadow Wood Lane from Firewheel Drive to approximately 70 feet north of Firewheel Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Shadywood Court 	25 
Shadywood Lane east of Lexington Avenue 	25 
Shawnee Trail 	20 
Shelley Drive 	25 
Shelmar Drive 	25 
Shiloh Road 	40 
Shoreline Drive 	20 
Shoshone Drive 	20 
Sidney Lane 	25 
Silverthorn Lane 	25 
Silverwood Drive 	25 
Simmons Road from Flower Mound Road intersection to the entrance to the Lake Park 	40 
Simmons Road from Flower Mound Road to approximately 380 feet south of Flower Mound Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Skillern Road from its intersection with Quail Run Road to its intersection with Wichita Trail 	40 
Sleepy Lagoon 	20 
Spinks Road from approximately 330 feet west of Aberdeen Drive to approximately 45 feet east of Tanglewood Lane when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	35 
Spring Meadow Lane from Timber Creek Road to approximately 200 feet south of Timber Creek Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Springwood Road 	25 
Spruce Street 	20 
St. Gallen Lane from Garden Ridge Boulevard to Wager Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Stanford 	25 
Starleaf Place 	25 
Starlight Trail 	20 
Sterling Parkway 	25 
Sterling Parkway from Bruton Orand Boulevard to approximately 400 feet east of Dwyer Lane when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	25 
Stone Court 	25 
Stone Creek Drive 	25 
Stone Trail Drive 	25 
Stonehenge Lane 	25 
Strait Lane south of Lexington Avenue 	25 
Surrey Lane between Lakeside Parkway and Solano Drive 	25 
Surrey Woods Court 	20 
Surrey Woods Road 	20 
Sutters Way 	25 
Sycamore Drive 	20 
Tanglewood Lane 	25 
Tanyard Court 	25 
Teakwood Court 	25 
Timber Creek Road from approximately 200 feet south of Colony Street to approximately 585 feet northeast of Kirkpatrick Lane when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Timber Creek Road from approximately 150 feet south of Glen Hollow Lane to Valley Ridge Boulevard when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Timber Creek Road from approximately 200 feet north of Eaton Street to approximately 200 feet east of Spring Meadow Lane when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Timber Creek Road, except: 	
	(a) 	From 200 feet northeast of Kings Drive to approximately 535 feet southwest of Lori Court when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	(b) 	From 190 feet southwest of College Parkway to approximately 200 feet northeast of College Parkway when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
Timber Meadow Drive 	25 
Timber Park Drive 	25 
Timber Trail 	25 
Timber Way 	25 
Timberland Parkway 	25 
Timberview Drive 	25 
Tinsdale Drive 	25 
Tophill Drive 	25 
Tophill Lane 	25 
Townsend Drive 	25 
Tree Line Road 	25 
Twilight Drive 	25 
US 377 	
	Beginning at the northern town limit, also being the common boundary with the City of Argyle, thence southerly along U.S. 377 a distance of approximately 2.380 miles, to Denton Creek, same being the southern town limit, a maximum speed of: 	60 
Valley Ridge Boulevard from Morriss Road to approximately 210 feet east of Morriss Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Valley Ridge Boulevard from Morriss Road to approximately 410 feet east of Timber Creek Road when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Vicksberry Trail 	25 
Walnut Street 	20 
Wanda Lane 	20 
Wager Road from Kirkpatrick Lane to approximately 400 feet south of St. Gallen Lane when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Waketon Road from the west town limits to approximately 365 feet east of Bridlewood Boulevard when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Waketon Road from Chinn Chapel Road to Morriss Road 	40 
Waketon Road from Morriss Road to approximately 30 feet east of Pebblebrook Lane when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	40 
Waterford Drive 	25 
Wembley Circle 	25 
Wentworth Drive 	25 
West Windsor Drive from Bridlewood Boulevard to approximately 235 feet east of Bridlewood Boulevard when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Westminster Trail 	25 
Whispering Oaks 	20 
Wichita Trail 	40 
Wicklow Court 	25 
Wild Wood Drive 	20 
Willow Drive 	20 
Winding Oaks Drive from approximately 210 northwest of Matterhorn Lane to approximately 160 feet southeast of Matterhorn Lane when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	25 
Windsor Drive from approximately 120 feet northwest of Avon Court to approximately 245 feet east of Churchill Drive when the school zone flasher is flashing or during times as posted on reduced school zone speed limit sign while school is in session. 	20 
	All other times it shall be: 	30 
Wood Trail 	25 
Woodberry 	25 
Woodbury Drive 	25 
Woodhill Drive 	25 
Woodhollow 	25 
Woodland Boulevard 	25 
Woodmont 	25 
Woodpark Drive 	25 
Youpon Street 	20 
 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 6.00(d); Ord. No. 46-97, § 1, 9-4-1997; Ord. No. 77-97, § 1, 12-1-1997; Ord. No. 1-99, § 1, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 18-00, § 1, 2-21-2000; Ord. No. 06-00, § 1, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 34-00, § 2, 5-1-2000; Ord. No. 48-00, § 1, 7-17-2000; Ord. No. 68-00, § 1, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 20-02, § 1, 4-1-2002; Ord. No. 73-02, § 2, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 12-03, § 2, 2-17-2003; Ord. No. 09-07, § 2, 2-19-2007; Ord. No. 24-07, § 2, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 28-07, § 2, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 44-07, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 54-07, § 2, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 84-07, § 2, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 21-08, § 2, 3-27-2008; Ord. No. 30-08, § 2, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 47-08, § 2, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 65-08, § 2, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 06-09, § 2, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 07-09, § 2, 2-2-2009; Ord. No. 18-09, § 2, 5-21-2008; Ord. No. 23-08, § 2, 6-15-2009; Ord. No. 24-09, § 2, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-21-2010; Ord. No. 16-10, § 2, 3-25-2010; Ord. No. 25-10, § 2, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 37-10, § 2, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 42-10, § 2, 7-19-2010; Ord. No. 47-10, § 2, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 64-10, § 2, 10-18-2010; Ord. No. 73-10, §§ 2, 4, 12-16-2010; Ord. No. 18-11, § 2, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 45-11, § 2, 8-15-2011; Ord. No. 48-11, § 2, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 49-11, § 2, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 04-12, §§ 2, 3, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 03-12, § 2, 2-6-2012; Ord. No. 58-13, §§ 2, 3, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 12-14, § 2, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 32-14, §§ 2, 3, 7-21-2014; Ord. No. 50-14 , §§ 2, 3, 9-15-2014; Ord. No. 58-14 , § 2, 11-3-2014; Ord. No. 39-15 , § 2, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 49-15 , § 2, 8-17-2015; Ord. No. 68-15 , § 2, 12-7-2015; Ord. No. 14-16 , § 2, 3-21-2016; Ord. No. 58-16 , § 2, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 27-17 , § 2, 8-7-2017; Ord. No. 29-17 , § 2, 8-21-2017; Ord. No. 07-18 , § 2, 3, 3-5-2018; Ord. No. 23-18 , § 2, 7-16-2018; Ord. No. 16-19 , §§ 2, 4, 5-6-2019; Ord. No. 22-19 , § 2, 6-3-2019) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
_____ 
Secs. 66-215—66-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STOP INTERSECTIONS 
 
Sec. 66-251. - Regulations on file in town secretary's office. 
The regulations regarding stop streets, yield streets and through streets and intersections are not codified in this article, but are still in effect in the town and are on file in the town secretary's office. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 7.00; Ord. No. 07-00, § 1, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 57-00, § 1, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 29-03, § 2, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 73-04, § 2, 8-16-2004; Ord. No. 10-05, § 2, 2-7-2005; Ord. No. 69-05, § 2, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 11-06, § 2, 2-20-2006; Ord. No. 47-08, § 3, 8-4-2008)  
Secs. 66-252—66-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PROHIBITED TURNS 
 
Sec. 66-281. - Enumeration. 
It is hereby provided that traffic control devices shall be erected at the following places, and such places shall be designated as prohibited turn locations. When such traffic control devices are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at that location other than as directed and required by such traffic control devices, except,when otherwise directed by a police officer. The prohibited turn locations are: 
(1)  No left turn from west on Waketon Road to south on Pebblebrook Lane from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. while school is in session. 
(2)  No right turn from east on Waketon Road to south on Countryside Place from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. while school is in session. 
(3)  No right turn south from private parking lot located on the northwest corner of Morris Road and Waketon Road to west on Waketon Road from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. while school is in session. 
(4)  Right turn only from eastbound on Sagebrush to southbound Long Prairie Road (FM 2499) thereby prohibiting left turns or through-traffic. 
(Code 1989, ch. 10, § 8.00; Ord. No. 62-00, § 1, 9-7-2000)  
Secs. 66-282—66-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - USE OF HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS 
 
Sec. 66-301. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 29-09, § 2, adopted Aug. 17, 2009 repealed the former § 66-301 which pertained to use of hand-held mobile telephones prohibited in active school zones and derived from Ord. No. 11-08, § 2, 2-4-2008.  
Chapter 70 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for sanitary sewer and water system and require property owners to connect with sanitary sewer, § 3.07(n); authority to provide for sanitary garbage disposal and to set fees and charges therefor and provide penalties for failure to pay such fees and charges, § 3.07(o); authority to provide public utilities and set fees and charges and provide penalties for misuses of same; § 3.07(p). 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; electrical code, § 14-131 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18; engineering design criteria and construction standards, ch. 32; environment, ch. 34; water and wastewater impact fees, § 42-31 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; development standards, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 90; standards of drainage in subdivisions, § 90-401 et seq.; standards for utilities in subdivisions, § 90-421 et seq.; water, § 98-141 et seq.; wastewater, § 98-161 et seq; water service rates, app. A, § 25.00; sewer service rates, app. A, § 26.00; utility deposits, app. A; electric, app. B, art. IV. 
State Law reference— Authority to operate utilities and prescribe rates, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.017; town has exclusive jurisdiction over all water and sewer utility rates, operations and services provided by a water and sewer utility, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 13.042; authority to control and regulate waste discharges and require pretreatment, V.T.C.A., Water Code §§ 26.176 and 26.177; authority of town to adopt regulations for controlling and governing solid waste collection, handling, transportation, storage, processing and disposal, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 363.111; authority to suspend garbage collection service for nonpayment, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 363.114. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 70-1—70-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 70-31—70-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - METERS 
 
Sec. 70-51. - Bypassing utility meter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain any utility bypass or connection between the utility meter and the main source of supply, except as may be installed upon written permission from the town and the utility company, if any, furnishing such utility through a franchise granted by the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 10.01)  
Sec. 70-52. - Tap or turn on of utility service. 
Any person who shall tap or connect with any utility being furnished by the town or through a franchise granted by the town, or who shall turn on any utility meter valve without first having obtained a permit to do so, or who shall turn on such utility meter valve after the valve has been turned off by the town or its agents, without first having obtained a permit to do so, or who shall tamper with or interfere with any water, electric or gas meter or any other utility supplying equipment, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 10.02)  
Sec. 70-53. - Use of utility after cutoff. 
It shall be unlawful to use any utility after the utility has been cut off by the town, its agents or the utility company furnishing such utility under a franchise granted by the town, without first having secured a new permit therefor upon new application for such utility service. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 10.03)  
Sec. 70-54. - Presumption of bypass violation. 
The discovery of an unauthorized bypass as mentioned in this article shall be prima facie evidence that such bypass was installed by and maintained by the person or persons to whom the utility service is received through such unauthorized bypass. Also, after a utility service has been turned off by the town, discovery that the utility meter value has been turned on without authorization shall be prima facie evidence that the person to whom the utility service is being received, turned on such utility meter valve. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 10.04)  
Sec. 70-55. - Rereading; testing; water meter and equipment replacements; check for leak and data logging information. 
(a)  Upon the request of any water customer, the town will reread such customer's water meter at no charge; provided, however, that such reread shall not be done more often than once in a 12-month period. Any reread request of such customer's meter, more often than once in a 12-month period, shall be charged a fee for each additional reread, as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. Upon the second reread request within the allotted time frame if it is determined that the meter read was incorrect, there shall be no reread fee charged to the water customer. 
(b)  If a property owner suspects that a water meter is registering improperly and requests that the water meter be tested, the water meter, which is the property of the Town of Flower Mound, will be tested. The water meter will be removed and a new water meter installed. The removed water meter shall be tested by an outside testing facility chosen by the town. If, upon testing, the water meter reads below or within the approved standards of the American Water Works Association (A.W.W.A), the customer shall be charged according to the water meter testing fees as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. If the water meter test indicates that the water meter is testing above the A.W.W.A standard, no such charges will be made and the water customer's bill will be adjusted for the previous three months from the last bill received using the percentage that is above the A.W.W.A standard. 
(c)  If a water meter stops registering usage for any reason, so that the actual amount of water used cannot be determined, the town will replace the water meter and bill the customer by taking a three-year average of the water used for the same billing period. If no prior history is available, the system average will be used. 
(d)  If any water meter reading equipment, including but not limited to, the water meter register and the radio read unit, is damaged, or willfully or accidently destroyed, the contractor, builder and/or water customer will be billed for the replacement of the equipment as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(e)  If a water meter box is damaged, or willfully or accidently destroyed, the contractor, builder and/or water customer will be billed for the replacement of the water meter box as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(f)  If a water customer damages, or willfully or accidently destroys the barrel lock after the water service has been disconnected due to non-payment and/or prior to establishing water service or prior to a town official reconnecting the water service after payment has been made, the water customer will be billed for the barrel lock, trip charge, and administrative fees as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(1)  Any other damage caused to the town's water system, such as cutting off the locking tabs on the angle stop, will also be billed to the customer's account to cover the cost of parts, labor, trip charge, and administrative fees for work completed by the public works department. 
(g)  Upon the request of any water customer, the town will check for a leak at the customer's water meter at no charge, provided, however, that such leak check shall not be done more often than once in a 12-month period. Any check for leak request of such customer's meter, more often than once in a 12-month period, shall be charged a fee for each additional leak check, as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. If it is determined that there is a water leak on either the town's side and/or customer's side of the meter, the customer will not be billed a trip charge. For this paragraph the term "town's side" is any leak at the rear meter tail/coupling gasket or before the water meter. 
(h)  Upon the request of any water customer's water meter that is equipped with a data logging device, the town will pull the data logging information on such customer's water meter at no charge; provided, however, that such data pull shall not be done more often than once in a 12-month period. Any data pull request of such customer's meter, more often than once in a 12-month period, shall be charged a fee for each additional data pull, as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. If it is determined that there is a water leak on either the town's side and/or customers side of the meter, the customer will not be billed a trip charge. For this paragraph the term "town's side" is any leak at the rear meter tail/coupling gasket or before the water meter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 17.00; Ord. No. 60-19 , § 1, 10-7-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 60-19 , § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2019, changed the title of § 70-55 from "Rereading and testing; replacement" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 70-56. - Water meter fee schedule. 
(a)  The water meter fee schedule for the town is as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(1)  The town will not furnish a water meter or allow connection to the town's water or wastewater system until the applicant for such connection provides proof of receipt to the customer service department that the water and/or wastewater impact fees required by section 42-37, entitled "Fee calculation," have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-18-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 68-03; § 2(Exhs. A, B), 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 50-05, § 2, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 60-19 , § 1, 10-7-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 60-19 , § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2019, changed the title of § 70-56 from "Use of town meter mandatory" to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Fee schedule, App. A, § 70-56.  
Sec. 70-57. - Town-issued fire hydrant meter(s). 
(a)  For the use of a town-issued fire hydrant water meter(s) and backflow prevention assembly, the town has implemented a conditional agreement between the contractor, builder, and/or customer to be used on the town's water system for a short-term basis only. 
(1)  The "fire hydrant meter use agreement" which is available on the town's website and is on file in the office of the town secretary and fully incorporated in this section by reference as exhibit A. 
(Ord. No. 11-07, § 2, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 60-19 , § 1, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 70-58. - Residential and commercial water meter installation policy. 
(a)  Residential and commercial water meters five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch to two-inch non-compound HPT/T-10 water meters. 
(1)  The Town of Flower Mound has implemented a water meter installation procedure, which provides for the installation of water meters by individual contractors and/or builders. This procedure requires all contractors and/or builders engaged in new construction of residential or commercial building to install water meters using their own labor resources. 
(2)  Notice of non-compliance. 
a.  All contractors and/or builders are hereby notified that during the entire construction process, all installation procedures shall be followed. If any procedure is violated at any time during the construction process, an employee of the Town of Flower Mound shall issue a warning notifying the contractor and/or builder of the violation. The contractor and/or builder will then have three business days to have the violation corrected. If the violation is not corrected within three business days it shall result in all inspections of that contractor and/or builder to be suspended by the town, until such problem is corrected. 
(3)  Town supplied water meter materials. 
a.  All water meters five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch through one inch are supplied with the following materials: 
1.  One non-lead meter coupling; and 
2.  Two rubber meter gaskets. 
b.  All non-compound water meters 1.5-inch through two-inch HPT/T-10 are supplied with the following materials: 
1.  One non-lead meter flange; 
2.  Two flange gaskets; and 
3.  Four nuts and four bolts. 
c.  All materials supplied with the water meter must be used in conjunction with the installation of the water meter. It is the contractor and/or builder(s) responsibility to supply all other materials required in the installation of the water meter. On all commercial and residential curb stops one inch up to two inches that need to be reduced, the plumber shall use a meter adapter made of non-lead domestic brass (PVC reducers are not allowed in between the angle stop and the water meter). When connecting a five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch water meter to a one-inch curb stop, the plumber must use a non-lead brass reducer bushing with washers, no foreign brass products are allowed on the town's water system. See the town's "construction standards" for a list of approved manufacturers. 
(4)  Setting water meter requirements. 
a.  After the water meter is purchased, the contractor and/or builder(s) are required to set the water meter(s) within ten working days. After ten working days, if the water meter(s) is not installed, town personnel may ask the contractor and/or builder to return any such meter(s) to the customer service department until the meter(s) is ready to be installed. 
b.  When installing a T-10 or an HP Turbine water meter, the following installation instructions shall be followed: 
1.  All water meter(s) shall be installed by a licensed utility contractor, irrigator, and/or plumber at or before the plumbing rough in a horizontal position with the register dial facing upward. 
2.  Water meters shall be installed by connecting the inlet side of the water meter to the town's angle stop, no meter tails and/or couplings are allowed in between the water meter and the angle stop. 
3.  The line opening for the meter in between the curb stop and the customer's service line should match the lay length, allowing slight additional spacing for coupling gaskets. 
4.  The service line should be axially aligned with the inlet and outlet sides of the meter so that the coupling and meter threads can engage without binding or cross-threading. 
5.  The water meter coupling and/or flange must be attached to the outlet side of the water meter. 
6.  After the water meter has been installed, a water meter box/lid must be kept around the water meter at all times to help prevent the water meter from being damaged. 
7.  The curb stop and the water meter coupling nut and/or flange must be accessible without any obstructions from inside of the water meter box. 
8.  Water meters shall be installed at the address indicated on the water meter to prevent billing errors. If a water meter is installed at the wrong location, an administrative fee and a trip charge as set forth in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances will be charged to the contractor and/or builder(s) account for correcting the information in the town's billing system for each address. 
9.  Any contractor and/or builder found to be installing water meters not purchased through the town shall be in violation of section 70-59, entitled, "town-issued water meter(s) mandatory." The meter(s) will be confiscated, the contractor and/or builder will be billed for the consumption that has registered on the meter, using a starting read of ten and all inspections for said contractor and/or builder may be halted until such violation is corrected and a penalty fee will be accessed for each occurrence as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
10.  Streets with or without curbs must be marked with a straight saw-cut and painted blue at each service location to include domestic and irrigation meters. 
(5)  Damaged and/or destroyed water meters. 
a.  If a water meter is installed backwards, the contractor and/or builder must have the water meter reinstalled in the correct position at their expense within three business days. If there is any negative usage on the meter, the account will be billed the negative usage and a trip charge, along with an administrative fee will be billed to the account as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances. The town has the right to lock the service until the repairs are made. 
b.  If a water meter freezes during cold weather and becomes nonfunctional before the meter services technician takes the beginning read for the new occupant, it shall be the contractor and/or builder(s) responsibility to purchase and install a new water meter from the town at their expense. The town does not allow plumbers, utility contractors, and/or irrigators to install refurbished and/or repaired meters. The water meter fee schedule is as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances. The town has the right to lock the service until the repairs are made. 
c.  If the water meter data logger register is damaged and/or destroyed during the construction process, the contractor and/or builder shall be billed the cost of the data logger register, labor charge, trip charge, and an administrative fee as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances. If the water meter is damaged beyond repair, it is the responsibility of the contractor and/or builder to purchase and install a new water meter at their expense. The town has the right to lock the service until the repairs are made. 
d.  Prior to purchasing a replacement water meter(s) that has been damaged or destroyed, the contractor and/or builder must return the damaged or destroyed water meter(s) to the customer service department before a new water meter(s) is issued. 
e.  The contractor and/or builder shall have all water, mud, and/or debris cleaned out of the water meter box on the day the new home owner has scheduled an occupant change for new water service. This will allow the meter services technician to perform the final water meter inspection. If the water meter installation to include the water meter, water meter box and curb/angle stop, do not meet the water meter installation policies and/or construction standards the water service will stay in the contractor and/or builder(s) name until the issue has been corrected. Not correcting the deficiency within three business days may result in all inspections for said contractor and/or builder to be put on hold until the violation is corrected. 
(6)  Water meter box requirements. 
a.  All new subdivisions that have been developed are supplied with a water meter box by the developer, located at the property line near the curb. All existing residential lots that have not been developed must provide a town approved water meter box. If at any time during the construction process the water meter box becomes damaged, it is the contractor and/or builder(s) responsibility to purchase and install a new water meter box at their expense. If a water meter box becomes damaged and must be replaced in an area that was approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance, the contractor and/or builder must comply with the most current town "construction standards." 
b.  Water meter boxes/lids for all angle stops up to one inch shall be DFW37C-SBSM series or approved equal and all water meter boxes/lids for all angle stops 1.5 inches through two inches for non-compound HPT or T-10 water meters shall be DFW65C-12-SBSM or approved equal. 
c.  Approved equal. Any water meter box/lid other than a DFW37/65 series meter box/lid, will require a detail spec sheet of the meter box/lid and it shall be submitted during the planning process and must be approved by the meter services division. 
d.  When setting a water meter box, the correct placement of the box shall be centered over the water meter and in line with the service. The top of the water meter box shall match the surrounding surface elevation (example - curb or sidewalk). 
e.  Prior to the water meter box being set, there shall be a three-inch minimum of pea gravel placed under the water meter box as a base. Pouring the pea gravel into the water meter box will result in the water meter and water meter box setting to fail inspection. The pea gravel must not cover the water meter or couplings/flanges at any time. 
f.  All water meter boxes and services shall be located in a utility easement dedicated to the town. The water meter box shall be installed with a minimum clearance of six inches behind the back of curb and shall not be installed in any sidewalk, drive, or parking area. The center of the meter swivel nut and/or flange on the angle stop shall be located within the meter box no less than eight inches below grade or ten inches deeper than grade. Any location variances will need to be preapproved. All other additional water meter box requirements not referenced within this article must reference the town's "construction standards." 
g.  The landscaper and/or irrigator shall not install any irrigation lines within two feet of the water meter box and at no time shall any irrigation lines be ran over the top of the water meter box. 
(7)  Looped and/or multiple water source connections. 
a.  All residential and/or commercial facilities that require two different sources of water or are on a looped system shall install a back flow preventer after the water meter. 
b.  The back flow preventer shall be installed after the water meter and before the two water sources are connected - this will prevent any reverse flows along with any cross contamination of the town's water system. 
c.  The back flow preventer shall not be installed within two feet of the meter box. 
d.  The back flow preventer shall be owned, operated, and tested annually by the facility owner at the facility owner's expense. 
e.  If it is determined that any reverse flows have occurred the builder and/or contractor shall install a back flow preventer at their expense. 
(b)  Residential and commercial water meters two-inch to six-inch compound and/or three-inch to six-inch HP Turbine water meters. 
(1)  The Town of Flower Mound has implemented a water meter installation procedure, which provides for the installation of water meters by individual contractors and/or builders. This procedure requires all contractors and/or builders engaged in new construction of residential or commercial building to install water meters using their own labor resources. 
(2)  Notice of noncompliance. 
a.  All contractors and/or builders are hereby notified that during the entire construction process, all installation procedures shall be followed. If any procedure is violated at any time during the construction process, an employee of the Town of Flower Mound may issue a warning notifying the contractor and/or builder of the violation. The contractor and/or builder will then have three business days to have the violation corrected. If the violation is not corrected within three business days it shall result in all inspections of that contractor and/or builder to be suspended, until such problem is corrected. 
(3)  Town-supplied water meter materials. 
a.  Compound meters two inches and larger or three inches and larger HP Turbine meters are supplied with the following materials: 
1.  Two flange gaskets; 
2.  Four nuts and four bolts for large meters under four inches; and 
3.  Six nuts and six bolts for large meters over six inches. 
b.  All materials supplied with the water meter must be used in conjunction with the installation of the water meter. It is the contractor and/or builder(s) responsibility to supply all other materials required in the installation of the water meter. At no time shall any foreign brass products be allowed on the town's water system. See the town's "construction standards" for a list of approved manufacturers. 
(4)  Damaged or destroyed water meters. 
a.  If a water meter is installed backwards, the contractor and/or builder must have the water meter reinstalled in the correct position at their expense within three business days. The account will be billed the negative usage and a trip charge, and an administrative fee will be billed to the account as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances. The town has the right to lock the service until the repairs are made. 
b.  If a water meter freezes during cold weather and is non-functional it shall be the contractor and/or builder(s) responsibility to purchase a new water meter from the town and have it installed at their expense. The water meter fee schedule is as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances. The town has the right to lock the service until the repairs are made. 
c.  If a water meters data logger register(s) is damaged or destroyed during the construction process, the contractor and/or builder shall be billed the cost of the register, labor charge, trip charge, and an administrative fee as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances. If the water meter is damaged beyond repair, it is the responsibility of the contractor and/or builder to purchase and install a new water meter from the town at their expense. The town has the right to lock the service until the repairs are made. 
d.  Prior to purchasing a replacement water meter(s) that has been damaged or destroyed, the contractor and/or builder must return the damaged or destroyed water meter(s) to the meter services division before a new water meter(s) is issued. The town does not allow refurbished and/or repaired meters to be installed while under construction and/or prior to the certificate of occupancy. 
e.  All water meters purchased by contractor(s) and/or builder(s) for new construction are the sole property of the Town of Flower Mound and must remain at the address to which the meter is assigned. Water meters in this class size take approximately 45 plus days after the order is received to be delivered. 
(5)  Water meter vault requirements. 
a.  The Town of Flower Mound requires all vaults to be pre-fabricated and all walls shall be a monolithic pour with no seams or extensions. All side walls shall be six inches thick with 4,500 psi concrete reinforced with #4 re-bar on eight-inch centers both ways. All vaults shall be Park, Brooks, and American and/or approved equal. These are minimum specifications. 
b.  The bottom of the vault shall be six inches thick with 4,500 psi concrete with #4 re-bar on 12-inch centers both ways. A four-inch deep with a 12-inch by 12-inch sump with a cast iron grate shall be installed on the bottom of the slab. A four-inch cushion of sand shall be installed under the slab. 
c.  The vault shall not be installed in any drive or parking area and must be located in a utility easement dedicated to the Town of Flower Mound. The top of the vault shall match the surrounding surface elevation (example - curb or sidewalk). 
d.  The lid shall be a J-4AL Bilco door (three feet by three feet) for two-inch to four-inch meter vaults and JD-2AL Bilco (four feet by four feet) door for six-inch to eight-inch meter vaults. The design loads for the lid shall consist of dead, live, impact loads, and in addition loads due to water table and any other loads which may be imposed upon the structure. Live loads shall be for H-20 per AASHTO standard specifications for highway bridges. Design wheel load shall be 16 kips. The live load shall be that which produces the maximum shear and bending movements in the structure. The lids shall be equipped with a hold-open mechanism and flush locking devices. The access door must have two, two-inch holes drilled six inches apart in the center of the lid for AMR reading devices. The aluminum must be protected from the concrete during casting. 
e.  All vaults must have a galvanized steel ladder with Bilco Ladder-up Safety posts. The ladder must be in line with the access lid for easy entrance in to the vault for repairs and/or testing. 
f.  All piping inside the vault must be ductile iron pipe with flanged fittings. Town Standards - American National Standard for ductile iron AWWA standard C151 (ANSI A21.51). 
g.  The contractor shall make the by-pass and meter test tap inside of the vault. The by-pass line must be the same pipe size as the main line. If the service is strictly to be used as irrigation, a by-pass will not be necessary. The test tap must be installed at least two pipe diameters down-stream from the meter and all test taps shall be two inches and the contractor shall install an approved service saddle with non-lead brass nipple and non-lead brass gate valve. The test tap gate valve must have a threaded end discharge pipe. 
h.  The main line and by-pass gate valves shall be resilient wedge. All main line and by-pass valves shall be flanged on both ends and have hand wheels. All gate valves must be one of the approved manufactures listed in the towns "construction standards" or approved equal. 
i.  The contractor shall have a choice of having link seal or wall sleeves (model WS-6-28-5-6 for three-inch pipe; model WS-8-32-5-6 for four-inch pipe; model WS-10-38-5-6 for six-inch pipe; model WS-12-37-5-6 for eight-inch pipe. The above mentioned wall sleeves shall use the following link seal: for a three-inch pipe - 5 #LS325-C; for four-inch pipe - 5 #LS400-C; for six-inch pipe-7 #LS400-C; for eight-inch pipe-9 #LS400-C. Breaking the wall with a jackhammer or using a pre-cast knockout panels is not permitted. 
j.  Pipe and fittings shall be constructed a minimum of one foot above the vault floor and there shall be a minimum of two feet from the side walls. The by-pass tees shall be a minimum of one foot from the side wall. There shall be a concrete and/or galvanized steel support under each valve. 
k.  Minimum depth of any vault shall be four-foot six inches. 
l.  The contractor and/or builder must purchase the water meter from the town. All other parts will be supplied by the contractor at the contractor's expense. 
m.  Documentation shall be provided to the town's engineering department showing that the vault meets the required specs listed above. 
n.  Vault detail - W-12 Town Construction Standards. 
_____ 
o.  Water meter vault sizes. 
1.  Vault sizes are: length x width x height. 
(i)  Two-inch compound meter w/2" by-pass       6', 0" × 6', 0" × 6', 0" 
(ii)  Three-inch compound meter w/3" by-pass       9', 0" × 6', 0" × 6', 0" 
(iii)  Three-inch HP Turbine meter       6', 0" × 6', 0" × 6', 0" 
(iv)  Four-inch compound meter w/4" by-pass       9', 0" × 6', 0" × 6', 0" 
(v)  Four-inch HP Turbine meter       6', 0" × 6', 0" × 6', 0" 
(vi)  Six-inch compound meter w/6" by-pass       13', 0" × 7', 0" × 6', 0" 
(vii)  Six-inch HP Turbine meter       9', 0" × 6', 0" × 6', 0" 
_____ 
(6)  Setting and putting the water meter into service requirements. 
a.  After the water meter is purchased, the contractor and/or builder(s) are required to set the water meter(s) within ten working days. After ten working days, if the water meter(s) is not installed, town personnel may ask the contractor and/or builder to return any such meter(s) to the customer service department until the meter(s) is ready to be installed. 
b.  When installing a Tru/Flo Compound or an HP Turbine meter, the following installation instructions shall be followed: 
1.  The meter manufacturer along with the town requires that all Tru/Flo Compound and/or HP Turbine meters be installed with a plate strainer at the meter inlet. The strainer, in addition to protecting the meter from debris in the line, also corrects the velocity profile of the flow to the meter. 
2.  Install the Tru/Flo Compound and/or HP Turbine water meter horizontally with all registers facing upwards. 
3.  Do not install pressure reducing or check valves before the inlet-side of the water meter. 
4.  Do not open or connect any service pipe to the plugs located on the side of the Tru/Flo Compound water meter. These plugs are designed for the multi-jet meter low flow, allowing factory installation of a low flow water meter. 
5.  When installing a TRU/FLO Compound and/or HP Turbine meter, normal good piping practice should always be followed. In particular, all gaskets should be centrally located on their flanges with no overlap or interference with the pipe diameter. This is particularly important at the inlet connection to the meter where a gasket protruding into the flow stream will cause unpredictable velocity conditions. 
6.  Caution should be exercised to avoid air in the line, sudden flow surges, or excessive flow rates since these conditions may cause severe damage to the meter. 
7.  Water meters shall be installed at the address indicated on the water meter to prevent billing errors. If a water meter is installed at the wrong location, an administrative fee and a trip charge as set forth in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances will be charged to the contractor and/or builder(s) account for correcting the information in the town's billing system for each address. 
8.  Any contractor and/or builder found to be installing water meters not purchased through the town shall be in violation of section 70-59, entitled, "Town-issued water meter(s) mandatory." The meter(s) will be confiscated, the contractor and/or builder will be billed for the consumption that has registered on the meter, using a starting read of ten and all inspections for said contractor and/or builder may be halted until such violation is corrected and a penalty fee will be accessed for each occurrence as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
9.  Streets with or without curbs must be marked with a straight saw-cut and painted blue at each service location to include domestic and irrigation meters. 
(7)  Before operation. 
a.  Before putting the TRU/FLO Compound meter in service follow these steps: 
1.  Before opening the valve at the main, make sure the by-pass, inlet and outlet valves are in the "fully closed" position. 
2.  Slowly open the valve at the main and let it pressurize the service line from the main to the inlet valve on the water meter. 
3.  Before opening the inlet valve, turn air bleed on meter cover counter-clockwise one to two turns. 
4.  With outlet-side gate valve closed, SLOWLY open inlet-side valve to pressurize meter. 
5.  Close air bleed screw (clockwise) when air is completely vented and no "spitting" occurs. 
6.  SLOWLY open outlet-side gate valve until downstream is pressurized. 
b.  After installation, it is important that the upstream (inlet) valve be put in the "full open" condition during service. A partially throttled upstream valve will cause flow profile distortion which will adversely affect meter accuracy. All throttling should be done ONLY on the downstream (outlet) side of the meter. 
c.  Before leaving the site, check for any possible leaks. If any leaks are discovered, shut the inlet-side valve down followed by the outlet-side valve slowly and make the necessary repairs. 
d.  At all times during the construction process the water meter vault shall be clean and free of debris. 
e.  If at any time during the construction process the water meter registers any negative usage, the contractor and/or builder will be required to install a backflow preventer device after the meter vault and before any usable water source at their expense. 
(8)  Looped and/or multiple water source connections. 
a.  All residential and/or commercial facilities that require two different sources of water or are on a looped system shall install a backflow preventer after the meter. 
1.  The backflow preventer shall be installed after the water meter and before the two water sources are connected - this will prevent any reverse flows along with any cross contamination of the town's water system. 
2.  The backflow preventer shall not be installed within two feet of the meter vault. 
3.  The backflow preventer shall be owned, operated, and tested annually by the facility at their expense. 
( Ord. No. 60-19 , § 2, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 70-59. - Town-issued water meter(s) mandatory. 
(a)  All contractors and/or builders installing water meters shall purchase all water meter(s) from the town. The town reserves the right to determine the size, type, and right to own and control all water meters installed or used by customers of its water or wastewater system. 
(b)  Contractors, builders and/or water customers shall not purchase any replacement meter(s) and/or equipment that has been damaged and/or destroyed from any other vendor, website and/or person. All replacement meter(s) and/or equipment shall be purchased from the town. 
( Ord. No. 60-19 , § 2, 10-7-2019)  
Secs. 70-60—70-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY SEWER SERVICE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 70-91—70-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL WASTES PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to control and regulate waste discharges and require pretreatment, V.T.C.A., Water Code §§ 26.176 and 26.177. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 70-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  BOD: biochemical oxygen demand. 
(2)  CFR: Code of Federal Regulations. 
(3)  COD: chemical oxygen demand. 
(4)  EPA: Environmental Protection Agency. 
(5)  l: liter. 
(6)  mg: milligrams. 
(7)  mg/l: milligrams per liter. 
Act or the Act. means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq; 
Approving authority means the town or its duly authorized representative, either of which are the authorized agent of the town. 
Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor, respectively; 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
Categorical standards means National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or pretreatment standard. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Control authority means the approval authority. 
Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Control point means a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
Director of utilities means the person designated by the town manager to supervise the operator of the POTW and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this division, or his duly authorized representative. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the manager or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33 USC 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402, of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or district from normal wastewater. 
Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the town's sewer system. 
Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the town's NPDES permit. The term "interference" includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405 of the Act, (33 USC 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-of-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 3.5. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
New source means any source, the construction of which is commences after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 307(c) (33 USC 1217) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after the proposal, a new source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard. 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l and BOD is not more than 250 mg/l. 
Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
pH means the logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials; radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment; rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d); 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 USC 1291) which is owned in this instance by the town. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this section, the term "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the town who are, by contract or agreement with the town, users of the town's POTW. 
POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Public sewer means a pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the town. 
Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes, or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the town's wastewater disposal system who has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday, or has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the town's wastewater treatment system, or has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the Act of state statutes and rules or is found by the town, (state control agency) or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contribution industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system. 
Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in connection of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial waste are not intentionally passed. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering, 
To discharge means to deposit, conduit, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Town means the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, or the town council of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the manager of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of GWA 307(a) or other Acts. 
Trap means a device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalies; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(6)  Not more than ten mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD; 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the town's POTW. 
Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with drainage water which may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
Wastewater contribution permit means as set forth in section 70-161. 
Wastewater facilities means all facilities for collection, pumping, treatment and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
Wastewater treatment plant means any town-owned facilities, devices and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludges from the sanitary sewers same as POTW treatment plant defined in this section. 
Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any of its portions. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 70-112—70-130. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Administration and Enforcement[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 70-131. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The director of utilities and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credential and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this division. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by town employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The director of utilities and other duly authorized employees of the town, bearing proper credentials and identification, are entitled to enter all private properties through which the town holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying with the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. 
All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this section may inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit; state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. Information accepted by the town as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the town until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.23)  
Sec. 70-132. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The town may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the town that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the town's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the town as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The industrial customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers. 
(b)  If service is disconnected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the town shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristic from his industrial wastes. 
(c)  Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the following conditions, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.24)  
Sec. 70-133. - Notice. 
The town shall serve persons discharging in violation of this division with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.25)  
Sec. 70-134. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
No person may continue discharging in violation of this division beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.26)  
Sec. 70-135. - Show cause hearing. 
(a)  The town may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the town council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the town council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the town council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(b)  The town council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the (assigned department) to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the town council notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)  Take the evidence; 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the town council for action thereon. 
(c)  At any hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges. 
(d)  After the town council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.27)  
Sec. 70-136. - False statement or misrepresentation. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.28)  
Sec. 70-137. - Failure to pay. 
In addition to sanctions provided for by this division, the town is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other orders of the town for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.29)  
Sec. 70-138. - Penalty for violation of division. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the town, shall be punishable by a fine, and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under the authority of subsection (a) of this section, the town is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes under this division or other ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.30)  
Secs. 70-139—70-160. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Wastewater Contribution Permits 
 
Sec. 70-161. - Required. 
All significant users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit within 180 (optional) days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.21(a))  
Sec. 70-162. - Application. 
(a)  Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file with the town, an application in the form prescribed by the town, and accompanied by a review fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code and a letter requesting connection to the town's sewer system. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 30 (optional) days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, and proposed the new users shall apply at least 90 (optional) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and location, if different from the address; 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended; 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution; 
(5)  Average daily and 30 minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation; 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any town, state or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates or the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection (9)a of this section shall exceed nine months. 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the director of utilities including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall it be more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director of utilities. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(12)  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed by the town to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.21(b))  
Sec. 70-163. - Evaluation of data; issuance. 
The town's engineer will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the town may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this subdivision. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.21(c))  
Sec. 70-164. - Application deadline. 
Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the Applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the director of utilities within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.21(c))  
Sec. 70-165. - Duration. 
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the town during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.21(d))  
Sec. 70-166. - Transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the town. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.21(e))  
Sec. 70-167. - Reporting requirements for permittee. 
(a)  Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director of utilities a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(b)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the director of utilities during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the director of utilities, a report indicating the nature and concentration, of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow report in section 70-162(a)(4). At the discretion of the director of utilities and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the director of utilities may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(2)  The director of utilities may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (a) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and mass where requested by the director of utilities, of pollutants contained in this division which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the manager pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures approved by the manager. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the manager. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.21(f))  
Sec. 70-168. - Conditions. 
(a)  The town may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of the savings clause, provided that the person: 
(1)  Submit an application within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived on forms supplied by the approving authority; 
(2)  Secure approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities when required; and 
(3)  Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but not limited to, provisions for: 
a.  Payment of charges; 
b.  Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; 
c.  Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength; and 
(4)  Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this division and approval of the approving authority. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.22)  
Secs. 70-169—70-190. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Discharge Regulations 
 
Sec. 70-191. - Compliance with existing authority. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids; or 
(4)  Unpolluted waters or liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the Texas Water Control Board, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property in or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify, prior to discharge, that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of law, regulations, ordinances, rules and order of federal, state and local governments. 
(d)  Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this division for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this division. The director of utilities shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. State requirements and limitations on discharge shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this division. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.09)  
Sec. 70-192. - Approving authority requirements. 
(a)  If discharge or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, create a hazard to life or health, or create a public nuisance, the approving authority may require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; or 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge whereby: 
a.  No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the town or state. 
b.  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the town for review, and shall be approved by the town before construction of the facility. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the town. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. The approving authority reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this division. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when: 
(1)  It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.10)  
Sec. 70-193. - Approving authority review and approval. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment flow equalization or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating conditions at his expense. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.11)  
Sec. 70-194. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.12)  
Sec. 70-195. - Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 0.5 mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l; 
(4)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operations of the POTW. At no time, shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides, and any other substances which the town, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system; 
(5)  Substances causing a chemical oxygen demand (COD) greater than 500 mg/l. 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acids, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius); 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirements, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; and 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of this section. 
(c)  No waste, wastewater or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which have a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste and odor-producing substances, shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal or other agencies, with jurisdiction over discharge to receiving waters. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.02)  
Sec. 70-196. - Heavy metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods are: 
(1) 	Arsenic 	0.05 mg/l; 
(2) 	Barium 	5.0 mg/l; 
(3) 	Boron 	1.0 mg/l; 
(4) 	Cadmium 	0.02 mg/l; 
(5) 	Chronimum (total) 	0.5 mg/l; 
(6) 	Copper 	0.5 mg/l; 
(7) 	Iron 	1.0 mg/l; 
(8) 	Lead 	0.1 mg/l; 
(9) 	Manganese 	1.0 mg/l; 
(10) 	Mercury 	0.005 mg/l; 
(11) 	Nickel 	0.5 mg/l; 
(12) 	Selenium 	0.02 mg/l; 
(13) 	Silver 	1.0 mg/l; 
(14) 	Zinc 	0.5 mg/l; 
 
Note: In determining the concentration parameters to be included in this section, current state, federal and other appropriate agency rules, regulations and orders should be consulted, including Texas Water Quality Board Order No. 70-0828-5, regulating the discharge of hazardous metals into or adjacent to state waters. 
(c)  No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volume and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony; 
(2)  Beryllium; 
(3)  Bismuth; 
(4)  Cobalt; 
(5)  Molybdenum; 
(6)  Tin; 
(7)  Uranyl ion; 
(8)  Rhenium; 
(9)  Strontium; 
(10)  Tellurium; 
(11)  Herbicides; 
(12)  Fungicides; and 
(13)  Pesticides. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.03)  
Sec. 70-197. - Garbage. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half of an inch in any dimensions are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.04)  
Sec. 70-198. - Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; or 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  The approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged with the approval of the town in areas on which that town has jurisdiction. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.05)  
Sec. 70-199. - Temperature. 
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.06)  
Sec. 70-200. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.07)  
Sec. 70-201. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow of sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l including, but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth; 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 500 mg/l including, but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration including, but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  BOD, COD or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers. 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment. 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action. 
(4)  Cause the POTWs effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(5)  Cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(6)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation. 
(f)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(g)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes; 
(2)  Cinders; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Mud; 
(5)  Straw; 
(6)  Shavings; 
(7)  Metal; 
(8)  Glass; 
(9)  Rags; 
(10)  Feathers; 
(11)  Tar; 
(12)  Plastics; 
(13)  Wood; 
(14)  Unground garbage; 
(15)  Whole blood; 
(16)  Paunch manure; 
(17)  Hair and fleshings; 
(18)  Entrails; 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(20)  Slops; 
(21)  Chemical residues; 
(22)  Paint residues; or 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.09)  
Sec. 70-202. - Requirements for building sewers. 
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation samplings and measurement of the waste; and 
(3)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.13)  
Sec. 70-203. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards of health, life, limb and property. 
Note: The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, eight-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH. 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this division shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling. 
(d)  The approving authority may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine from BOD and suspended solids. 
(e)  The approving authority may select the time of sampling at his sole discretion, so long as at least annual samples are taken. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.14)  
Sec. 70-204. - Grandfather clause. 
A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived (5-13-1985) may continue without penalty so long as he: 
(1)  Does not increase the quantity or decrease the quality of discharge, without permission of the approving authority; 
(2)  Has discharged the industrial waste at least six months prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived (5-13-1985); and 
(3)  Applies for and is granted a permit no later than 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived (5-13-1985). 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.20)  
Secs. 70-205—70-220. - Reserved.  
Subdivision V. - Calculation of Rates and Charges 
 
Sec. 70-221. - Payment and agreement required. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the town or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the town; 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge; and 
(3)  Approval of rates by the town council. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.15)  
Sec. 70-222. - Industrial waste charge and added costs. 
(a)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the town does not cause overloading to sewage collection, treatment or disposal facilities of the town, then, prior to approval, the town and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay an industrial waste charge to be determined from the schedule of charges. 
(b)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the town requires that wastewater collection, treatment or other disposal facilities of the town be improved, expanded or enlarged in order to treat the waste, then, prior to approval, the town and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay in full all added costs the town may incur due to acceptance of the waste. 
(c)  The agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste; 
(2)  Operation and maintenance costs, including salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals and supplies, proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, overhead and office expense; and 
(d)  Amortization shall be completed in a period represented by "n," in years, and payment shall include all debt service costs. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.16)  
Sec. 70-223. - Schedule of charges. 
The method of cost allocation or derivation of industrial waste charges may be found fully described in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.17)  
Sec. 70-224. - Adjustment of charges. 
(a)  The town shall adjust charges at least annually to reflect changes in the characteristics of wastewater based on the result of sampling and testing. 
(b)  Increases in charges shall be retroactive for two billing periods and shall continue for six billing periods unless subsequent tests determine that the charge should be further increased. 
(c)  The town shall review at least annually the basis for determining charges and shall adjust the unit treatment cost in the formula to reflect increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based on the previous year's experience. 
(d)  The town shall bill the discharger by the month and shall show industrial waste charges as a separate item on the regular bin for water and sewer charges. The discharger shall pay monthly in accordance with practices existing for payment of sewer charges. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.18)  
Sec. 70-225. - Fees. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this division to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the town's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the program established in this division. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the town's schedule of charges and fees in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  Charges and fees. The town may adopt charges and fees which may include: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the town's pretreatment program; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for permit applications and review of application by the town's engineer; 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(6)  Fees for consistent removal (by the town) of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; 
(7)  Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this division. 
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.19)  
Secs. 70-226—70-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SOLID WASTE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for sanitary garbage disposal and to set fees and charges therefor and provide penalties for failure to pay such fees and charges, § 3.07(o). 
State Law reference— Authority to control and regulate waste discharges and require pretreatment, V.T.C.A., Water Code §§ 26.176, 26.177; authority of town to adopt regulations for controlling and governing solid waste collection, handling, transportation, storage, processing and disposal, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 363.111; authority to suspend garbage collection service for nonpayment, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 363.114. 
 
Sec. 70-261. - Regulations for collection and disposal. 
The regulations regarding solid waste collection and disposal, including the rates and charges for solid waste collection services, are contained in the effective franchise agreement for solid waste collection services on file in the town secretary's office. 
( Ord. No. 26-16 , § 3, 5-16-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 26-16 , § 3, adopted May 16, 2016, is effective from and after Oct. 1, 2016.  
Sec. 70-262. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Effective from and after Oct. 1, 2016, § 70-262 was repealed in its entirety by Ord. No. 26-16 , § 4, adopted May 16, 2016. The former § 70-262 pertained to rates and charges and derived from the Code's original codification.  
Sec. 70-263. - Garbage service mandatory. 
Every owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee using or occupying any building, house or structure within the town which is on the town's water system shall be required to utilize and pay for garbage service provided by the town or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 17-06, § 2, 3-20-2006)  
Sec. 70-264. - Scavenging discarded material prohibited. 
No person, other than the current resident, current occupant or current owner of the property on which discarded materials are placed for collection or a certified police officer acting in his or her official capacity, shall open, remove, pick up, search through, or transfer discarded materials directly from the curbside when such discarded materials are contained within a closed plastic bag, box, garbage receptacle or any other closed or sealed container left at curbside for collection and removal by a carrier authorized to remove discarded materials within the town. For purposes of this section "discarded materials" is hereby defined as recyclable items, reusable items, household trash, garbage, and/or debris. 
(Ord. No. 75-06, § 4, 11-6-2006) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 75-06, § 4, adopted Nov. 6, 2006, added § 70-263 to the Code. Inasmuch as said section already existed, the provisions have been redesignated as § 70-264 at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 70-265—70-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SERVICE RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING PROCEDURE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 70-291—70-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - UTILITY DEPOSITS 
 
Sec. 70-311. - Service deposits. 
(a)  Exemption from deposit for residential service. No service deposit will be required of an applicant for residential utility service if the applicant can provide one of the following: 
(1)  An acceptable credit rating for 12 consecutive months' during the last two years from the town's utility system or another public utility company. The applicant must provide the town a written document which will verify such acceptable credit rating. 
(2)  A cosigner who is currently receiving utility service from the town and who has an acceptable credit rating with the town utility system and will execute a written guarantee to guarantee payment of the applicant's utility bills. 
(3)  A member of the applicant's immediate family, i.e., parent, child or sibling, who has received service from the town's utility system or another public utility company with an acceptable credit rating for 12 consecutive months during the last two years, becomes a coapplicant, agreeing in writing to pay the account should the customer fail to make payment. 
(4)  For purposes of this chapter, the term "acceptable credit rating" shall mean no late payments and no NSF checks. 
(b)  Exemption from deposit for commercial service. An applicant for utility service for a commercial or industrial entity or business may not be required to make a deposit if the applicant: 
(1)  Provides the town an acceptable credit rating for 12 consecutive months during the last two years, from the town utility system or another public utility company. Credit references from residential utility accounts are not accepted for exemptions of commercial/industrial deposits; or 
(2)  Demonstrates an acceptable credit rating by supplying to the town for review and verification current relevant financial information which may include: annual reports, information from recognized financial rating agencies, information from credit reporting agencies, references from other utility suppliers; and such other financial data that the town manager or his designee may require. 
(c)  Deposit due. If one of the conditions in subsections (a) or (b) of this section cannot be met, then the customer requesting utility service will be required to deposit an amount as provided for in this division before receiving utility service from the town. In addition, a customer may be required to pay a deposit if: 
(1)  The customer has been terminated from receipt of utility service due to utility bill nonpayment; 
(2)  The town has determined there is evidence of tampering with the customer's meter; 
(3)  The customer has been required to pay or is paying off a utility account balance previously deemed uncollectible; or 
(4)  The customer has filed a petition for relief under applicable provision of the United States Bankruptcy Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 15.01; Ord. No. 72-97, § 1, 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 70-312. - Amount of deposit. 
(a)  Residential customers. If a customer receiving residential service is required to make a deposit, the amount of the deposit shall be as listed in appendix A of this Code or an amount equal to one-sixth of the last 12 months' billing at the location where service is requested, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Commercial customers. In the case of commercial or industrial service, if the applicant for service is required to make a deposit, the amount of the deposit shall be as established in appendix A of this Code or an amount equal to one-sixth of the last 12 months of billing at the location where service is requested, whichever is greater. If no previous history is available for the location, a representative facility similar to the type where service is requested will be used to establish the amount of the deposit. 
(c)  Additional deposits. The town may require a customer to make an additional deposit if a deposit made as specified in subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section is subsequently determined to no longer be sufficient. In no event will the amount of the deposit exceed one-sixth of the last 12 months' billing at the service location. The town may disconnect service if the customer does not remit the additional deposit. 
(d)  Credit checks. After a customer makes application for service, the utility billing department may, pursue a credit reference check. If a customer has not had utility service as specified in section 70-311(a) or (b), the customer will be required to place a deposit. If the credit check shows the customer does have an acceptable credit rating, the customer's deposit will be refunded. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 15.02; Ord. No. 72-97, § 1, 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 70-313. - Refunds of deposits. 
The town shall refund the deposit to any applicant or customer if one of the following events occurs: 
(1)  The customer's service has been disconnected. The town shall refund the deposit less any outstanding balances. A transfer of service from one service location to another shall not be deemed a disconnection, and the town shall not require an additional deposit. 
(2)  When the customer has paid bills for service for 12 consecutive residential billings or 12 consecutive commercial or industrial billings without having service disconnected for nonpayment of bills or meter tampering and with no occasions each year in which a bill was delinquent, provided that the customer is not delinquent in the payment of the current bill. The town shall refund the deposit to the customer in the form of credit to a customer's bill. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 15.03; Ord. No. 72-97, § 1, 11-17-1997)  
Secs. 70-314—70-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONNECTION AND TRANSFER OF SERVICE 
 
Sec. 70-331. - Reconnect charge after cutoff. 
A customer with a delinquent account may avoid termination of service by arranging with the utility customer service department for an acceptable short-term payment agreement. A customer may apply for a short-term payment agreement no more than three times in any calendar year; a customer shall not be granted consecutive or back-to-back short-term payment agreements. In the event a customer fails to make payments as agreed, service may be disconnected without notice. After a customer has failed three short-term payment agreements, a customer will not be granted any future short-term payment agreements. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 18.01; Ord. No. 77-02, § 2(g), 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 70-332. - Connection to system. 
(a)  Connection to the water system where a previous account has been shall be charged a connection fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  A service fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code will be charged when a previous customer moves to a residence or commercial establishment from a previous residence or commercial establishment. Any person moving into a residence or commercial establishment must report such a change to the town. Failure to report such a change will result in a disconnection from the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, §§ 18.02, 19.00)  
Sec. 70-333. - Connection and transfer fees. 
A connection fee in an amount established by the town council and on file in the office of the town secretary will be charged to new customers requesting water service, and a transfer fee in an amount established by the town council and on file in the office of the town secretary will be charged existing customers for transferring from one location to another. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 15.04(a); Ord. No. 72-97, § 1, 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 70-334. - Reconnect charge after cutoff. 
If a customer fails to pay for water service after the expiration of 15 days from the original billing due date, service will be disconnected; however, the customer may request an administrative hearing by providing written notice to the town manager or his designee prior to the expiration of 15 days from the original billing due date. Water service will remain status quo until after the hearing, at which time it may be disconnected based upon the findings of the town manager. A delinquent door-hanger tag can be delivered to the service address notifying the customer of disconnection. The delinquent door-hanger tag is a courtesy notice which does not provide the customer with any additional rights relative to the disconnection of service. If the charges are not paid prior to 9:00 a.m. the following business day, service at the delinquent address will be discontinued. The meter shall not be reconnected or service resumed until the customer has paid the entire amount for which he or she has been billed at the time, plus a ten percent charge on any outstanding balance and the reconnect charge, which shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 15.04(b); Ord. No. 72-97, § 1, 11-17-1997; Ord. No. 77-02, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Secs. 70-335—70-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - WATER SERVICE 
 
Sec. 70-361. - Minimum water bills. 
(a)  The minimum charge for each customer shall be determined by meter size through which it secures its water. Each customer shall receive 2,000 gallons for its minimum. The minimum charge for each sized meter in the town is as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  The minimum charge, as established, is designed to recover a portion of fixed costs such as debt service and operation and maintenance expense to supply water to the customers of the system and to take into account the greater demand larger meters can place on the system as a whole. 
(c)  For the customers located outside the town limits, the minimum charge shall be double the minimum rate had such premises been located within such town limits. 
(d)  Customers shall also pay a volume charge in the amount identified in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code per 1,000 gallons after the first 2,000 gallons of water usage. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 8.01; Ord. No. 86-03, § 2, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 87-05, § 3, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 95-07, § 2, 12-3-2007)  
Sec. 70-362. - Water service rates. 
(a)  [Water service rates.] The rates and charges for water service shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  Fire hydrant meter water service rate . The volume charge after 2,000 gallons shall be as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(c)  [Meter rereading.] Any meter rereading upon the request of the customer more often than once in any four-month period shall be accomplished for a charge as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. If upon any such rereading it is determined that the meter reading was incorrect, there shall be no reading charge made to the water customer. 
(d)  [Meter testing, replacement.] If a water meter is replaced by the town at the request of a water customer, the meter removed will be tested. If upon testing the meter reads accurately the water customer will be charged the price of the new meter plus an administrative fee as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. The water customer will also be charged for the cost of the labor to remove and replace the water meter. If the meter tests to be inaccurate, no such charges will be made. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 8.02; Ord. No. 95-07, § 3, 12-3-2007)  
Secs. 70-363—70-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SEWER SERVICE 
 
Sec. 70-381. - Determination of charges. 
(a)  The rates and charges for sewer service shall be as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  The charges for residential sewer service shall be determined by the calculation of the average water usage as registered on the customer's water meter during the consecutive months of December, January and February. The billing year for sewer services shall be March 1 through the last day of February. The monthly sewer bill for each billing year shall be based on the average water usage for the consecutive billing months of December, January and February of the preceding billing year. 
(1)  The minimum bill for residential customers shall be in the amount identified in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code and shall include the first 2,000 gallons of water usage. 
(2)  The residential customer shall also pay a volume charge in the amount identified in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code per 1,000 gallons after the first 2,000 gallons of water usage. 
(3)  If no average water usage for the consecutive billing months of December, January and February has been determined for a residential customer, such residential customer shall be charged a minimum bill equal to the "residential no-average maximum" as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code until the average water usage is determined. 
(c)  All charges for commercial sewer services will be determined by monthly water consumption as registered on the customer's water meter. 
(1)  The minimum monthly bill for commercial sewer service shall be in the amount identified in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code and shall include the first 2,000 gallons of water usage. 
(2)  The commercial sewer customer shall also pay a volume charge in the amount identified in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code per 1,000 gallons for all water usage in excess of 2,000 gallons. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 9.00; Ord. No. 95-07, § 4, 12-3-2007)  
Secs. 70-382—70-400. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - BILLING PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 70-401. - Billing cycles; due date. 
Utility bills will be billed in up to six cycles monthly. The due date for the payment of the bill for utility services shall not be less than 15 days after issuance. Payment must be received in the town cashier's office by the close of business on the due date, in order to avoid assessment of a penalty. Payment placed in the mail and showing a postmark on the due date will not be considered as being received on the due date. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 16.00(a); Ord. No. 71-97, § 1, 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 70-402. - Delinquencies; late charges. 
All utility bills shall become delinquent on the first working day following the customer's due date, and a ten percent late charge shall be added to any utility bill on the date it becomes delinquent. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 16.00(b))  
Sec. 70-403. - Notice of delinquency. 
The delinquent notice shall be sent to all utility customers with a delinquent account on the first working day following the customer's due date. The delinquent notice shall inform the delinquent utility customer that if the delinquent bill is not paid prior to the customer's next billing date, service will be terminated immediately. The delinquent notice shall also inform the delinquent utility customer that they have a right to a hearing on the matter of their delinquency by contacting the town manager on or before the customer's next billing date. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 16.00(c))  
Sec. 70-404. - Reconnection of service; requirements. 
(a)  In order for water or sewer service to be connected or reconnected to any property within the town, all delinquent accounts shall be satisfied. No person shall be allowed to make application for service to property at an address if the person has delinquent charges outstanding. The term "person" means any builder or developer of property as well as a resident, business owner, or business tenant within the town. 
(b)  No reconnection shall be made until the person requesting the reconnection shall have paid a reconnection fee, settled any past due or delinquent accounts on the property, and shall have made the deposit required in this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 16.00(d), (e); Ord. No. 47-00, § 1, 7-17-2000)  
Sec. 70-405. - Hearing; payment of delinquent accounts; failure; termination of service. 
Upon hearing, the town manager shall have authority to make arrangements with any delinquent water customer for the pay out of any delinquent billing over a period of time not to exceed six months; provided, however, that should any delinquent customer fail to make payment of the delinquent account as agreed upon with the town manager, water service shall be immediately terminated without further notice. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 16.00(f))  
Sec. 70-406. - Returned checks for insufficient funds. 
A check returned to the town for any reason stated thereon shall be assessed a fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this Code. A customer shall pay the amount due on the original billing, plus the insufficient funds fee, within three business days of receipt of notice from the town of a returned check. If the fee is not paid within three business days, service may be disconnected. Notice of disconnection may be served by U.S. mail or delinquent door-hanger tag, at the town's discretion. In the event of three returned checks from the same customer in a two-year period, the account will move to a cash-only status for a period of six months. If a customer presents a total of four returned checks in the same two-year period, the account will convert to cash only for the life of the account. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 20.00; Ord. No. 77-02, § 4, 11-4-2002)  
Secs. 70-407—70-440. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - WATER CONSERVATION[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-19 , Sec. 1, adopted May 20, 2019, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 70-461—70-477, 70-501—70-503, 70-521—70-530, 70-541, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 20-10, 4-5-2010. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 70-441—70-460. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LONGTERM WATER CONSERVATION PLAN 
 
Sec. 70-461. - Purpose and goals. 
(a)  The purpose of this long term water conservation plan is to encourage and promote efficient use of water resources, and to outline a strategy for achieving such efficiency. 
(b)  Opportunities for conservation exist through public education efforts, plumbing fixture improvements, and the responsible use of water that may allow the town and its customers to save water. This plan addresses various opportunities to conserve water and establishes specific strategies to realize those opportunities. 
(c)  Current Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) rules requires the adoption of specific water conservation five-year and ten-year goals as part of plan. No enforcement action will be taken against the town by TCEQ if these proposed goals are not met. The following table summarizes the town five-year and ten-year goals using 2014 per capita water usage as the benchmark, since it was the driest in the last five years. This is in compliance with TCEQ guidelines. 
Town per Capita Target Water Savings Goals 
Description 	Current Average (GPCD) 	5-Year Goal (GPCD) 	Ten-year Goal (GPCD) 
Annual average per capita day use 	203.39 	199.32 	193.34 
 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-462. - Conservation methods. 
The objective of water conservation is to permanently reduce the quantity of water required per person per day for living and business activities. The water conservation methods recommended by the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) Guidelines for Municipal Water Conservation and Emergency Demand Management are as follows: 
(1)  Education of the public and provide information to each retail customer; 
(2)  Plumbing codes to promote conservation; 
(3)  Retrofit of existing plumbing devices where warranted; 
(4)  Conservation oriented rate structure; 
(5)  Universal metering and meter repair and replacement; 
(6)  Water conservation landscaping practices; 
(7)  Irrigation practices; 
(8)  Water audits and leak detections; 
(9)  Recycling and reuse of treated wastewater wherever practical; 
(10)  Assumption of water supply corporations that are located within the town's corporate limits and conversion to surface water supply; 
(11)  Pressure control; and 
(12)  Encourage water conservation by owners of private water wells. 
In addition, various methods recommended by the TWDB for saving water are on file in the office of the town Secretary, incorporated herein, and will be made available to customers through an organized program. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-463. - Conservation program. 
This water conservation program is organized according to the conservation methods outlined above, and each method is described below. At the conclusion of this section, the steps involved in implementation and enforcement are outlined. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-464. - Public information and education. 
The following shall be done to inform and educate the public concerning long-term water conservation: 
(1)  Have a series of town meetings during the course of each major water and wastewater project to explain the purpose of the project and available alternatives, and explain how growth or usage is affecting the need for the project. 
(2)  Have on display at the Town of Flower Mound Offices at least three conservation items, conveniently organized to encourage customer use. Possible booklets or brochures available from the TWDB include: 
a.  "A Homeowners Guide to Water Use and Water Conservation" 
b.  "How to Save Water Inside the Home" 
c.  "How to Save Water Outside the Home" 
d.  "Water Saving Ideas for Business & Industry" 
(3)  Mail water conservation brochures appropriate for the season to each retail customer. The number of brochures mailed on an annual basis will be adjusted to maintain the effectiveness of the program. The program may include the following: 
Item 	Frequency 
(1) Water conservation message 	Annually 
(2) Water conservation brochure or bill stuffers 	Annually 
(3) Information on conservation programs 	As necessary, such as leak detection or reuse 
(4) Instructions for additional information 	Included with utility bills 
(5) Encourage local media coverage of water conservation issues and the importance water conservation 	
(6) Make information on water conservation available on the town website and include links to the Texas Smartscape website and to other sites with good information about water conservation, including TWDB and TCEQ 	
(7) Make information on water conservation available on Flower Mound TV (FMTV) 	
(8) Notify local organizations, schools, and civic groups that town staff, and staff of Upper Trinity Regional Water District (UTRWD), are available to make presentations on the importance of water conservation and the best ways to save water 	
 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-465. - Water conserving plumbing fixtures. 
The Town of Flower Mound will inform customers about water-conserving plumbing fixtures and encourage the use of such fixtures when replacing fixtures in existing homes and commercial and public buildings. The town shall require all plumbing fixtures to meet the water conservation standards established in V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code § 372.002, as listed below: 
(1)  Toilets: Maximum flush that does not exceed 1.6 gallons of water. 
(2)  Urinals: Maximum flush of one gallon of water. 
(3)  Showerheads: Maximum flow rate of 2.5 gallons per minute at 80 pounds per square inch, except where necessary for safety reasons. 
(4)  Faucets: Maximum flow rate of 2.0 gallons per minute at 60 pounds per square inch, for all lavatory, kitchen, and bar sink faucets. 
This program will be implemented by code inspectors and monitored by the town manager and shall become effective on the effective date of the adoption of this plan. It is not expected to increase the costs of code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-466. - Reserved.  
Sec. 70-467. - Conservation oriented rate structure. 
(a)  The Town of Flower Mound recognizes that an increasing block rate structure will encourage water users to reduce water use and, thereby, increase water conservation. With an increasing block rate, the price per 1,000 gallons of water increases as the quantity used increases, thereby discouraging excessive and wasteful water use. 
(b)  The town has an increasing block rate structure as evidenced by the town's rate structure, which is on file in the office of the town secretary. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-468. - Metering and meter testing. 
The purpose of metering is to measure the quantity of water being distributed to customers throughout the system, to account for all the water being produced, and to accurately bill for the quantity of water delivered to each customer. The Town of Flower Mound recognizes the need for universal and accurate metering. The town's schedule for testing meters is as follows: 
(1)  Compound meters two inches and larger and HPT meters three inches and larger - Test, calibrate and repair annually. 
(2)  Meters two inches or smaller - Test and/or replace every ten years. 
These activities can be performed by the town as a part of its routine operation and maintenance activities. It will be monitored by the meter services section. It is expected that the costs will be offset by more accurate accounting and billing, resulting in enhanced revenues. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-469. - Water conservation landscaping. 
Well designed and properly maintained demonstration landscapes located in parks and other highly visible areas will promote the water-conserving landscape concept. As opportunities occur, the town will plan xeriscape landscaping for its parks and other facilities. Such landscaping should emphasize native species and low water consuming plant types. Also, the town will encourage garden clubs, developers and customers to implement water efficient landscaping. The town will participate with the UTRWD in demonstration gardens developed as part of the regional program. Brochures on water demand of certain grasses and on outdoor water use in general will be mailed to all customers initially and provided to all new customers. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-470. - Irrigation practices. 
The Town of Flower Mound will explore opportunities for conserving water through improved irrigation practices, including: 
(1)  Prohibiting wasteful uses of water from irrigation systems, such as: 
a.  Over-watering lawns and gardens in excess of what is actually required, thereby causing water to escape from irrigated areas or run off into gutters, ditches, streets, sidewalks, and other surface drains; 
b.  Watering during the heat of the day when losses due to evaporation are high; 
c.  Operating sprinkler systems during periods of rainfall. 
(2)  The partitioning of any given irrigation system so as to provide sequential operation of segments of the system rather than simultaneous operation. 
(3)  The distribution of a brochure providing helpful tips when a permit is issued for a sprinkler system and periodically thereafter. 
(4)  Require all new irrigation systems be in compliance with state design and installation standards (TAC Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 344). 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-471. - Water audits and leak detection. 
(a)  The town is aware of potential savings from leak detection studies and water audits. The town is committed to maintain low unaccounted-for water losses in its water system, and in recent years has experienced less than five percent loss because of the responsiveness of the various utility service departments and a relatively new water system. Although the current management practices have been successful in maintaining low water losses, the town currently does not have an established leak detection and repair program. The five-year and ten-year water loss goals are five percent and four percent, respectively. 
(b)  Audit results will continue to be evaluated. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-472. - Wastewater recycling and reuse. 
(a)  The leading types of potential recycling and reuse projects are: 
(1)  Use of wastewater effluent for irrigation of parks and/or golf courses. 
(2)  Transmission of wastewater effluent to a surface water reservoir project for treatment and reuse as a public water supply. 
(3)  Installation of gray water (water from the washing machine, showers, and bathtubs) tanks in homes for lawn and landscape watering. 
(4)  Recycling and reuse of treated effluent by, or for, industrial, commercial and institutional customers—as well as for irrigation of open space, such as parks and golf courses. 
(b)  The town has two reuse water master plans that take advantage of nearby wastewater treatment plant effluent, one was adopted in 2014 and covers the western area of Flower Mound and the other was adopted in 2018 and covers the southeast area of Flower Mound. The treatment of wastewater effluent is recognized as an excellent method of conserving drinking water through the use of reuse water for irrigation purposes. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-473. - Pressure control. 
The Town of Flower Mound recognizes that adequate pressure control throughout its distribution system can improve water conservation. The transmission system should be sized to maintain a minimum pressure of 40 psi during normal operating conditions and a minimum pressure of 20 psi during extreme operating conditions. In addition, pressures above 90 psi are undesirable and should be avoided. The maximum pressure in extreme conditions should be limited to 120 psi because high operating pressure will result in increased system maintenance and increased operational cost. The transmission system should also be sized to limit maximum velocity in the transmission system to seven cubic feet per second. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-474. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
(a)  The water conservation plan will be implemented and enforced under the general direction of the town manager. Methods and costs of implementation are described below: 
(1)  Public information and education. The town will make copies available of the water conservation plan, including copies of the water conservation methods, to customers, civic groups and other groups upon request. Also, copies of the plan and literature will be given to the local newspapers for use in writing water conservation articles. 
(2)  Water conservation plumbing fixtures. The V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code § 372.002 et seq., sets out conservation standards for plumbing fixtures sold within Texas. These standards are listed in section 70-465, above. 
(3)  Water conserving landscape. The town will cooperate with the UTRWD in informing nurseries and the public of plants and shrubs that are native to the area. The budget for this activity will be included in the budget for public information and education. 
(4)  Leak detection and water audits. The town will be alert to leak detection, will emphasize water audits, and will repair leaks to save water and reduce operation costs. Technical assistance for leak detection and water audits is available from the TWDB and from the UTRWD. No budget increase is expected for this water conservation activity. 
(5)  Wastewater reuse and recycling. The use of wastewater effluent from the central sewage collection and treatment system for irrigation of parks, golf courses, or forage crops is incorporated in to the town's water master plan. Other opportunities will be considered. Any such use must be planned and evaluated on an individual basis. Also, opportunities for recycling and reuse of effluent by or for, industrial, commercial and institutional customers will be explored. 
(b)  The use of gray water systems in homes for lawn and landscape watering may be possible in some parts of the service area; but may not be acceptable within more densely populated portions of the service area. Gray water systems are most easily installed as homes are being built. Existing homes can be retrofitted with a gray water system at a higher cost. In the case of new homes, gray water tanks, piping, and pumping equipment for a family of four would cost approximately $4,000.00 to install. The costs to install such a system in existing homes may be considerably higher, since piping would need to be modified and pumps added. 
(c)  The town encourages water reuse and recognizes that the cost of water reuse will be borne by the beneficiaries. To the extent that water reuse saves water and lowers monthly water bills, the benefits can be used to repay the costs of reuse projects. 
(d)  The town manager will be responsible for implementation of the water conservation program. Punitive enforcement measures are not expected to be required. By adoption of this plan, the town is directing and authorizing the town manager to take all steps reasonably necessary to implement and enforce the plan. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-475. - Review and evaluation. 
The town shall maintain a record management system to record water pumped, delivered, sold and lost, which allows the classification of water sold and used by user categories (i.e., residential, commercial, public and institutional, and industrial). 
The town is required to submit an annual water conservation implementation report to TCEQ and TWDB. Said reports must be completed by May 1 of the following year for the previous year and used to monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of the town water conservation program. The results of the report may also be used to plan conservation-related activities for the following year. A copy of the report will also be sent to UTRWD, which will monitor the regional water conservation trends. 
As required by TCEQ rules, the town will review the plan every five years. The plan will be updated, as appropriate, based upon new or updated information. Should the plan be revised during any five-year period, an amended plan must be submitted to TCEQ within 90 days of being adopted. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-476. - Contracts with other political subdivisions. 
The town sells water to one small Water Supply Corporation for resale. 
(1)  Customer data for wholesale customer is as follows: 
Red Rock Water Supply Corporation 
P.O. Box 270103 
Flower Mound, TX 75027 
Annual usage in 2018: 8.3MG 
(2)  Contract requirements for successive customer conservation. The town will include a requirement in every water supply contract entered into or renewed after official adoption of the water conservation plan, and including any contract extension, that each successive wholesale customer develop and implement a water conservation plan or water conservation measures using the applicable elements of Title 30 TAC Chapter 288. If the customer intends to resell the water, then the contract between the initial supplier and customer must provide that the contract for the resale of the water must have water conservation requirements so that each successive customer in the resale of the water will be required to implement water conservation measures in accordance with the provisions of 30 TAC Chapter 288. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-477. - Coordination with regional planning groups. 
The town will provide a copy of this water conservation plan to the Region C Water Planning Group, which is responsible for developing regional water use information for the planning of future water needs. Flower Mound will cooperate with regional water agencies by providing information, participating in cooperative conservation programs, and with usage reductions initiated as a result of drought or other conditions. In addition, a copy of this approved plan will be sent to both TCEQ and TWDB. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 70-478—70-500. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SHORTTERM WATER CONSERVATION PLAN 
 
Sec. 70-501. - Purpose and goals. 
(a)  The purpose of the annual water conservation plan is to establish the town's policy and procedures in reference to the use of potable water for outdoor watering and to encourage the prudent application of water to lawns and landscaping plants. 
(b)  Waste of water shall be prohibited, including such actions as permitting water to escape from irrigated areas or runoff into gutters, ditches, streets, sidewalks, and other surface drains; failing to promptly repair a controllable leak due to deficient plumbing after discovery; and other obvious wasteful uses. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-502. - Public education and information. 
Public information that can make the most immediate impact is the encouragement for proper watering of lawns and landscaping. Proper watering of lawns can further reduce usage while improving the health of the lawns at the same time. Information on outdoor water use will be published in the town's newsletter. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-503. - Water conserving plumbing fixtures. 
The town shall require water conserving fixtures on all new construction in the town. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 70-504—70-520. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - EMERGENCY WATER DEMAND MANAGEMENT PLAN 
 
Sec. 70-521. - Purpose and goals. 
The purpose of this emergency water demand management plan is to establish an orderly strategy for preserving and managing an adequate supply of water to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare of citizens and the general public from situations that threaten to interrupt or otherwise prevent the town from providing continuous water service. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-522. - Trigger conditions. 
The following four stages of drought or water storage and pumping conditions shall be used to determine the degree of urgency for initiation and implementation of the management plan measures. 
(1)  Stage 1 Triggers - Water Awareness - Water awareness conditions exist upon discovery or notification of potentially serious water management situations that can be managed through voluntary reductions in water use. Customers shall be requested to voluntarily conserve water and adhere to the prescribed restrictions on certain non-essential water usage as provided in the emergency management measures section of this plan. These conditions include: 
a.  Either wholesale water supplier(s) implement restrictive measures that require customers to implement similar restrictions for reasons such as conserving reservoir levels, maintaining system pressures, water treatment capacity, or other such items requiring cooperation; 
b.  Total water consumption reaches 75 percent of the town's water distribution pumping capacity; or, 
c.  The water supply system has a significant limitation due to failure of or damage to important system components. 
Stage 1 of the Plan may be terminated when Stage 1 conditions no longer exist and would be unlikely to recur upon termination. 
(2)  Stage 2 Triggers - Water Watch - Water watch conditions exist because of a failure in voluntary reduction and public awareness efforts to reduce demand, failures with equipment, inadequate supply, or diminished capacity. Customers shall be requested to adhere to both voluntary and mandatory measures to conserve water and adhere to the prescribed restrictions on certain non-essential water uses provided in the emergency management measures section of this plan. These conditions shall include any of the following: 
a.  Either average daily water demand reaches 90 percent of available supply for two consecutive days; 
b.  Average daily water demand reaches 90 percent of the town's water distribution system pumping capacity for two consecutive days; 
c.  Failures occur with town or wholesale supplier equipment or systems that result in a situation where demand reaches 90 percent of remaining supply or system capacity; or 
d.  Wholesale suppliers implement restrictive measures that require customers to implement similar restrictions for reasons such as conserving reservoir levels, maintaining system pressures, water treatment capacity or other items requiring cooperation. 
Stage 2 of the Plan may be terminated when Stage 2 conditions no longer exist and would be unlikely to recur upon termination. 
(3)  Stage 3 Triggers - Water Warning - A water warning condition exists because of a failure of Stage 2 management measures to reduce demand for water, or failures with equipment, inadequate supply, or diminished system capacity prevents meeting demand for water. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and mandatory restrictions on certain non-essential water uses provided in the emergency management measures section of this plan. These conditions shall include any of the following: 
a.  Either average daily water demand reaches 95 percent of available supply for two consecutive days; 
b.  Average daily water demand reaches 95 percent of the town's water distribution system pumping capacity for two consecutive days; 
c.  Failures occur with town or wholesale supplier equipment or systems that result in a situation where demand reaches 95 percent of remaining supply or system capacity; or 
d.  Wholesale suppliers implement restrictive measures that require customers to implement similar restrictions for reasons such as conserving reservoir levels, maintaining system pressures, water treatment capacity or other items requiring cooperation. 
Stage 3 of the Plan may be terminated when the Stage 3 conditions no longer exist and would be unlikely to recur upon termination. 
(4)  Stage 4 Triggers - Water Emergency - A water emergency condition exists because of a failure of Stage 3 management measures to reduce demand for water. This condition reflects the town's impaired ability to provide water service as a result of unforeseen failures and inadequacies in equipment and supply. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and mandatory restrictions on certain non-essential water uses provided in the emergency management measures section of this plan. These conditions shall include any of the following: 
a.  Either average daily water demand reaches 98 percent of the town's water distribution system pumping capacity for one day; 
b.  The water system is contaminated either accidentally or intentionally; 
c.  Major waterline breaks, or pump or system failure occurs causing unprecedented loss of capacity to provide treated water service; or 
d.  Wholesale suppliers implement restrictive measures that require customers to implement similar restrictions for reasons such as conserving reservoir levels, maintaining system pressures, water treatment capacity, or other items requiring cooperation. 
Stage 4 of the plan may be terminated when Stage 4 conditions no longer exist and would be unlikely to recur upon termination. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-523. - Emergency management measures. 
Adoption of this plan includes authorization for the town manager to implement the following emergency management measures in response to the aforementioned trigger conditions for the various levels of severity for drought or emergencies: 
(1)  Stage 1 Response - Water Awareness - Water awareness measures involve voluntary reductions in water use and encourage users to conserve water to avoid activation of more limiting management measures. The target of water awareness measures is to achieve a voluntary one percent reduction in total gallons per capita day (GPCD) usage. 
Specific actions to be taken during any drought situation will be determined by the town manager. The town manager may also take other actions not listed, if deemed necessary. The actions available under this measure include the following voluntary water use restrictions for reducing demand, except for item 1, which provide a menu of possible actions collectively and for different classes of water users as follows: 
a.  All water users. 
1.  All users shall refrain from lawn and garden watering, or irrigation, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
2.  Encourage the reduction of water use through a voluntary day-of-week watering schedule. Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to Sundays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, or 8) and for locations without an address. Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to Saturday, Monday, and Wednesday for water customers with a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7, or 9). Apartments, office building complexes, or other property containing multiple addresses shall be identified by the lowest address number. Irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at any time if it is by means of a hand-held hose, faucet-filled bucket, or drip irrigation. 
3.  Encourage reduction in the frequency of watering new and first year landscaping and foundations. 
4.  Encourage only initial filling of ornamental fountains or ponds. 
5.  Encourage reduction in the frequency of washing and rinsing vehicles and recommend the use of bucket/container, hand-held hose with positive shut-off valve or commercial car wash. 
6.  Encourage reduction in the frequency of draining and refilling of swimming pools. 
7.  Encourage reduction in recreational water use including the use of faucets, hoses, or hydrants which use water in such a manner as to allow run-off or other waste. 
b.  Municipal government. 
1.  Initiate a public education campaign teaching and encouraging reduced water use practices for both town water and water from private wells. 
2.  Notices will be published in local papers, will appear on local cable channel and posted on the town's web page informing the public of the trigger condition(s) prompting the measure and requesting that water users voluntarily reduce water consumption. 
3.  Increase public awareness through the distribution of conservation pamphlets, including water conservation tips on utility billings, and including notices and suggestions in newsletters. 
4.  Weekly status updates on the condition(s) causing activation of the management measure will be displayed on the local cable television channel and appear on the town's website. 
5.  Waste of water shall be prohibited by eliminating such actions that allow excessive amounts of water to escape from irrigated areas as runoff into gutters, ditches, streets, and other surface drains; failing to promptly repair a controllable leak; and, other obvious wasteful uses and conditions. 
6.  Intensify normal leak detection and repair activities on waterlines. 
7.  Encourage reduction of water use in town-owned ornamental fountains or ponds. 
8.  Encourage reduction in water use for landscaping for parks and athletic fields. 
c.  Commercial customers. 
1.  Commercial users, home owners associations, and other non-residential irrigation system owners will be contacted and asked to reduce water use by inspecting their systems. Corrective measures would limit over watering to prevent runoff, repairing broken or damaged sprinkler heads, and repair of any leaks that may be identified. 
2.  Identify and encourage voluntary reduction measures by high-volume water users through water audits. 
3.  Encourage reduction in water use for landscaping for commercial landscaping, open space, parks and golf courses. 
4.  Encourage reduction in water use for landscape nursery stock. 
(2)  Stage 2 Response - Water Watch - Water watch measures impose usage restrictions on consumers as a result of ineffective Stage 1 measures, or because Stage 2 conditions require immediate implementation of Stage 2 measures. The Stage 2 management measures provide for limiting use and enforcement of the restrictions. The target of water watch measures is to achieve a five percent reduction in total gallons per capita day (GPCD) usage. 
Specific actions taken during any drought situation will be determined by the town manager. The town manager may also take other actions not listed, if deemed necessary. The actions available under this measure include the following mandatory water use restrictions for reducing demand which provide a menu of possible actions collectively and for different classes of water users as follow: 
a.  All water users. 
1.  Required reduction of water use through mandatory day-of-week landscape watering schedule and required watering only during off-peak hours. Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday for customers with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, or 8) and for locations without addresses, and Saturday, Monday, and Wednesday for water customers with a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7, or 9). Irrigation is further limited to the hours of 12:00 midnight until 10:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on the customers' designated watering days. Apartments, office building complexes, or other property containing multiple addresses shall be identified by the lowest address number. Irrigation of landscaping areas is permitted at any time if it is by means of a hand-held hose, faucet-filled bucket, or drip irrigation system. 
2.  Restrict operation of ornamental fountains or ponds to initial filling except where necessary to support aquatic life or where fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
3.  Prohibit recreational water use including the use of faucets, hoses, or hydrants that use water in such a manner as to allow run-off or other waste. 
4.  Restrict washing of any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane, or other vehicle to the use of a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning, such as garbage trucks, and vehicles used to transport food or perishables. 
5.  Filling of swimming pools following new construction is allowed during Stage 2 management measures. However, filling of existing swimming pools following maintenance or to maintain water levels is considered outside use and must comply with the schedule outlined in the Stage 2 management measures. 
6.  Prohibit hosing off of paved areas, buildings, windows, and other surfaces. 
7.  Watering of new plantings (first year) of trees, shrubs, and turf will require obtaining a variance from the director of public works. The variance will only be given for the length of time needed to establish the planting. 
8.  Wasting of water shall be prohibited, including such actions as: permitting an excessive amount of water to escape from the irrigated areas or run off into gutters, ditches, streets, and other surface drains; failing to promptly repair a controllable leak after discovery; and other obvious wasteful uses. 
9.  Certain construction related activities using significant amounts of water, such as new water line flushing and paving construction will not be allowed without prior approval from the director of public works. 
b.  Municipal government. 
1.  Accelerate public education campaign teaching and encouraging reduced water use practices. 
2.  Reduce frequency of Town vehicle washing or rinsing by 50 percent. 
3.  Continue intensified leak detection and repair activities on waterlines. 
4.  Prohibit operation of ornamental fountains and ponds by municipal government. 
5.  Require reduction of water use for all municipal government landscaping including parks and athletic fields through day of the week landscape watering schedule. 
c.  Commercial customers. 
1.  Identify and encourage voluntary reduction measures by high-volume water users through water use audits. 
2.  Require reduction of water use through day of the week landscape watering schedule for parks, athletic fields, and golf courses unless water is received from another source. 
3.  Encourage further reduction of landscape uses for nursery stock. 
(3)  Stage 3 Response - Water Warning - Water warning management measures reflect worsening conditions. Outside water use for irrigation purposes will be more strictly limited with active enforcement measures taken to ensure compliance. The target of water watch measures is to achieve a 15 percent reduction in total gallons per capita day (GPCD) usage. 
Specific actions taken during any drought situation will be determined by the town manager. The town Manager may also take other actions not listed, if deemed necessary. The actions available under this measure include the following mandatory water use restrictions for reducing demand which provide a menu of possible actions collectively and for different classes of water users. All requirements of Stage shall effect during Stage 3 except as follows: 
a.  All water users. 
1.  Required reduction of water use through mandatory day-of-week landscape watering schedule and required watering only during off-peak hours. Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, or 8) and for locations without addresses, and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9). Irrigation is further limited to the hours of 12:00 midnight until 10:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on the customers'; designated watering days. Apartments, office building complexes, or other property containing multiple addresses shall be identified by the lowest address number. Irrigation of landscaping areas is permitted at any time if it is by means of a hand-held hose, faucet-filled bucket, or drip irrigation system. 
2.  A ten percent rate increase shall be initiated for high water demand users (customers using greater than 10,000 gallons per month, per account). 
3.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle not occurring on the premises of a commercial car wash and commercial service stations and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety, and welfare shall continue to be limited to the use of hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Further, such washing shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
4.  The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools and Jacuzzi type pools is prohibited except between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
5.  Foundations may be watered for a two-hour period between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. with soaker or hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle on the customers' designated day of the week watering schedule. 
6.  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
7.  Permitting of new swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, ornamental ponds, and fountain construction is prohibited. 
8.  Certain construction related to using significant amounts of water such as new line flushing and paving construction will not be allowed without prior authorization from the director of public works. 
b.  Municipal government. 
1.  Town vehicle washing and rinsing is limited to once a week. 
2.  All municipal landscape watering is prohibited. 
c.  Commercial customers. 
1.  Watering of golf course greens and tee boxes shall be restricted to off-peak hours of 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m.; watering of other golf course areas and parks is prohibited unless the golf course or park utilizes a water source other than that provided by the town. 
2.  Watering of nursery plant stock shall be restricted to designated off-peak hours and the customers' designated day-of-the-week landscaping water schedule. 
(4)  Stage 4 Response - Water Emergency - Water emergency management measures reflect the most extreme measures taken in protecting the water supply for sanitary and fire protection uses only. Outside water uses shall be limited and active enforcement measures will be taken to ensure compliance. This measure is anticipated to be a short term measure used to protect the integrity of the water system. The target of water emergency measures is to achieve a 25 percent reduction in total gallons per capita day (GPCD) usage. 
Specific actions taken during any drought situation, including water allocation will be determined by the town manager. The actions available under this measure include the following mandatory water use restrictions for reducing demand which provide a menu of possible actions collectively and for different classes of water users. All requirements of Stages 2 and 3 shall remain in place during Stage 4 except as follows: 
a.  All water users. The town manager may order the implementation of the following and take other reasonable and necessary measures subject to the approval of the town council: 
1.  Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited. 
2.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is absolutely prohibited. 
3.  All rates for usage in excess of 10,000 gallons per month (per single-family residential account), or any other usage amount above 10,000 gallons per month, as deemed appropriate by the town manager, may be increased by an additional ten percent, or any other percentage deemed appropriate by the town manager as necessary to reduce water consumption. 
4.  No application for new, additional, expanded, or increased-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains, or water service facilities of any kind shall be approved, and time limits for approval of such applications are hereby suspended for such time as this drought response stage or a higher number stage shall be in effect. 
5.  Commercial and industrial water users shall reduce or stop water consumption to the extent determined by the town manager. Water service will be provided, depending on availability, according to the following priority system: 
i.  Hospitals; 
ii.  Schools; 
iii.  Industrial users; 
iv.  Commercial users; 
v.  Residential users; 
vi.  Recreational users. 
6.  Certain construction related activities using significant amounts of water, such as new water line flushing and paving construction will not be allowed without prior authorization from the director of public works. 
7.  Exceptions to these mandatory water use restrictions may be authorized by the director of public works for essential water uses such as: health and safety uses; commercial and industrial uses necessary to maintain, but not expand, primary business practices (e.g., commercial car and truck washes, nurseries, water haulers, etc.); and uses pursuant to law and/or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-524. - Public involvement. 
Adoption of this plan and subsequent revisions will require the town to actively inform the public of proposed changes and provide an opportunity for comment regarding the conservation plan. At a minimum, this will include the placement of proposed changes on a town council meeting agenda with participation by individuals during the citizen/visitor comment portion of the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-525. - Initiation procedures. 
The method of initiation of emergency management measures is defined in each level of emergency in section 70-523 above. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-526. - Termination notification. 
For water alert conditions, termination will not occur until the conditions which triggered the emergency have been alleviated. If excessive demand is determined to be the trigger, all initiated actions will remain in effect until September 30 of the year in which they were triggered, or until the town manager determines the actions are no longer required. For water warning conditions, all initiated actions will remain in effect until the conditions which triggered the emergency have been alleviated, or until the town manager determines that conditions exist which will allow the removal of the water warning actions. For water emergency conditions, all initiated actions will remain in effect until the conditions which triggered the emergency have been alleviated, or until the town manager determines that conditions exist which will allow the removal of the water emergency actions. Public notification of the termination of any water emergency management measures will follow the same procedures used in the notification of the initiation of these measures. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-527. - Implementation and enforcement of division provisions. 
The various levels of remedial actions are implemented per the triggers defined in section 70-522. The method of implementation is set out in section 70-523. Violations of restrictions defined in section 70-523 and will result in a warning, after which a citation may be issued with a fine as prescribed in section 1-13 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-528. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, customer and/or user of the town's water system, except for the town, who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article VI shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-13 of this Code of Ordinances. Each day any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under the authority of subsection (a) of this section, the town shall be entitled to disconnect or discontinue water services to any such person, customer and/or user of the town's water system who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article VI. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-529. - Emergency water demand management plan review and update. 
The emergency water demand management plan shall be reviewed and updated as needed at least every five years, based upon new or updated information, such as the adoption or revision of the regional water plan. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-530. - Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) notification. 
The town shall notify the executive director of TCEQ within five business days of the implementation of any mandatory provisions of the emergency water demand management plan. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-531. - Utilization of alternative water sources and/or alternative delivery mechanisms. 
The Town of Flower Mound utilizes and is under contract with two potable water sources, Dallas Water Utilities and Upper Trinity Regional Water District. The town also has plans to utilize reuse water in the future from two sources, Trinity River Authority and our wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-532. - Pro rata curtailment. 
In the event that the triggering criteria specified in Stage 4 - Water Emergency have been met, the town manager is hereby authorized to initiate allocation of water supplies on a pro rata basis in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Water Code § 11.039. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 70-533. - Contract provisions. 
Dallas Water Utilities and Upper Trinity Regional Water District will include a provision in every wholesale contract entered into or renewed after adoption of the plan, including contract extensions, that in case of a shortage of water resulting from drought, the water will be distributed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Water Code § 11.039. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 70-534—70-540. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - UTILITY PROFILE 
 
Sec. 70-541. - Texas Water Development Board utility profile. 
The most recent Texas Water Development Board utility profile is on file in the office of the town secretary. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 70-542—70-560. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - WATER WELLS 
 
Sec. 70-561. - Authority and purpose of article regulations. 
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.072 vests cities adopting charters with full power of local self-government, and the town council deems it necessary, expedient and in the best interests of its citizens to adopt regulations for all new and existing water wells within the corporate limits of the town. Therefore, the town council hereby adopts the regulations contained in this article affecting water wells which regulations shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 11.01)  
Sec. 70-562. - Requirements for construction of new wells. 
(a)  Approvals and permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a new water well after February 8, 1993 within the corporate limits of the town without first: 
(1)  Obtaining a building permit from the town's community development department; 
(2)  Having the location inspected by an official of the town's community development department. 
The fee for a permit to construct a new water well shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  Location/drilling requirements. 
(1)  The location for construction of all new water wells must be approved by the community development department of the town; 
(2)  New water wells must be drilled by a licensed water driller pursuant to rules promulgated by the state water commission and/or other applicable regulatory agencies. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 11.02)  
Sec. 70-563. - Requirements for existing wells. 
(a)  If the property or residence on which a water well is located as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived is using water from the water well for household purposes, a double back check valve shall be installed within 30 days of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived on the side of the water meter facing the house, in its own box, which shall be no closer than 24 inches to the water meter. 
(b)  There shall be no direct or indirect connection of the water well and the public water system. 
(c)  When any well, because of nonuse, abandonment, or any other reason, becomes inactive, it shall be filled and permanently capped. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 11.03)  
Sec. 70-564. - Special construction requirements; exceptions. 
(a)  Setbacks from all property lines. A minimum setback of 40 feet shall be required from all property lines. 
(b)  Setbacks from all habitable buildings. A minimum setback of 20 feet shall be required from all habitable buildings. 
(c)  Setbacks from all buildings used to shelter animals. A minimum setback of 50 feet shall be required from all buildings used to shelter animals. 
(d)  Setback requirements from on-site sewer facilities and public water wells. 
(1)  Sewage treatment tanks. A minimum setback of 50 feet is required from all on-site sewerage treatment tanks. 
(2)  Soil absorption systems or unlined evapotranspiration systems. A minimum setback of 150 feet is required from all soil absorption and evapotranspiration systems. This distance may be reduced to a minimum of 50 feet for existing or proposed private water wells only, if the space between the existing private water well casing and the surrounding ground is filled with cement slurry that is pumped through a tube that extends to the required depth sealing. This depth shall be at least two times the horizontal encroachment measurement but not more than the depth to the water producing strata. A three-foot square by six-inch thick concrete slab shall be poured around the casing. 
(3)  Lined evapotranspiration systems. A minimum setback of 150 feet is required from all lined evapotranspiration systems. When a leak detection system is used, the minimum required distance is 50 feet to existing private water wells. 
(4)  Public water wells. A minimum setback of 200 feet is required from all public water wells. 
(e)  Owners of water wells installed prior to February 8, 1993, are exempt from the construction requirements set forth in this section. 
(f)  A variance in subsection (a) of this section may be approved by the town council, provided that all other requirements of this section are met. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 11.04)  
Secs. 70-565—70-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC UTILITIES COMPANIES 
 
Sec. 70-601. - Granted consent to use and occupy streets. 
The public utility companies operating in the town are hereby expressly granted consent to use and occupy the public streets, avenues, alleys, public grounds and ways for the purposes of laying, maintaining, constructing, operating and replacing therein and thereon any and all poles, wires, anchors, cables, manholes, conduits, pipes, lines and all necessary or desirable appurtenances for the purposes of supplying public utilities to the citizens of the town subject to the regulations contained in this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 1.01)  
Sec. 70-602. - General regulations. 
(a)  Poles, structures and other appurtenances shall be so erected and maintained as not to interfere unreasonably with traffic over streets and alleys. The location of all poles, conduits and other structures shall be fixed under the supervision of the town engineer, but such supervision shall not interfere unreasonably with the proper operation of such lines by the utility. 
(b)  Utility companies shall promptly clean up and restore to an approximate original condition, at their own cost, all thoroughfares and other services which they may disturb and when any such utility company shall make or cause to be made any excavation in the street or shall place any obstruction in the street, alley or other public place, the public shall be protected by barriers and lights placed, erected and maintained by the utility company. No street, alley, highway or public place shall be encumbered for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute the work. 
(c)  The utility company shall, if possible, remove, raise or lower their wires or lines temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the benefited party, and the utility company may require such payments in advance. Any permanent move of any utility line, wire or equipment shall be paid for by the benefited party and only subject to the express consent of the utility company and with the appropriate permit and inspection by the building official of the town. 
(d)  The utility companies are granted the right and permission to trim and remove trees or other obstructions to existing lines under the supervision of the building official of the town. 
(e)  All poles placed on public property shall be of sound material and reasonably straight, and shall be placed so that they will not interfere with the flow of water in any gutter or drain, and so that the poles will interfere as little as practical with the ordinary travel on the street or sidewalk. As of the time of this article, all utility lines are placed underground within the town, and the regulations included in this article shall not affect such requirement. 
(f)  Lines should be placed so that they will not interfere with ordinary travel on the street, alley or sidewalk where they are situated. The location and route of all equipment and lines shall be subject to the reasonable and proper regulation, control and direction of the building official of the town under appropriate town ordinances. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 1.02)  
Sec. 70-603. - Emergency evacuation. 
Public utility companies may perform emergency work during the night hours or at times during which the town hall is closed, but it shall be necessary for such public utility company to obtain the necessary permit as required by this article on the first day thereafter that the town hall is open for business. 
(Code 1989, ch. 3, § 13.07)  
Sec. 70-604. - Article provisions do not affect franchises. 
The passage of this article shall not affect the rights and privileges of public utilities under existing franchise agreements granted by ordinance of the town. The town hereby expressly reserves the right to amend the requirements of this article so as to provide reasonable regulations for the operations of public utilities within the town, so long as such regulations do not violate any provisions of the existing franchise agreements. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 1.03)  
Sec. 70-605. - Street rental fee. 
(a)  Every public utility company doing business within the town is hereby assessed, as street rental, a sum equal to two percent of its gross revenues received from sale of its utility products from all residential, industrial, commercial, governmental and municipal business conducted within the corporate limits of the town for the preceding 12 months. Payments shall be made annually. 
(b)  The amounts set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be paid and received as streets, alleys and public places rentals and is not in lieu of the usual general or special ad valorem taxes now or hereafter levied upon the real and personal property of the utility company. 
(c)  In order to determine the gross receipts received by the company within the corporate limits, the company shall, on the same date payments are tendered, file with the town secretary a sworn report showing the gross receipts received from the sale of its services within the corporate limits for the preceding 12-month period as set out in this section. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 1.04)  
Sec. 70-606. - Inspection of utility poles, wires, pipelines and other fixtures in public places. 
The town engineer, and any other person designated by the town, shall have the power, and it shall be their duty to examine and inspect from time-to-time all telephone, telegraph, electric light or other poles, lines, conduits, gas pipe lines, pipes and other fixtures in the public places of the town, for the purposes of seeing that all the same are in a safe and suitable condition. When any such item is found to be unsafe or unsuitable for the purpose for which it is used, the person using, possessing or maintaining the same shall be notified and required to place the same in a safe and suitable condition. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 1.05)  
Sec. 70-607. - Reservation of right to adopt further restrictions and regulations. 
The town hereby reserves the right to put in effect at any time other restrictions and regulations as to the maintenance of poles, wires, pipes and conduits, and other appurtenance in the streets, easements, alleys and other public ways of the town, and from time-to-time to require such poles, pipes, wires, gas pipe lines, conduits and other property, equipment and fixtures as it may deem proper to be removed without cost to the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 1.06)  
Secs. 70-608—70-640. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ON-SITE SEWERAGE FACILITIES 
 
Secs. 70-641—70-740. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - WATER, WASTEWATER, STORMWATER, AND DETENTION FACILITY IMPROVEMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-03, § 2, amended art. X in its entirety and enacted new provisions as set out herein. The former art. X pertained to water and sewer main extensions and derived from Code 1989, ch. 11, §§ 13.01—13.07. 
 
Sec. 70-741. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Capacity means the quantity of water, wastewater, or stormwater that can be distributed, or conveyed, through water mains, wastewater mains, lift stations, stormwater drain lines, or detention facilities. 
Consumer means the actual user of water, stormwater, and/or wastewater service provided by the town. 
Frontage means the side of the lot on which the legal address is located. 
Off-site improvements means water main extensions, wastewater main extensions, lift stations, stormwater drain lines, and/or detention facilities constructed totally outside of a developed property. 
On-site improvements means water main extensions, wastewater main extensions, lift stations, stormwater drain lines, and/or detention facilities constructed totally within a developed property. 
Pro rata means a monetary fee charged to a consumer, property owner, or developer to pay for the installation, extension or any related construction cost of water, stormwater, and/or wastewater service as provided for in this article. 
Pro rata agreement means an agreement between the town and a developer, approved by the town council, establishing reimbursement procedures for the cost of water main extensions, wastewater main extensions, lift stations, stormwater drain lines, and/or detention facilities constructed by said developer. 
Property owners means the record titleholder of premises served with or to be served with water, stormwater, and/or wastewater service from a connection by the town. 
Town means the Town of Flower Mound. 
(Ord. No. 72-03, § 2, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 70-742. - Pro rata charges. 
(a)  On and after the passage of this article, the town may impose a service charge due on all property for which water main extensions, wastewater main extensions, stormwater drain lines, lift stations, and/or detention facilities are constructed, completed and accepted by the town. This charge shall be called the "pro rata" charge for water, stormwater, and/or wastewater construction. The pro rata charge shall represent the calculated cost of providing water, stormwater, and wastewater service to the property on which the pro rata charge is paid. No charge or assessment referenced in this article is or shall be deemed an impact fee, as defined in chapter 395 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
(b)  The town may extend or construct water mains, stormwater drain lines, wastewater mains, lift stations, and detention facilities in the streets and alleys, or easements, within the town limits of the town in order to permit connections by those desiring water, stormwater, and wastewater services. Upon approval of a pro rata agreement by the town council, a pro rata charge shall be made against each lot or tract of land, and the owner thereof, whose water or wastewater line shall be hereafter connected with any water mains or wastewater mains, or whose stormwater or wastewater is conveyed through or to a stormwater drain line, lift station or detention facility. The pro rata charge shall be based on the calculated cost of the water main extensions, stormwater drain lines, wastewater main extensions, lift stations, and/or detention facilities as constructed, for the area served, and as approved by ordinance of the town council. The ordinance shall include an exhibit listing the affected properties and the amounts of the pro rata charges, which will be due from each property. The ordinance shall also include a location map of the improvements. The property exhibit and location map documents shall be a part of this article for all purposes when approved by an ordinance of the town council. 
(c)  In addition to the pro rata charge on water main extensions, stormwater drain lines, wastewater main extensions, lift stations, and detention facilities, the property owner must pay all other charges related to the connection and/or service, including but not limited to, impact and permit fees as established by the town. 
(Ord. No. 72-03, § 2, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 70-743. - Extension of water, stormwater, and wastewater lines to individual property owners (as distinguished from residential or commercial development). 
(a)  Where extensions of water mains, wastewater mains, and stormwater drain lines are requested by an individual property owner to serve a given lot or tract of land, and upon approval of the town, the property owner requesting extension of water mains, wastewater mains and stormwater drain lines to his property may have the water mains, wastewater mains, and stormwater drain lines extended by a utility contractor. In this case, the town will consider and herein refer to the property owner as "the developer." 
(b)  The town shall determine the adequate size of any new water main, wastewater main, or stormwater drain line, and its decision will be final. The developer shall extend the water main, wastewater main, or stormwater drain line, including all valves, hydrants, manholes, cleanouts, service stub-outs and appurtenances, the distance along the frontage of all intervening properties and along his frontage necessary to provide for the future extension of the main or line. Detailed construction plans for the improvements shall be drawn by a professional engineer and approved by the town prior to any construction. The improvements shall be subject to all town requirements for the construction of water mains, wastewater mains, or stormwater drain lines, including but not limited to, permits, inspections, and associated fees. The construction shall be inspected and approved by the town prior to final acceptance. 
(c)  The total costs of extending the water mains, wastewater mains, or stormwater drain lines to and across the owner's property shall be borne solely by the owner. Reimbursements for any water mains, wastewater mains, or stormwater drain lines are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Prior to final acceptance of the improvements, the developer may submit to the town a written request for the establishment of pro rata charges on the improvements. The request shall include documentation of the costs associated with the construction of the water mains, wastewater mains, or stormwater drain lines including a copy of the actual construction contract with unit prices. The request may result in a pro rata agreement between the developer and the town, after negotiation, subject to provisions of subsection 2., below, if approved in accordance with this article. 
2.  The town engineer, or his designated representative, shall verify the developer's calculations for reimbursement. In the event of a discrepancy, the town engineer, or his designated representative, shall establish the calculated cost per front foot for the pro rata charge, and his decision shall be final. 
3.  Upon approval of a pro rata agreement by the town council, the town will reimburse to the developer pro rata charges received from consumers, property owners, or other developers who desire to connect to the water mains, wastewater mains, or stormwater drain lines, with the total reimbursement not to exceed the amount of the developer's cost of off-site improvements. 
4.  The owners of all intervening property served by any water main, wastewater main, or stormwater drain line described herein shall be required to pay the pro rata charges provided for herein prior to the release of any construction permit for the property. 
5.  The maximum period of time for the pro rata reimbursement to the developer for the off-site water mains, wastewater mains, or stormwater drain lines shall not exceed ten years. 
(Ord. No. 72-03, § 2, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 70-744. - Extension of water mains, wastewater mains and stormwater drain lines to developments and within developments. 
(a)  Extension to residential or commercial developments. Where extensions of water mains, wastewater mains, or stormwater drain lines are required to serve property which has been subdivided or platted for development and resale, the costs of off-site mains fronting on property not owned by the developer but required and necessary to connect property to be developed shall be borne solely by the developer. The town shall determine the adequate size of any new water mains, wastewater mains, or stormwater drain lines, and its decision will be final. Reimbursements for the construction of any water mains, wastewater mains, or stormwater drain lines are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Prior to final acceptance of the improvements, the developer may submit to the town a written request for the establishment of pro rata charges on the improvements. The request shall include documentation of the costs associated with the construction of the water mains, wastewater mains, or stormwater drain lines, including a copy of the actual construction contract with unit prices. The request may result in a pro rata agreement between the developer and the town, after negotiation, subject to provisions of subsection 2., below, if approved in accordance with this article. 
2.  The town engineer, or his designated representative, shall verify the developer's calculations for reimbursement. In the event of a discrepancy, the town engineer, or his designated representative, shall establish the calculated cost per front foot for the pro rata charge, and his decision shall be final. 
3.  Upon approval of a pro rata agreement by the town council, the town will reimburse to the developer pro rata charges received from applicants who desire to connect to the water mains, wastewater mains, or stormwater drain lines, with the total reimbursement not to exceed the amount of the developer's cost of off-site improvements. 
4.  The developers of all intervening property served by any water main, wastewater main, or stormwater drain line described herein shall be required to pay the pro rata charges provided for herein prior to the preconstruction meeting for their development project. 
5.  The maximum period of time for the pro rata reimbursement to the developer for the off-site mains shall not exceed ten years. 
(b)  Oversized water and wastewater mains within residential or commercial developments. Developers shall bear the entire costs of water and wastewater main extensions within their developments, except that on any mains larger than 12-inch, the town may elect to participate in the cost and refund the difference between the cost of the oversized main and the 12-inch main. The town shall determine the adequate size of such water and wastewater mains, and its decision will be final. 
(c)  Lift stations and detention facilities within residential developments. 
1.  In the event a lift station or detention facility with capacity that exceeds the area necessary to serve a development is required, the developer may submit a written request for the establishment of a pro rata charge for the lift station or detention facility. The pro rata charge for lift stations and detention facilities shall be calculated on a cost-per-acre, per-tract basis for properties within the approved service area. The costs eligible for the reimbursement of constructing a lift station may include the lift station, force main and other appurtenances. The request may result in a pro rata agreement between the developer and the town, after negotiation, subject to provisions of subsection 2., below, if approved in accordance with this article. 
2.  The town engineer, or his designated representative, shall verify the area served by the lift station or detention facility, as well as the developer's calculations for reimbursement. In the event of a discrepancy, the town engineer, or his designated representative, shall establish the service area and calculated cost per acre, per tract for the pro rata charge, and his decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 72-03, § 2, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 70-745. - Water and wastewater connection charges. 
Each property owner or developer shall furnish materials and shall install all water service lines, and wastewater laterals from the mains to the right-of-way line at his own expense to meet the standard details and specifications and the approval of the town. The property owner and/or developer shall pay all permit fees, including impact and inspection fees, prior to the release of a construction permit by the town. 
(Ord. No. 72-03, § 2, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 70-746. - No funds available. 
In no event will the town be required to make extensions or participate in the cost of improvements under the provisions of this article if there are no funds available or if, at the discretion of the town, the extension or improvements are not practical. 
(Ord. No. 72-03, § 2, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 70-747. - Method of enforcing payment. 
Nothing herein shall be deemed in any way to be an exclusive method of enforcing the payment of the pro rata or improvement costs against the property owners, developers, and/or consumers and this procedure shall not be deemed in any manner to be a waiver of the town's right to validly assess the affected property owners, developers, and/or consumers for cost of the construction of water mains, stormwater drain lines, wastewater mains, lift stations, and detention facilities to fix and enforce liens against said property, all of which may be done as provided by ordinance in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 72-03, § 2, 11-3-2003)  
Secs. 70-748—70-774. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - MUNICIPAL STORMWATER UTILITY SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 70-775. - Established. 
The town council hereby establishes a municipal stormwater utility system for the town. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, § 2, 1-23-2003)  
Sec. 70-776. - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.044, as amended, are hereby adopted, except as modified here: 
(a)  Service area means the geographic areas within the municipal boundaries of the town. 
(b)  Drainage charge means i) the levy imposed to recover the cost of service of the town in furnishing and maintaining drainage for any benefited property, and ii) an amount made in contribution to funding of future drainage system construction by the town. 
(c)  Impervious surface means the area of a structure or other improvement upon land that causes an impervious coverage of the soil under the structure or improvement, as shown on the land area data maintained by the county appraisal district (or other applicable appraisal district, as the case may be) or as calculated from site plans submitted for the purpose of obtaining a building permit. When information from both sources is available, the town engineer shall determine which source more accurately establishes the impervious area, and shall utilize that source. 
(d)  Property area means the property area of each lot or tract as shown on the land area data maintained by the county appraisal district (or other applicable appraisal district, as the case may be). 
(e)  Stormwater utility system (SWUS) fee means the total drainage charge for a property. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, § 2(I), 1-23-2003)  
Sec. 70-777. - Schedule of charges. 
Every property owner and town service customer shall be responsible for paying the SWUS fee for the benefited property. The fee for residential property is based on the size of a residential lot including less than one acre, one to five acres, or above five acres. The multi-family, commercial and industrial rates are based on the size of a commercial/industrial building including less than 25,000 square feet, 25,000 to 50,000 square feet, and above 50,000 square feet. 
Those parcels and lots on which there is situated stormwater detention facilities or which parcels and lots are part of a larger unified development or subdivision that provided stormwater detention facilities as a component of the development of such project ("qualified parcel") may be entitled to receive a 17 percent discount from and against the SWUS fee (the "discount"). It shall be the obligation of the owner of any qualified parcel to request the discount. The town shall have no liability for failing to apply this discount on any qualified parcel. Neither shall the town have any liability for, responsibility or obligation to refund, credit, or reimburse any discount created by this provision which is collected by the town on a qualified parcel. 
The amount of the SWUS fee to be paid is broken down by land use type and size of property both with and without the discounts as discussed herein-above. The provisions reflecting such information are contained in appendix A, fee schedule, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, § 2(II), 1-23-2003; Ord. No. 67-06, § 3, 10-16-2006; Ord. No. 33-09, § 2, 9-8-2009)  
Sec. 70-778. - Levy of fees. 
After the passage of this article and commencing with the February 2003 utility billing cycle, the schedule of drainage charges shall be levied. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, § 2(III), 1-23-2003)  
Sec. 70-779. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The town exempts the following governmental entities and all lots or tracts in which it holds a freehold interest and that are being used by the governmental entity exclusively for public purposes, from the levy of drainage charge: 
(1)  All independent school districts; 
(2)  The town. 
(b)  The town exempts the following categories of utility customers from the levy of the drainage charge: 
(1)  Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately owned drainage system. 
(2)  Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed has been accepted by the town. 
(3)  A subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the town. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, § 2(IV), 1-23-2003)  
Sec. 70-780. - Billing, deposits and expenditures. 
(a)  The town will bill for drainage services on the monthly utility bill along with water, sewer and solid waste services, as may be applicable. In the event the property has no associated utility bill, the town may place the charge on an adjacent property under the same ownership, or may establish a separate utility account. 
(b)  There will be no separate deposit required for initial service. A deposit will be required following any discontinuance for delinquent payment. 
(c)  In the case of a delinquent payment of the monthly utility bill, which includes the drainage charge, pursuant to V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 402.050, the town manager is hereby authorized to discontinue service of all town utilities for nonpayment, even if the amount in dispute is the drainage charge component of the monthly utility bill. The town manager is also authorized to employ other remedies at law to recover any charge not paid when due. 
(d)  The income of the SWUS fee shall be segregated and completely identifiable in the town accounts. The moneys received from utility drainage charges shall be used only for purposes that are directly or indirectly related to the surface water drainage utility system. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, § 2(V), 1-23-2003)  
Secs. 70-781—70-799. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - NATURAL GAS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-02, §§ 1—18, adopted Dec. 16, 2002, adopted general service rates, including rate adjustment provisions and miscellaneous service charges, for sales and distribution of natural gas to customers of TXU Gas Distribution. Said rates are attached to said ordinance as exhibit A and are on file in the office of the town secretary. 
 
Secs. 70-801—70-824. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - CABLE TELEVISION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 632, §§ 1—8, adopted Oct. 7, 2002, established maximum rates that Communication Services, Inc., dba AT&T Broadband, may charge subscribers of Flower Mound Cable Television for programming, equipment and installation costs for the period from June 1, 2002, through May 30, 2003. Said rates are attached to said ordinance as exhibit A and are on file in the office of the town secretary. 
 
Secs. 70-825—70-1000. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 65-11, § 3 states that: "This ordinance shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, except where the provisions of this ordinance are in direct conflict with the provisions of such ordinances, in which event the conflicting provisions of such ordinances are hereby repealed." 
 
DIVISION 1. - TITLE, PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 70-1001. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Stormwater Quality Management and Discharge Control Ordinance" of the Town of Flower Mound and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1002. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of citizens, and protect and enhance the water quality, and to satisfy the appropriate water quality requirements of the TPDES general permit issued pursuant to V.T.C.A. Water Code, § 26.040 of the Texas and Section 402 of the Clean Water Act, by reducing the discharge of pollutants from the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1003. - Definitions. 
The term used in the article shall have the following meanings: 
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Best management practices ("BMP") means the schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, structural controls, local ordinances, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants. BMP also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control runoff, spills or leaks, waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage areas. 
Clean Water Act (CWA) means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251, et seq., and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Commercial activity means any public or private activity involved in the storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or sale of goods and/or commodities or providing professional and/or non professional services. 
Construction or construction site means causing or carrying out any building, bulk heading, filling, clearing, excavation, or substantial improvement to land or the size of any structure. 
Discharge, when used without a qualifier, refers to the discharge of stormwater runoff or certain non-stormwater discharges as allowed under the authorization of the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("TPDES") general permit. 
Fundraising car wash means the washing of a vehicle, by someone other than the vehicle's owner, at an event for the sole benefit of a charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational or civic institution. 
Hazardous material means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quality, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Illicit connection means any man-made conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to a municipal separate storm sewer. 
Illegal discharge means any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not entirely composed of stormwater, except discharges authorized under the TPDES general permit or a separate authorization and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities. 
Industrial activity means manufacturing, processing, material storage, and waste material disposal areas (and similar areas where stormwater can contact industrial pollutants related to the industrial activity) at an industrial facility described by the TPDES multi sector general permit TXR050000, or by another TCEQ or TPDES permit. 
Mobile car wash means a business providing or equipped to provide vehicle cleaning or detailing services for a vehicle owner at a non-fixed location. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, bar ditches or storm drains): 
(1)  Owned and operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the Clean Water Act (CWA) that discharges to waters of the United States; 
(2)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
(3)  Which is not a combined sewer; and 
(4)  Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW). [40 CFR 122.26(b)(8)]. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials; radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment; rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Pollution means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, are injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property or the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Remediation means the abatement or removal of pollution or contaminants from land or water (including sediments in waterways) for the general protection of human health and the environment. 
Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial waste are not intentionally passed. 
Stormwater and stormwater runoff means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom, including but not limited to, rainfall runoff, snow melt runoff and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater management program ("SWMP") means a comprehensive program to manage the quality of discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). 
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Stormwater Discharge Permits means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
Town means the Town of Flower Mound. 
Town manager means the town council appointed manager of the town, or his/her designee. 
Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any of its portions. 
Waters of the United States ("U.S.") (40 CFR 230.3(s)) means: 
(1)  All waters which are currently used, or were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; 
(2)  All interstate waters including interstate wetlands; 
(3)  All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds, the use, degradation or destruction of which could affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters: 
a.  Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes; or 
b.  From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or 
c.  Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce; 
(4)  All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; 
(5)  Tributaries of waters identified in paragraphs (s)(1) through (4) of this section; 
(6)  The territorial sea; 
(7)  Wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in paragraphs (s)(1) through (6) of this section; waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of CWA (other than cooling ponds as defined in 40 CFR 423.11(m) which also meet the criteria of this definition) are not waters of the United States. 
Waters of the United States do not include prior converted cropland. Notwithstanding the determination of an area's status as prior converted cropland by any other federal agency, for the purposes of the Clean Water Act, the final authority regarding Clean Water Act jurisdiction remains with EPA. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1004. - Applicability and effective dates. 
This article, including any amendments or revisions thereto, shall apply to all water entering the municipal separate storm sewer system generated on or flowing over any developed and undeveloped land lying within the town. 
The provision and requirements of this article shall become effective upon its adoption by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1005. - Responsibility for administration. 
The town manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1006. - Severability. 
The provisions of the article are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person, establishing, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this article. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1007. - Regulatory consistency. 
This article shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirement of the Clean Water Act, and any amendments thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1008. - Ultimate responsibility of discharger. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the state caused by said person. This article shall not create liability on the part of the town, or any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from any discharger's reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS 
 
Sec. 70-1009. - Prohibition of illegal discharges. 
No person or entity shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal separate storm sewer system or waters of the state any material, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. Waste deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection is exempted from this prohibition. 
(a)  Illegal discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system or waters of the state include, but are not limited to, the following types of discharges and are prohibited, unless the discharge is permitted under a separate TPDES permit, or as allowed by the proper application of BMP adopted by the town: 
(1)  A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, a TPDES permit (other than the TPDES permit for discharges from the MS4). 
(2)  Water from the cleaning of gas stations, vehicles services garages, or other types of vehicles service facilities. 
(3)  Water, cleansers, or solvents from the cleaning of vehicles, machinery or equipment, and other such commercial and industrial activities. 
(4)  Water from the washing or rinsing of vehicles containing soap, detergents, solvents, or other cleaners (an individual washing his/her private vehicle is exempt per subsection (b) of this section). 
(5)  Water from the washing or rinsing of vehicles engine, with or without soap from auto body repair shop. 
(6)  Water from the cleaning or rinsing of vehicle engine, undercarriage, or auto parts cleaning. 
(7)  Vehicle fluids. 
(8)  Mat wash and hood cleaning water from food services facilities. 
(9)  Food and kitchen cleaning water from food services facilities. 
(10)  Leakage from dumpsters, trash containers, or grease traps and containers. 
(11)  Water from the cleaning or rising of garbage dumpster areas and areas where garbage or waste is stored or contained. 
(12)  Water from pressure washing, steam cleaning, and hand scrubbing of sidewalks, gutters, plazas, alleyways, outdoor eating areas, steps, building exteriors, walls, driveways, and other outdoor surfaces. 
(13)  Wastewater or cleaning fluids from carpet cleaning. 
(14)  Swimming pools and spa water; 
(15)  Water out from concrete trucks; Any concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or hydromulch material, or material from the cleaning of commercial vehicles or equipment containing, or used in transporting or applying, such material; 
(16)  Runoff from areas where hazardous substances, including diesel fuel, gasoline and motor oil are stored, except as allowed by section 70-1011. 
(17)  Super-chlorinated water normally associated with the disinfection of potable water systems. 
(18)  Debris, such as, but not limited to construction debris and sediment, trash, yard waste, grass clippings, leaves, paint, and wash water. 
(19)  Sewage or other forms of pollutants from commercial and/or residential facilities and recreational activities. 
(20)  Agricultural stormwater runoff. 
(21)  A mobile car wash. 
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm sewer system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(b)  Discharge from the following sources will not be considered a source of pollutants to the storm sewer system and to the state when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present; therefore, discharges from the following list shall not be considered illegal discharges, unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Clean Water Act or this article: 
(1)  Potable water line flushing; 
(2)  Pumped groundwater not containing pollutants and other discharges from potable water sources; 
(3)  Landscape irrigation and lawn watering; 
(4)  Diverted stream flows; 
(5)  Rising ground water; 
(6)  Ground water infiltration (as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20)) not containing pollutants; 
(7)  Water from crawl space pumps not containing pollutants; 
(8)  Air conditioning condensations; 
(9)  Non-industrial roof drains not containing pollutants; 
(10)  Springs; 
(11)  An individual washing his/her private vehicle(s) (except as provided in subsection (a) of this section); 
(12)  flow from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(13)  de-chlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(14)  flow from fire fighting; or 
(15)  flow from a fundraising car wash. 
(c)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an TPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the state under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharge is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and the applicable law and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by the town. The town may exempt in writing other non-stormwater discharge which are not a source of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system or Waters of the state. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1010. - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(a)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(b)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1011. - Discharges in violation of industrial or construction activity TPDES stormwater discharge permit. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity TPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the town manager prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 70-1012. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants. 
(a)  Authorization to adopt and impose best management practices. The town may adopt requirements identifying BMP for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, or waters of the state as a separate best management practice of the stormwater management program. Where BMP requirements are promulgated by the town or any federal, state, or regional agency for any activity, operation, or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the storm sewer system or waters of the U.S., every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements. 
The town manager will periodically report to the town council on the status of implementation of BMP and any new BMP to be developed for inclusion in the town's stormwater management program. 
(b)  New development and redevelopment. The town may require any owner or person developing real property to identify appropriate BMP to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants. The town shall incorporate such requirements in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required in this article and the town stormwater utility ordinance, Chapter 70, Article XI of this Code. (Required by SmartGrowth and the Design Standards) 
These requirements may include a combination of structure and non-structural BMP, and shall include requirements to ensure the proper long term operation and maintenance of these BMP. 
(c)  Construction sites. BMP to reduce pollutants in any stormwater runoff activity shall be incorporated in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit. The owner and developer shall comply with terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlement and building permits as required by the town. 
(d)  Responsibility to implement best management practices. Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated pursuant to subsections (a), (b), and (c) above, any person or entity engaged in activity or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, or waters of the state shall implement BMP to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. Facilities designed to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's expense. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1013. - Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges. 
Notwithstanding the requirements of 70-1019 herein, the town manager may require by written notice that a person or entities responsible for an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1014. - Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections. 
(a)  The town manager may require by written notice that a person or entity responsible for an illicit connection to the storm sewer system comply with the requirements of this article to eliminate or to secure approval for the illicit connection by a specified date, regardless of whether the connection or discharge has been established or approved prior to the effective date of this Article. 
(b)  If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this article, the responsible person or entity can demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur, said person or entity may request town approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible party's expense. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1015. - Watercourse protection. 
Every person or entity owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such owner's lessee shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other manmade or unnatural obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner or such owner's lessee shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1016. - Requirement to remediate. 
Whenever the town manager finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, or waters of the U.S., the town manager may require by written notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person or entity that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a specified time pursuant to the provision of Sections 70-1021—70-1023 below. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1017. - Requirement to monitor and analyze. 
The town manager may require by written notice that any person or entity engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating a facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illegal discharge, and/or non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system or waters of the state, to undertake at said person's or entity's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the town as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1018. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of material which are resulting or may result in illegal discharge or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system or waters of the state from said facilities, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such releases. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of non-hazardous material, said person shall notify the town manager in person or by phone or facsimile no later than 5:00 pm of the next business day. Notification in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the environmental services within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment hall also retain an onsite written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
For site development or construction activities already regulated under a TPDES general construction permit, which is limited to: Construction activities that disturb less than 1 acre; small construction activities that disturb one acre to five acres; large construction activities that disturb five acres or greater; or a common plan of development, relative to erosion and sediment control, the TPDES general construction permit shall regulate said activities and exempt the operator from the spill notification requirements relative to sediment and/or erosion control. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTION AND MONITORING 
 
Sec. 70-1019. - Authority to inspect. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this Article, or whenever the town manager has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this article, the town manager may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and copy records related to stormwater compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the town is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1020. - Authority to sample, establish sampling devices, and test. 
During any inspection as provided herein, the town manager may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 70-1021. - Enforcement and administration. 
(1)  Violations of provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute an offense punishable by fine not to exceed $2,000.00 per violation, per day. Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in accordance with the provisions of this article. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(2)  The owner or operator of any facility, construction site, structure, premises, or party thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(3)  Violations of this article may be remedied using the procedures set forth in section 1-13 of this Code, entitled General Penalty; continuing violations. These remedies shall be in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the town to address any violation of this article. In addition, the town manager may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharge; 
c.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and 
d.  The implementation of source control or treatment BMP. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1022. - Emergency abatement. 
The town manager is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this article that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well being of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the town manager, the town is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the town shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent the town from seeking other and further relief authorized under this article. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1023. - Compensatory action. 
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the town manager may impose upon violator alternative compensatory actions such as storm sewer stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1024. - Violation deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored by the town at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the town. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1025. - Stop orders. 
(1)  The town manager shall retain the authority to issue stop work orders for any construction site in violation of this article. 
(2)  If the town manager determines that compliance is not being attained, that a construction site is operating in a dangerous or unsafe manner, or that conditions exist at a construction site that may lead to an illicit discharge, upon written notice of an issuance of a stop work order, such work or conditions shall be immediately terminated or remedied. Written notice of such action shall be provided to the owner, operator, and responsible party of the construction site and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. However, where an emergency exists which may result in discharge of hazardous materials or other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health and safety, or are likely to result in immediate injury and harm to property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat written notice shall be delivered as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1026. - Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any provision of any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter may also be in violation of the Clean Water Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this article shall also include written notice to the violator of such potential liability. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1027. - Civil penalties to be deposited in the stormwater utility fund. 
Any civil penalties collected by the town as a result of violations of this article shall be deposited in the stormwater utility fund. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
DIVISION 6. - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 70-1028. - Injunctive relief. 
When the town manager finds that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the town manager may petition any court of competent jurisdiction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance by that person of any requirement imposed by this article or any order issued hereunder. The town manager may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for a violator to conduct environmental remediation, abatement, or restoration. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a violator. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1029. - Civil suit under the Texas Water Code. 
Whenever it appears that a violation of any provision of the Texas Water Code, or any rule, permit, or order of the TCEQ, has occurred or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the town, exclusive of its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the town, in the same manner as the TCEQ, may have a suit instituted in a state district court, through its attorney, for the injunctive relief or civil penalties or both authorized in V.T.C.A., Water Code, ch. 7, against the person who committed or is committing or threatening to commit the violation. This power is exercised pursuant to V.T.C.A., Water Code, ch. 7, and in suits brought thereunder, the TCEQ shall be a necessary and indispensible party. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
Sec. 70-1030. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The town may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. The town is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any violator. These actions may be taken concurrently. All remedies are cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 65-11, § 2, 12-19-2011) 

Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS  
Chapter 74 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Purpose of subpart B of this Code. 
The regulations of subpart B of this Code have been established in accordance with the comprehensive master plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the town. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the districts and their peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the town consistent with the comprehensive master plan. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 1.02)  
Sec. 74-2. - Rules for construction of language. 
(a)  Generally. All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in subpart B of this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the town council may be fully implemented. 
(b)  Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. In the computation of time for public hearing notice, both the first day (day of the advertisement) and the last day (day of the hearing) shall be excluded. The following time-related words shall have the meanings ascribed: 
(1)  Day means a calendar day, unless working day is specified. 
(2)  Week means seven calendar days. 
(3)  Month means a calendar month. 
(4)  Year means a calendar year, unless a fiscal year is indicated. 
(c)  Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(3)  "Either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(d)  Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize professional-level subordinates to perform the required act or duty, unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
(e)  Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
(f)  Number. A word indicating the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. The use of the plural number shall be deemed to include any single person or thing, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(g)  Public officials, bodies and agencies. All public officials, bodies and agencies to which reference is made are those of the town, unless otherwise indicated. 
(h)  Shall and may. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(i)  Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or present, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(j)  Text. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this subpart B and any illustration or figure, the text shall control. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 2.01)  
Sec. 74-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in subpart B of this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use means a use subordinate to and incidental to the primary use of the main building or to the primary use of the premises. 
Accessory building, attached means an integral portion of a main building devoted to uses incidental and accessory to the main use, such as an attached garage, storage area or carport. 
Accessory building, detached means a freestanding building designed and used for functions incidental and accessory to the main use, such as a garden shelter, separate garage, carport or storage house. 
Advertising matter means any written or graphic message intended to convey any information other than a business, subdivision, development or complex name, logo and address including, but not limited to, specific products or services offered for sale and prices of goods and services. 
Alley means a space or thoroughfare that affords only secondary means of access to property abutting thereon. 
Alley, public means an alley that has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use. 
Alley, private means the secondary access easement to a platted lot that is not dedicated to the public and is not publicly maintained. The term "private alley" shall include both the pavement and the easement area for such private alley. 
Basement means a building story having at least one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall not be counted as a story in computing building height. 
Berm means a manmade mound of earth that is landscaped and used for screening. 
Block means an area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings; or if such word is used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two streets that intersect such street. 
Board means the board of adjustment of the town. 
Building means any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind. When subdivided in a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire, each portion so subdivided may be deemed a separate building. 
Building complex means two or more buildings located on a single tract of land and commonly known by one name and generally all of the same use. 
Building ends means those sides of a building having the least dimensions as compared to the front or rear of a building. As used in subpart B of this Code for the building spacing regulations for multiple-family dwellings, a building end shall be interpreted as being the most narrow side of a building, regardless of whether it fronts upon a street, faces the rear of the lot or is adjacent to the side lot line or another building. 
Building entry point means a main entry area for a building that is used by pedestrians and as a conveyance, generally located between the entry door and the parking spaces. 
Building, freestanding, means a single building designed to house one business and not attached in any way to another building or structure. 
Building, front of, means that part of a building that either faces an arterial or collector street, or has the legal address of the building affixed or posted to it. If the locations described in this definition are in conflict with one another, the front of a building shall be that part of a building that is viewed most by the general public as determined by the town manager. 
Building line means a line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line or property line, at a specified distance therefrom, establishing the minimum distance from the street line or property line that a building may be erected. 
Building, main, means the building on a lot that are occupied by the primary use. 
Building, multitenant, means a nonresidential building designed and built to house the operations of more than one place of business. 
Building official means the chief building official or building inspectors charged with the responsibility of issuing permits and enforcing chapter 14 of this Code of Ordinances. 
Building, single-tenant, means a nonresidential building designed and constructed to house the individual operation of any one place of business. 
Business/office park means a commercial development consisting of two or more platted lots with two or more buildings with single and multitenant uses. 
Candela means a measurement quantified in units of luminous intensity in any given direction. It is also commonly referred to as candlepower. 
Canopy means a roof system designed to provide a protective cover for an outdoor activity supported by a system of structural columns. 
Carport means a roofed structure open on at least one side and used or designed to be used for the storage of one or more vehicles. 
Cellar. See Basement. 
Certificate of occupancy means an official certificate issued by the town through the enforcing official that indicates conformance with, or approved conditional waiver from, the zoning and subdivision regulations of subpart B of this Code and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued. 
Commissioners means county commissioners of the commissioners court of Denton, Dallas or Tarrant County. 
Compatibility buffer means landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. 
Comprehensive master plan means the comprehensive master plan of the town and adjoining areas adopted by the planning and zoning commission and town council, including all of its revisions. The plan indicates the general locations recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, parks, water, wastewater and drainage facilities and other public and private developments and improvements. 
Comprehensive sign package means a combination of signs, as defined or as proposed for a particular development as an architectural structure, including but not limited to monuments, statues, art work, and towers that is designed specifically to enhance the unique quality of a proposed development. 
Corner development means any project, subdivision, or one or more integrally related buildings built upon a tract of land that is platted adjacent to at least two arterial or collector streets. 
Council means the town council (governing and legislative body). 
County means the county in which the subject property is located: Denton, Dallas or Tarrant County. 
Cul-de-sac means a street that terminates at one end. 
Cutoff angle means an angle, measured from nadir, between the vertical axis and the first line of sight at which the bare source is not visible. See illustration 8.14.1. following chapter 98, zoning. 
Decibel means a unit for measurement of relative loudness of sounds, equal to the smallest difference of loudness detectable by the human ear. 
Development means any project, subdivision or one or more integrally related buildings built upon a tract of land. 
Development plan means the plan for the subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land that is not to be recorded of record, but is only a proposed division of land for review and study by the town. 
Disability glare means the effect of stray light in the eye whereby visibility and visual performance are reduced. A direct glare source that produces discomfort can also produce disability glare by introducing a measurable amount of stray light in the eye. 
District means a section of the town for which the regulations governing the height, area or use of the land and buildings are uniform. 
District, nonresidential, means one of the following zoning districts: O, R-1, R-2, C-1, C-2, I-1, I-2, WR, REC, or any portion of a PD district devoted to nonresidential use. 
District, residential, means one of the following zoning districts: A, SF-E, SF-30, SF-15, SF-10, SF-A, 2F, MF, MH, or any portion of a PD district devoted to residential use. 
Dripline means the approximately circular area directly beneath the leaf canopy of a tree, where most of the tree's feed roots are located. 
Driveway means an area providing vehicular access between a street and an off-street parking or loading area. 
Drop lens means a luminaire with a lens that extends below the housing of the luminaire. See illustration 8.14.2 following chapter 98, zoning. 
Dwelling unit means a building or portion of a building that is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as living quarters, and that includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping. Election day means the day or days that voting in an election by town residents occurs at a polling place in the town including uniform election dates, early-voting day(s), absentee-voting day(s), general-election day(s), special-election day(s), runoff-election day(s), and other voting day(s) as specified or otherwise defined by federal, state, or local law. 
End or corner tenant means the tenant or tenant space in a multitenant, single-story building located in the end or corner of a building and having a minimum of two outside walls. 
End-tenant means the tenant or tenant space in a multitenant, single-story building located in the end of the building and having three outside walls. 
Engineer means a person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering. 
Established front yard means the required front yard located between the street and the front of the house on lots having two required front yards. 
Facade means the front of a building determined by the principal orientation of such structure. The facade usually includes the primary point of entry. 
Family means any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. A facility meeting the definition of group home shall be considered a family when located in a single-family detached dwelling. 
Fence and wall mean any structure intended for the use of confinement, prevention of intrusion, boundary identification or screening. 
Floodlight means a type of luminaire that is designed for lighting a scene or object to a luminance considerably greater than its surroundings. It usually is capable of being pointed in any direction and is of weatherproof construction. 
Floodlighting means a system designed for lighting a scene or object to a luminance greater than its surroundings. It can be for utility, advertising, or decorative purposes. 
Floor area means the total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building, including each floor level, but excluding cellars, carports or garages. 
Floor area ratio (FAR) means the ratio between the total square feet of floor area in all buildings located on a lot and the total square feet of land in the lot or tract on which the buildings are located. 
Footcandle means the amount of illumination provided by one lumen uniformly distributed on one square foot of surface. 
Freeway means a highway designed for movement of large volumes of traffic between areas and around and across the town and not providing access directly to adjacent land. 
Frequency means the number of times per second a vibration or sound wave oscillates. 
Full cutoff means a luminaire light distribution where zero candela intensity occurs at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and at all greater angles from nadir. See illustration 8.14.3 following chapter 98, zoning. 
Garage means an accessory building or a portion of a main building used or designed to be used for the parking or storage of the automobiles of the occupants of the main building. 
Golf course clubhouse means a public or private golf course development, including other amenities such as a restaurant or retail pro shop, that is owned and operated by an organization or entity for the use of its members and guests. 
Ground cover means any woody or herbaceous plant that will normally reach an average height of not more than two feet at maturity. 
Group home means a facility providing 24-hour care in a protected living arrangement for not more than six residents with certain physical or mental impairments and not more than two supervisory personnel. This classification is limited to homes for the care of persons suffering from orthopedic, visual, speech or hearing impairments, Alzheimer's disease, pre-senile dementia, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, mental retardation, autism or emotional illness. 
Height means the vertical distance measured from the average established grade at the street line or from the average natural front yard ground level, whichever is higher, to the highest point of the roof's surface if a flat surface, to the deckline of mansard roofs or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for hip and gable roofs and, in any event, excluding chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water towers, radio towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires and parapet walls not exceeding ten feet in height. If the street grade has not been officially established, the average front yard shall be used for a base level. Except as otherwise specified in subpart B of this Code, the height of a structure other than a building is the vertical distance from the average grade at the base of the structure to the highest point of the structure. 
Irrigation means underground automated watering system as designed by a licensed state irrigator or registered professional engineer. 
Lamp and light source mean a device producing visible energy, such as a bulb. 
Land use plan means the land use plan element of the town's comprehensive master plan, as may be amended, including the future land use map and specific plan areas. 
Landscaping means trees, shrubs, ground cover, vines, walkways, ponds, fountains, sculpture, and other organic and inorganic materials used for creating an attractive appearance. Smooth concrete or asphalt surfaces are not considered landscaping. 
Light intrusion means a light flow that spills outside the location boundary causing a disturbance to adjacent areas. 
Lighting standard means the light pole and the base measured at the highest point on the pole or fixture including the base. 
Livestock means any horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep or swine. 
Lot means an undivided tract or parcel of land under one ownership having frontage on a street and either occupied or to be occupied by a building or building group together with accessory buildings, which parcel of land is designated as a separate and distinct tract. 
Lot area means the net area of the lot, excluding all portions of streets and alleys. 
Lot, corner, means a lot adjoining the intersection of two or more streets. 
Lot coverage means the percentage of a lot or tract covered by the foundation or first floor of buildings. 
Lot, interior, means any lot other than a corner or through lot. 
Lot, key, means a corner lot abutting two or more noncorner (interior or through) lots. 
Lot line, front, means any lot line adjacent to a street and adjacent to a required front yard. 
Lot line, rear, means any lot line opposite a front lot line and not adjacent to a required front yard. 
Lot line, side, means any lot line not designated as a front or rear lot line. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot. 
Lot of record means either a platted lot of record or an unplatted lot of record. 
Lot of record, platted, means a lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk. 
Lot of record, unplatted, means a parcel of land, the deed for which is recorded in the office of the county clerk prior to the adoption of the town's zoning ordinance on January 9, 1975. 
Lot, through, means a lot, other than a corner lot. having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Lot width means the distance between the side lot lines measured along the required front yard setback line. In the case of a lot having more than one required front yard, the lot width shall be measured along the building line associated with the shortest front lot line. 
Lumen means the quantity of luminous flux intercepted by a surface of one square foot, all points of which are one foot from a uniform source of one candela. A one-candela source provides 12.57 lumens. 
Luminaire means a complete lighting unit including a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical, reflective and decorative parts. 
Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure extending from part of the wall of a building, but not supported by the ground, and constructed of durable material such as metal or glass. 
Masonry construction means that form of construction composed of stone, brick, concrete, hollow clay tile, concrete tile or other similar building units or materials or combination of these materials, and including brick veneer and stucco. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built off-site on a permanent chassis and is designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
Nadir means the point of the celestial sphere directly opposite to the zenith and directly below the observer. See illustration 8.14.1 following chapter 98, zoning. 
Nonresidential district. See District, nonresidential. 
Nonresidential use. See Use, nonresidential. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast. 
Occupancy means the use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants. 
Octave band means a portion of the audible sound spectrum. An octave band analyzer divides the audible sound spectrum into eight octave bands. 
Outdoor lighting nuisance means light: 
(1)  Which if measured at the property line adjacent to a residentially zoned property or adjacent to a property used for residential purposes, is in excess of four-tenths of one footcandle; 
(2)  Which if measured at the property line adjacent to an arterial street, is in excess of 1½ footcandles; or 
(3)  Which if measured at the property line adjacent to a collector or residential street, is in excess of four-tenths of one footcandle. 
Park and open space plan means an element of the town's adopted comprehensive master plan. 
Particulate matter means finely divided solid or liquid matter, other than water, that is released into the atmosphere. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, trust, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
Planned development means a development provided for by the planned development zoning district, the plan of which is subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission and town council. 
Planning and zoning commission means the agency designated in this chapter and appointed by the town council as an advisory body to it. 
Point method photometrics means a lighting design procedure for predetermining the illuminance at various locations in lighting installations by use of luminaire photometric data. 
Poultry means chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys and other domesticated birds raised for food. 
Private outdoor recreational activities means any form of outdoor play or amusement, including, but not limited to, games or sports conducted on property not owned, operated, or leased for operation by the town, a school, school district, county, or other governmental agency. 
Public outdoor recreational sport fields and sport courts complex means outdoor community recreation facilities owned, operated, or leased for operation by the town, a school, school district, county, or other governmental agency and may include swimming pools, tennis courts, softball and baseball facilities, soccer facilities, and other outdoor athletic facilities. 
Real property means all real property within the town included within the boundaries of any lot approved and recorded in the plat records of the county, or within the boundaries of any unplatted tract or parcel of land described and recorded in the real property records of the county. 
Recessed luminaire means a luminaire that is mounted above the canopy or soffit with the opening of the luminaire level with the surface. See illustration 8.14.4 following chapter 98, zoning. 
Record plat means the plat of any lot, tract or parcel of land requested to be recorded of record in the records of the county clerk of the county. 
Recreational vehicle/travel trailer means a vehicular portable structure designed for a temporary or shortterm occupancy for travel, recreation or vacation. 
Replatting means the rearrangement of any part or all of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract. 
Residence See Dwelling. 
Residential district. See District, residential. 
Residential use. See Use, residential. 
Roadway, country, means the section of Flower Mound Road from Bruton-Orand Boulevard to FM 1171/ Cross Timbers Road, and the following road segments or sections: 
(1)  Red Rock Lane; 
(2)  The future connection between Red Rock Lane and Shiloh Road north of FM 1171/Cross Timbers Road; 
(3)  Lusk Lane; 
(4)  High Road; 
(5)  Ridgecrest Drive; 
(6)  Shiloh Road; 
(7)  Scenic Drive; and 
(8)  Skillern Road. 
Roadway, principal, means all existing and proposed arterial streets included in the thoroughfare plan which are hereby designated as principal roadways, excluding portions of such streets that are classified as country roadways or scenic roadways or that are situated within specific plan areas, and excluding the following roadways: 
(1)  College Parkway; 
(2)  Kirkpatrick Road; 
(3)  Gerault Rd/Morriss Road; 
(4)  Dixon Lane/Valley Ridge Boulevard; and 
(5)  FM 407/Justin Road. 
Roadway, scenic, means the section of FM 1171/Cross Timbers Road from the eastern edge of Specific Plan Area 8 (SPA 8) to Bruton Orand Boulevard. 
Roof means the covering structure of a building. 
Roof, mansard, means any roof that has an angle greater than 45 degrees, derives its support from the building wall, is attached to a low slope roof, and extends along the full length of the front facade or at least three-quarters of the length of a side building wall. 
Screened means an object is considered screened when it is hidden from public view. 
Screening device means plants or structure installed to conceal areas used for refuse, mechanical equipment, parking, service and loading bays or lanes, and nonresidential activities, from adjacent residential districts and from street views. 
Screening wall means a fence or barrier constructed of brick, stone or other approved masonry material and used to separate developments, neighborhoods or dissimilar land uses. 
Searchlight means any apparatus used to project a beam of light for the express purpose of attracting attention to a location. 
Secondary frontage means the part of an end or corner tenant property within a corner development that faces an arterial or collector street and does not have the legal address. 
Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, public region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center, as such terms are defined as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult bookstore or adult video store. A commercial establishment that as one of its principal business purposes openly advertises or displays or offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slide, or other visual representations that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
b.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
(3)  Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment that regularly features: 
a.  Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity; 
b.  Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
c.  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that: 
a.  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this type of photographic reproductions; 
b.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
c.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
(5)  Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
(7)  Escort agency. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration. For the purposes of this definition, an escort is a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
(8)  Nude model studio. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or seminudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any other form of consideration. 
(9)  Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
a.  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; 
b.  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude. 
Shrub means a self-supporting, woody perennial plant more than 30 inches in height at maturity, characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from the base, and excluding trees. 
Sign means any letter, figure, character, mark, plane, design poster, pictorial, picture, stroke, stripe, line, trademark or reading matter of illuminated or nonilluminated surface that shall be so constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever, so that the same shall be used for the attraction of the public to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or merchandise whatsoever, that is displayed in any manner whatsoever out of doors. 
Sign, agricultural, means an accessory sign identifying the farm or ranch on which it is placed and advertising the produce, crops, animals or poultry raised or quartered thereon. 
Sign area (effective area) means the area enclosed by drawing a rectangle around the outermost extremities of the sign or its letters, insignias, logos, etc., if the same is placed on a wall. The area of a ground sign shall include the sign base and sign cabinet. 
Sign, awning or canopy, means any sign that is part of or attached to an awning or canopy or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. 
Sign, ball field, means any temporary or permanent sign placed inside ball field fencing which is intended for advertising to raise funds for recreation programs. 
Sign, blinking or flashing, means a repetitious or intermittent illumination of a sign face, message or conveyed information. 
Sign, building identification, means a sign used to identify the name of a building or development, with placement being on the primary building wall and/or a ground sign. 
Sign cabinet means the actual enclosure of a sign and its internal parts. A sign cabinet shall include the sign faces and the external limits of the sign face frame including its width, height and thickness. 
Sign face means the actual surface upon which the message of a sign is displayed. In the case of wall signs, the area contained within the outermost limits of the letters, logos, numbers, insignias, etc. shall be considered the sign face. 
Sign, ground, means a sign characterized by construction of stone, concrete, metal or brick, etc. set on a monument, ground-mounted base. 
Sign, height, means the vertical distance measured from the adjacent street curb level or the mean street grade elevation if no curb exists, to the highest point of the sign. 
Sign, off-premises, means any sign identifying or directing attention to a business, profession, activity, commodity, service or entertainment other than one conducted, sold or offered for sale upon the site where such sign is located. 
Sign, on-premises, means any sign located on the same site to which location, facility or place of business the sign refers. 
Sign, permanent, means a sign so constructed as to be a lasting and enduring condition and in a permanent manner affixed to the, ground, wall or building, excluding such signs for which a specific time limit has been designated for the removal of such sign. 
Sign support means the mechanism, device or structure that upholds the sign cabinet and/or face. 
Sign, pole, means a sign mounted on vertical pole supports. 
Sign, temporary, means any sign that does not meet the definition of Sign, permanent. 
Sign, wall, means a sign attached to a building, wall or principal facade. 
Sign, window, means a sign painted, etched or formed into a window, door or other translucent opening of a facade. 
Smoke means the visible discharge of particulate matter from a chimney, vent, exhaust or combustion process. 
Specific plan areas means detailed land use and development controls for the areas generally located along FM 1171 from Morriss Road to Old Settlers Road and along FM 2499 from FM 1171 to FM 3040 and set forth in the town's comprehensive master plan, as may be amended. 
Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1)—(3) of this definition. 
Sport courts complex means a community recreation facility consisting of four or more tennis courts, racquetball courts, or similar court facilities owned, operated, or leased for operation by the town, a school, school district, county, or other governmental agency. 
Spotlight means any of several different types of luminaries with a narrow beam angle designed to illuminate a well-defined area. 
Story means the height between the successive floors of a building or from the top floor to the roof. 
Street means a public way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, private place or however otherwise designated, other than an alley or driveway. 
Street, arterial, means a major or minor arterial street. Arterial streets are principal traffic thoroughfares more or less continuous across the town, that are intended to connect remote parts of the town or areas adjacent thereto, and act as principal connecting streets with state and federal highways. 
Street, arterial (greenway rural), means a street designated as a greenway rural arterial on the thoroughfare plan map. Greenway rural arterials are major arterials. Greenway rural arterials are designed with a grassy swale in the median that drains into an underground system which replaces the raised curb and gutter. This facility type reflects the community desire to maintain a rural character in the western portion of the Town. 
Street, arterial (greenway urban), means a street designated as a greenway urban arterial on the thoroughfare plan map. Greenway urban arterials are major arterials. Greenway urban arterials are designed to provide a large landscaped median which allows the Town flexibility to widen to six lanes, if needed, without taking additional ROW. 
Street, arterial (major), means a street designated as a major or greenway arterial on the thoroughfare plan map. Major arterials are designed to carry traffic long distances and connect the town to the regional freeway system and other major regional activity centers. Major arterials serve the town traffic and traffic travelling through the town. They are the most heavily traveled roadways and require some degree of access control. 
Street, arterial (minor), means an urban minor arterial or urban minor arterial undivided. Minor arterial streets are designed to serve traffic originating in or destined for locations within the town and are intended to serve traffic traveling through the town. 
Street, arterial (minor with bike lane), means an urban minor arterial with bike lane. Minor arterial streets are designed to serve traffic originating in or destined for locations within Town and are intended to serve traffic traveling through the Town. The addition of a bike lane to the street will allow for a connection between on-street and off-street trails as well as serve local trips. 
Street, arterial (minor with on-street parking), means an urban minor arterial with on-street parking. Minor arterial streets are designed to serve traffic originating in or destined for locations within town and are intended to serve traffic traveling through the town. This street type is intended to be used in mixed use type environments. It will have two 10-foot travel lanes provided in each direction with a 16-foot median and 18-foot angled parking on the outside curbs. Curbs would extend to limit parking near intersections to provide better operations and visibility at these locations and reduce the pedestrian crossing distance. This roadway section will typically have large sidewalks to accommodate pedestrians. 
Street, collector, means an urban collector or rural collector street. Collectors connect residential and commercial areas to the arterial system and collect and distribute traffic from these areas. Collector streets carry less traffic for shorter distances than arterials and carry traffic to and from areas rather than through them. 
Street, collector (rural), means an existing or planned street designated as a rural collector on the thoroughfare plan map. The design standards for rural collectors are intended to reflect the more rural character of the western part of town. 
Street, collector (urban), means an existing or planned street designated as an urban collector on the thoroughfare plan map. The design standards for urban collectors are intended to reflect the more urban character of the eastern part of town. 
Street frontage means that portion of a property that is adjacent to the right-of-way of a street. 
Street line means a dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street, the right-of-way line or easement line. 
Street, local, means any public or private street, other than an arterial or collector street. A local street is intended primarily to provide access to abutting property. 
Street, private, means the principal access easement to a platted lot that is not dedicated to the public and is not publicly maintained. The term "private street" shall include both the pavement and the easement area for such private street. 
Street, public means a street that has been dedicated or deeded to the town for municipal purposes. 
Street width means the dimension of the shortest distance between the lines that delineate the right-of-way of a street, road or other way. 
Street yard means the area of a lot that lies between any street line and the facing wall line or lines of the principal building, extended by imaginary lines from the outer corners of the building and parallel to the street to the property lines. In the case of multiple principal buildings located on a building tract, imaginary lines shall connect the corners of facing walls of adjacent buildings. 
Structural alterations means any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column, beam or girder. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building or any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definitive manner. 
Subdivider means a person, firm, association, corporation, syndicate, trust or any other legal entity who causes land to be divided into a subdivision for the same or others or seeks authorization of such entity. 
Subdivision means the division of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits, or within the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction, in two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition to the town, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots and streets, alleys or parts or other portions intended for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of creating building sites. Subdivision includes resubdivision, but it does not include the division of land for agricultural purposes in parcels or tracts of five acres or more that does not involve the creation of any new street, alley or easement of access or building sites. Subdivision shall also include judicial partitions and similar involuntary partitions or divisions of land. For the purpose of chapter 86 (Signs) of this Code, any development or real estate project containing improved property for nonagricultural purposes that has been divided into lots and blocks through the platting process. 
Surveyor means a licensed state land surveyor or a registered professional land surveyor, as authorized by state statutes to practice the profession of surveying. 
Temporary outdoor luminaries or lighting standards means luminaries that are not permanently affixed to a building wall or to a lighting standard and have temporary wiring. Temporary wiring as defined by the National Electric Code shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 90 days for Christmas decorative lighting and similar purposes. 
Thoroughfare. See Street. 
Thoroughfare plan means the thoroughfare plan element of the town's comprehensive master plan, as may be amended. 
Town means the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
Town council means the governing and legislative body of the town. 
Town manager means the chief administrative officer of the town. 
Toxic and noxious matter means any solid, liquid or gaseous matter that is present in sufficient quantities to endanger health, safety and comfort of persons in the vicinity or that may cause injury or damage to property. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody perennial plant that usually produces one main trunk and a more or less distinct and elevated head with many branches. Certain tree species may be multitrunked. 
Tree removal means the uprooting or severing of the main trunk of the tree or any other act that causes or may reasonably be expected to cause the tree to die. 
Undeveloped land means land on which no permanent structures or buildings are located. 
Use, nonresidential, means any building or structure built and designed for purposes other than permanent housing or shelter including the following: 
(1)  Retail. Establishments offering the sale of consumer goods. The typical retail area might include shopping centers, neighborhood convenience centers, restaurants, etc. 
(2)  Office. Buildings primarily intended to house the affairs of a business, professional organization, branch of government, etc. This category might also include appropriate accessory/complementary uses such as a pharmacy, office supply, etc. 
(3)  Commercial. Heavy retail uses and commercial uses catering to industrial or retail clientele. Typical uses in this category might include light indoor manufacturing, office/warehousing, office/showroom, automobile and truck sales. 
(4)  Industrial. Denotes industrial or manufacturing enterprises that tend to emit odor, noises or other ecological pollutants that are least compatible with other uses. 
(5)  Institutional. A school, church, hospital or similar public or quasipublic institution. 
Use, residential, means land primarily devoted to buildings containing dwelling units. 
Variance means an adjustment in the application of certain zoning district regulations to a particular parcel of property that, because of special conditions or circumstances peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district. 
Vehicle means any device or conveyance for transporting persons or property over public streets and licensed by the state including, but not limited to, any automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, van, semitrailer, tractor-trailer, recreational vehicle or trailer, and boat trailer. 
Vibration means a periodic displacement of the earth measured in inches. 
Wall washing means using luminaires to call attention to vertical surfaces by mounting the luminaire close to the vertical surface being lighted so that the light grazes that surface accentuating its texture by creating deep shadows. 
Yard means an open space on the lot that is not obstructed from any point 30 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot to the sky, except for plant material and authorized obstructions. 
Yard, front, means a yard adjacent to the street line and extending from the lot line a uniform distance into the lot. If a lot has frontage on more than one street, the location of the required front yard shall be determined according to section 98-1026 of this Code, minimum front yard setback. 
Yard, rear, means a yard adjacent to a rear lot line and extending from the lot line a uniform distance into the lot. 
Yard, side, means a yard adjacent to a side lot line and extending from the lot line a uniform distance into the lot. 
Zoning map means the official certified map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, §§ 2.02, 3.05(23(b); Ord. No. 72-00, § 1, 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 74-01, § 1, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 08-03, § 2, 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 14-03, § 2, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 83-03, § 2, 12-1-2003; Ord. No. 101-04, § 2, 12-20-2004; Ord. No. 48-06, § 2, 7-17-2006; Ord. No. 06-12, §§ 2—4, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 21-12, § 2, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 51-12, § 2, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 67-19 , § 3, 12-16-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-4. - Conformance with provisions of subpart B of this Code. 
(a)  All development and use of land within the corporate limits of the town shall conform to all of the requirements of subpart B of this Code, unless specifically exempted in subpart B or by law. 
(b)  All development and use of land within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town shall conform to the following provisions of subpart B of this Code, unless specifically exempted in this subpart B or by law. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 1.03)  
Sec. 74-5. - Consistency with comprehensive master plan. 
(a)  The regulations of subpart B of this Code are intended to implement the town's official comprehensive master plan, as such may be amended from time to time. A copy of the plan shall be kept in the office of the town secretary, and it shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(b)  Applications for rezoning shall be consistent with the land use categories designated for the property on the future land use map of the comprehensive master plan. 
(c)  Subdivisions and site plans for property in the specific plan areas of the comprehensive master plan shall be consistent with the land use and planning guidelines set forth for these areas in the comprehensive master plan. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 1.04)  
Sec. 74-6. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of subpart B of this Code or who shall fail to comply with any provisions of subpart B within the corporate limits of the town shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in this section. Each day any violation or noncompliance continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of subpart B of this Code or who shall fail to comply with any provisions of this subpart B within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town, outside the corporate limits, shall not be guilty of a misdemeanor. However, the town may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in the district court to enjoin the violation of this subpart B. 
(c)  The penalty provided in this section shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.012, and the power of injunction may be exercised in enforcing this subpart B whether or not there has been a criminal complaint filed. 
(d)  In addition to the penalty described in subsection (c) of this section, the right is hereby conferred and extended to any property owner owning property in any district where such property may be affected by a violation of the terms of this subpart B, to bring suit in such courts having jurisdiction, and obtain such remedies as may be available at law or in equity for the protection of the rights of such property owners. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 1.06)  
Chapter 78 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the town saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(2); administration, ch. 2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 78-1—78-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions, § 2-91 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 78-31—78-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions, § 2-91 et seq.; zoning, ch. 98. 
 
Sec. 78-51. - Created. 
There is hereby created an advisory board known as the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.01(a))  
Sec. 78-52. - Organization. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven regular members appointed by a majority vote of the town council. 
(b)  In addition to the seven regular members of the commission, two alternate members of the commission, who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members, shall be appointed by a majority vote of the town council. In determining which of the two alternate members shall serve in the absence of a regular member, the alternate member with the longest tenure shall so serve. If for any reason, the alternate member with the longest tenure is unavailable to serve, the second alternate member shall so serve. 
(c)  Regular members shall be designated as places number one through seven and alternate members shall be designated as alternate place number eight and alternate place number nine. 
(d)  Each member or alternate member of the planning and zoning commission shall be a resident citizen and qualified voter of the town, at the time of his appointment. A member or alternate member who ceases to reside in the town during his term of office shall immediately forfeit his office. 
(e)  The term of office of members or alternate members of the planning and zoning commission shall be for two years. Places one, three, five, seven, and alternate place number nine shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30 in odd numbered years. Places two, four, six, and alternate place number eight shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30 in even numbered years. Members and alternate members of the board may be removed before their terms of office expire. 
(f)  Members and alternate members shall serve without compensation. 
(g)  Other qualifications for regular or alternate membership shall be a genuine interest in the planning and zoning of the town, ability to work with the public, and time to devote to this service. 
(h)  Regular members and alternate members of the planning and zoning commission shall be appointed by the town council in accordance with established procedures. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.01(b); Ord. No. 27-03, § 2, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 16-05, § 7, 2-21-2005)  
Sec. 78-53. - Officers and procedures. 
(a)  At the first scheduled commission meeting in September of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the first item of business shall be the selection of the commission's chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the membership of the commission. The alternate members of the commission are not eligible to serve as the commission chairperson or vice-chairperson or to participate in the selection of said chairperson or vice-chairperson. 
(b)  The chairperson shall preside over meetings and shall vote only in case of a tie. In the event a question over procedures arises, Robert's Rules of Order shall prevail. 
(c)  The vice-chairperson shall assist the chairperson in directing the affairs of the planning and zoning commission. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall assume the duties of the chairperson. The vice-chairperson, when acting as chairperson, shall retain the right to vote. 
(d)  In the event of the absence of both the chairperson and vice-chairperson, any member of the commission may be selected as the acting chairperson for that particular meeting by majority vote of the members present. Any commission member acting as chairperson shall retain the right to vote. No member shall be required to act as chairperson if the member so declines. 
(e)  The recording of minutes of all commission meetings shall be the responsibility of the town staff. 
(f)  A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum (four members) to do business and the affirmative vote of the majority of those attending shall be necessary to pass any motion. 
(g)  The commission shall establish rules and procedures that govern its operation. 
(h)  All voting shall be by roll call. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.01(c); Ord. No. 27-03, §§ 3, 4, 5-19-2003)  
Sec. 78-54. - Powers and duties. 
The planning and zoning commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To recommend to the town council the boundaries of the various zoning districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein under subpart B of this Code or the laws of the state and to recommend approval or denial of zoning changes and regulations under this subpart B. 
(2)  To hear, recommend or determine any matter relating to zoning, planning or subdivision control as they may be specified or required under subpart B of this Code or applicable laws of the state. 
(3)  To exercise the duties and powers as may be now or hereafter conferred by subpart B of this Code or applicable laws of the state. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.01(d))  
Secs. 78-55—78-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions, § 2-91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 78-81. - Creation and organization. 
There is hereby created a board known as the board of adjustment, which shall be organized as follows: 
(1)  The board of adjustment will consist of five regular members appointed by a majority vote of the town council. 
(2)  In addition to the five regular members of the board of adjustment, three alternate members of the board of adjustment, who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members, shall be appointed by a majority vote of the town council, so that all cases heard by the board of adjustment will always be heard by a minimum of four members. In determining which of the three alternate members shall serve in the absence of a member, the alternate member with the longest tenure shall so serve. If for any reason the alternate member with the longest tenure is unable to serve, the second alternate member so shall serve. If for any reason the alternate member with the second longest tenure is unable to serve, the third alternate member so shall serve. If for any reason more than one member must be absent, more than one alternate may serve consistent with the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Regular members shall be designated as places one through five and alternate members shall be designated as alternate place number six, alternate place number seven, and alternate place number eight. 
(4)  Each member or alternate member of the board shall be a resident citizen and qualified voter of the town, at the time of his appointment. A member or alternate member who ceases to reside in the town during his term of office shall immediately forfeit his office. 
(5)  The term of office members of the board shall be for two years. Places one, three, five and alternate place number seven shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30 in odd-numbered years. Places two, four, and alternate place numbers six and eight shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30 in even-numbered years. Regular and alternate members may be removed before their terms of office expire. 
(6)  Members and alternate members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.10(a); Ord. No. 16-05, § 8, 2-21-2005)  
Sec. 78-82. - Officers and procedures. 
(a)  At the first scheduled board meeting in October of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the first item of business shall be the selection of the board of adjustment's chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the membership of the board. The alternate members of the board are not eligible to serve as the board chairperson or vice-chairperson or to participate in the selection of such chairperson or vice-chairperson. 
(b)  The chairperson shall preside over meetings. If a question over procedures arises, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall apply. 
(c)  The vice-chairperson shall assist the chairperson in directing the affairs of the board of adjustment. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall assume the duties of the chairperson. 
(d)  The recording of the minutes of the board of adjustment meetings shall be the responsibility of town personnel assigned by the town manager. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may adopt rules to govern its proceedings and conduct of the business before the board; provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with subpart B of this Code or state statutes. 
(f)  Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson, and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairperson or, in his absence, the vice-chairperson shall administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. Minutes of its proceedings shall be kept by the staff showing the vote of each member upon such question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(g)  The concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the board is required to act under subpart B of this Code or to grant any variance authorized by this subpart B. 
(h)  The filing fee for every petition to be submitted to the board of adjustment shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.10(b))  
Sec. 78-83. - Powers. 
The board of adjustment shall have the following powers, and shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions to ensure compliance and protect adjacent property: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official of the town in the enforcement of subpart B of this Code, pursuant to section 78-84, appeals. 
(2)  To permit variances or modifications of the height, yard, area, coverage and parking regulations, pursuant to section 78-85, variances. 
(3)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of subpart B of this Code, pursuant to section 78-86, special exceptions. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.10(c))  
Sec. 78-84. - Appeals. 
(a)  Authority of board. In exercising its powers, the board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of the state statutes, as existing or hereafter amended, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination, in the board's opinion, as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(b)  Application for appeal. Appeals to the board of adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department or board of the municipality affected by the decision of the building official. Such appeal shall be taken within 15 days after the decision has been rendered by the administrative officer, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order that may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(d)  Hearing and notice. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give the public notice by depositing such notice in the mail addressed to all owners of real property located within 200 feet of the property on which the appeal is made, and by publishing notice of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. Both the mailed and published notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by attorney or agent. 
(e)  Appeals to court. Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board, or any taxpayer or any officer, department or board of the municipality may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board of adjustment and not thereafter. The board's decision shall be deemed filed in the office of the board of adjustment on the first business day following the date on which action was taken by the board. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.11; Ord. No. 03-08, § 2, 1-17-2008)  
Sec. 78-85. - Variances. 
(a)  Authority of board. The board of adjustment shall be authorized to permit such variances or modifications of the height, yard, area, coverage, sign and parking regulations as may be necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of land that differs from other parcels in the district by being of such restricted shape or slope that it cannot be appropriately developed without such modification. 
(b)  Required findings. In exercising its power to grant a variance in accordance with subpart B of this Code, the board of adjustment shall make a finding and show in its minutes that: 
(1)  There are special circumstances existing on the property on which the application is made related to size, shape, area, topography, surrounding conditions and location that do not apply generally to other property in the same area and the same zoning district. 
(2)  A variance is necessary to permit the applicant the same rights in the use of this property that are presently enjoyed under subpart B of this Code by other properties in the vicinity and zone, but which rights are denied to the property on which the application is made. 
(3)  The granting of the variance on the specific property will not adversely affect the land use pattern as outlined by the master land use plan and will not adversely affect any other feature of the comprehensive master plan of the town. 
(4)  The variance, if granted, will be no material detriment to the public welfare or injury to the use, enjoyment or value of property in the vicinity. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.12)  
Sec. 78-86. - Special exceptions. 
The board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide the following special exceptions to the terms of subpart B of this Code: 
(1)  Reconstruction of nonconforming building. The board of adjustment shall be authorized to permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building pursuant to section 78-231(e), nonconforming uses and structures, destruction. 
(2)  Expansion of nonconforming building. The board shall be authorized to permit the addition of off-street parking or off-street loading to a nonconforming use pursuant to section 78-231(b), nonconforming uses and structures, expansion. 
(3)  Discontinuance of nonconforming use. The board shall be authorized to require the discontinuance of nonconforming uses of land or structures under any plan whereby the full value of the structure and facilities can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity of all property to conform to the regulations of subpart B of this Code. All actions to discontinue a nonconforming use of land or structure shall be taken with due regard to the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of the property. 
(4)  Status of nonconforming uses. The board shall, from time to time, on its own motion or upon cause presented by interested property owners or on request of the town council or planning and zoning commission inquire into the existence, continuation or maintenance of any nonconforming use within the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.13)  
Sec. 78-87. - Temporary use permits. 
Temporary use permits may be issued by the building official, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Application. Application for a temporary use permit shall be made on forms provided by the building official. 
(2)  Zoning. The use for which the permit is requested shall be authorized as a temporary use in the district in which the use is to be located. 
(3)  Conditions. The applicant shall meet all conditions for such temporary use permit set forth in subpart B of this Code; provided, however, that the town council may waive any such conditions if it determines that such waiver is warranted by special conditions. 
(4)  Time limit. A time limit for the discontinuance of the temporary use shall be specified on the temporary use permit. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.14)  
Secs. 78-88—78-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
 
Sec. 78-121. - Applicability. 
No building hereafter erected, converted or structurally altered shall be used or occupied and no land or nonresidential building may be changed in use unless or until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building official of the town stating that the building or proposed use of land or building complies with the provisions of subpart B of this Code and other building and health laws of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.17(a))  
Sec. 78-122. - Application. 
A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and will be issued within ten days after the completion of the erection, alteration or conversion of such building or land, provided that such construction or change has been made in complete conformity to the provisions of subpart B of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.17(b))  
Sec. 78-123. - Record. 
A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building official, and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the land or building affected. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.17(c))  
Sec. 78-124. - Inactive cases. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards by which cases are to be considered active. The regulations of this section are intended to require the applicant to respond, in writing, to staff comments in a timely manner, or officially withdraw the case from consideration. 
(b)  Applicability. New cases submitted after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and cases currently under review by town staff on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived will be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  If the case is to remain active, the applicant must reply fully and completely, in writing, to any written comments sent by town staff within a period not to exceed 30 days; 
(2)  If a case is to be withdrawn, the applicant must submit, in writing, a formal withdrawal of the case from consideration, thereby terminating any further review by town staff. 
(c)  Termination of review. If no written contact has been received by town staff within the allowed 30 days, staff will initiate termination of the review. The following procedure will be followed to terminate review: 
(1)  The town staff will send, via certified mail, notice of intent to terminate review; 
(2)  The applicant will have 10 days, from the date of registered receipt, to respond to the town in writing; 
(3)  If the town staff has not received written response within the allowed 10 days, review of the case will be terminated and considered officially withdrawn; 
(4)  A case officially withdrawn and/or otherwise terminated shall be required to be submitted as a new application in accordance with current standards and procedures at the time of submission. 
(Ord. No. 45-00, § 1, 6-19-2000)  
Sec. 78-125. - Outdoor lighting for nonresidential uses and multifamily uses; fees and procedures. 
(a)  Procedures. No person shall install outdoor lighting without having first completed a plan review application, paid the required plan review fee, and obtained a proper building permit. Plans submitted for review must contain the following: 
(1)  Description of outdoor light fixtures including component specifications such as lamps, reflectors, angle of cutoff, use of shields, supports, poles and manufacturer's cut sheets. 
(2)  Complete lighting plan showing location and description of every outdoor light fixture, including building mounted lighting, landscape lighting, and sign lighting. 
(3)  Point method photometric projected on the site plan illustrating the following: 
a.  Footcandle readings every ten feet; small areas may require the average to be computed from positions no greater than five feet apart; 
b.  Average projected footcandle readings of the parking area; 
c.  Average projected footcandle readings of the building entry point. 
(4)  Foundation details for light poles shall bear the stamp and signature of the designing professional engineer. 
(5)  All submitted lighting plans, including the point method photometrics, shall bear the stamp and signature of the designing professional engineer with an affixed statement that the plans submitted are accurate and designed in compliance with all applicable codes in effect at the time of the submission of plans. 
(b)  Outdoor lighting inspections. Prior to the final inspections for a certificate of occupancy for a newly constructed or remodeled nonresidential use or multifamily development, a professional engineer shall submit a set of stamped and signed as built plans certifying that the outdoor lighting was installed in accordance with all local codes in effect at the time of the submission of plans. Lighting inspections required for a certificate of occupancy will not be conducted until stamped and signed as-built plans are submitted. 
(c)  Outdoor lighting fees. A plan review fee and a reinspection fee shall be as set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4, 2-5-2002)  
Secs. 78-126—78-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AMENDMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-151. - Initiation. 
(a)  Any person having a proprietary interest in any property, may petition the town council for a change or amendment to the provisions of subpart B of this Code, or the planning and zoning commission may on its own motion or on request from the town council, institute study and proposals for changes and amendments in the public interest. 
(b)  The town council may, from time to time, amend, supplement or change by ordinance, the boundaries of the districts or the regulations established in this subpart B, as provided by state statutes. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.02(a))  
Sec. 78-152. - Informational signs. 
Upon the filing of an application to amend the comprehensive master plan land use category or the zoning on a lot or tract of land or property, or for the issuance of a specific use permit relative thereto, or the issuance of an outdoor lighting waiver, the owner/developer/applicant shall be required to place an informational sign on such lot or tract of land or property within five days after the date the application was filed as follows: 
(1)  The size of the sign shall be three feet by four feet and be made out of aluminum or corrugated plastic material. 
(2)  The sign shall be mounted on stakes/poles. 
(3)  The sign shall be visible from the street. 
(4)  There shall be one for each street frontage. 
(5)  The sign shall have a white background, with the letters and borders being blue in color. The sign shall state one of the following, as applicable: 
"Town of Flower Mound, Texas - Outdoor Lighting Waiver Request is Being Made on This Property. For Information Call" (the phone number of the development and environmental services department shall be placed on the sign.) 
Example: 
Town of Flower Mound, Texas 
Outdoor Lighting Waiver Request is Being Made on This Property 
For Information 
Call ___________ 
(6)  The owner/developer/applicant shall be required to remove informational signs from the lot or tract of land or property within ten days after the date of the final action of the requested change or amendment. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.02(d); Ord. No. 41-00, § 1, 6-5-2000; Ord. No. 101-04, § 3, 12-20-2004)  
Sec. 78-153. - Review by planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  Generally. Before taking action on any proposed comprehensive master plan, zoning map or zoning text amendment, supplement or change, the town council shall submit the same to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation and report. 
(b)  Hearing. The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for any such amendment or change prior to making its recommendation and report to the town council. 
(c)  Notification requirements for comprehensive master plan or zoning map amendment. When any such amendment or change relates to a change in the comprehensive master plan, the zoning classification of property or a change to the boundary of a zoning district, written notice of public hearing before the planning and zoning commission on the proposed amendment or change shall be mailed to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the change is requested. Such notice shall be given not less than ten days before the date set for hearing by depositing in the mail such notice, properly addressed and postage paid to each taxpayer as the ownership appears on the last approved town tax roll. 
(d)  Notification requirements for text amendment. When any such amendment relates to a change of a regulation or to the text of subpart B of this Code not affecting specific property, notice of the public hearing of the planning and zoning commission shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, without the necessity of notifying property owners by mail. Such notice shall state the time and place of such hearing and the nature of the subject to be considered, which time shall not be earlier than ten days from the date of publication. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.02(e))  
Sec. 78-154. - Action by town council. 
(a)  Hearing to be held. A public hearing shall be held by the town council before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement or change. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the town stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the date of publication. 
(c)  Vote by town council. A proposed master plan amendment shall not become effective except by a three-fourths vote of the town council qualified to vote. Further, if a proposed zoning map or text amendment has been denied by the planning and zoning commission, such amendment or change shall not become effective except by a three-fourths vote of the town council qualified to vote. 
(d)  Changes in zoning classifications. When any such amendment or change relates to a change in the zoning classification of property or a change to the boundary of a zoning district, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Amendment over protest. The rules governing an amendment over protest are contained in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code chapter 211 and are hereby adopted and restated as follows. 
a.  Upon receipt of a written protest, a proposed amendment, supplement, or change shall become effective only upon the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the town council when such protest meets one or more of the following enumerated conditions: 
i.  When such protest contains the signatures of the owner or the owners of 20 percent or more of the total area of the land (whether platted or otherwise) included within the boundaries of the proposed change, or 
ii.  When such protest contains the signatures of the owner or owners of 20 percent or more of the total area of land (whether platted or otherwise) outside of the boundaries of the proposed change and within 200 feet of any point of the land proposed to be changed. 
For purposes of this section the terms "owner" and "owners" shall mean and refer to those persons or entities indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll as owning such land. 
b.  All protests must be submitted to the town secretary in writing. Such written protest(s) should be in the form of a petition containing the zoning case number, the name of the protesting property owner, the address(es) or property description(s) of the property for which the property owner is asserting a protest, the reasons for the property owner's protest such as the zoning classifications or uses to which the property owner is opposed, and the verified signature of the protesting property owner(s) or a verification by the person submitting the petition confirming the authenticity of the signatures contained thereon. 
c.  The protest must be filed with the town secretary before 5:00 p.m. of the fourth working day immediately preceding the date advertised for the town council public hearing in the statutory notice published in the official newspaper of the town. For example, a written protest must be received by 5:00 p.m., on the Tuesday prior to a regularly scheduled Monday council meeting. A protest sent through the mail must be received by the town secretary before the deadline. 
d.  A person may by written request withdraw their signature from the protest at any time prior to the close of the public hearing only. If the withdrawal of an owner's signature from a protest reduces the percentage of land area ownership protesting the zoning change to less than 20 percent of the total area of land a three-fourths vote for approval of the zoning change shall not be required. 
e.  The plain wording of the protest(s) shall determine whether a three-fourths vote is required for approval of the advertised zoning district applied for by the applicant or any less intensive zoning classification that the town council decides to grant. 
(2)  A waiting period of one year, between the date an application for amendment to the comprehensive master plan or a requested change in zoning is denied by the town council and a new application for such a change or amendment is accepted, is hereby established. For purposes of this article, "denied by the town council" shall mean that a motion by the town council to deny the requested zoning change passed by a majority of the quorum present and voting, or that a motion by the town council to approve the requested zoning change failed for lack of having the necessary votes, or that a motion by the town council to approve or deny the requested zoning change resulted in a tie vote. The one-year waiting period shall be applicable to all requested amendments and changes for the same or a more intensive land use categories, or zoning districts, on all or any portion of the property previously considered for amendment or change in land use or zoning; provided, however, that such one-year waiting period shall not be applicable to any proposed amendment or change instituted by the town council or planning and zoning commission, or to a request for an amendment or change that is denied by the town council without prejudice. A property owner may apply for a waiver of the one-year waiting period as follows: 
a.  The applicant shall submit a request in writing to the town office of community development within ten days of the denial by the town council. Upon the filing of a request within the required time period, the office of community development shall inform the applicant in writing of the date on which the planning and zoning commission shall consider the request and advise the applicant of his rights to appear before the planning and zoning commission. 
b.  The planning and zoning commission may waive the one-year waiting period upon a finding that the circumstances surrounding the property have changed sufficiently to warrant the acceptance of a new application for a comprehensive master plan or zoning amendment or change prior to the end of the one-year waiting period. A majority of the planning and zoning commission quorum present and voting shall be required to grant any such request. If the request is granted, compliance with the procedures contained in subpart B of this Code and other applicable rules and regulations of the town shall be required. 
c.  The applicant may appeal a denial under this article by the planning and zoning commission to the town council by filing a request in writing with the town office of community development within ten days of the denial by the planning and zoning commission. 
d.  The decision of the town council regarding the request for a waiver shall be final. 
(e)  Approval conditions. From the effective date of subpart B of this Code, approval of a planned development district shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  From the effective date of the ordinance granting a planned development district, a record plat for the property must be recorded within five years, in accordance with the following: 
a.  If the property is less than 100 acres, a record plat must be recorded for the entire property. 
b.  If the property is 100 acres or more, a record plat must be recorded for 50 percent of the property or 100 acres, whichever is greater. 
(2)  If a record plat is not recorded within five years of the effective date of the ordinance granting a planned development district, the planning and zoning commission or the town council may, after public notice and hearing as required by subpart B of this Code, rezone the property to IH interim holding district. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.02(f) ; Ord. No. 04-08, § 2, 1-17-2008)  
Secs. 78-155—78-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMPREHENSIVE MASTER PLAN AMENDMENT 
 
Sec. 78-181. - Application for comprehensive master plan amendment. 
No zoning change shall be approved to any zoning district that is inconsistent with the land use designation for the property in the comprehensive master plan. Consistency with the comprehensive master plan land use designations shall be determined based on the district purpose statements, the nature of the district regulations and the description of the land use category in the comprehensive master plan. Comprehensive master plan amendments shall not be required for zoning changes proposing single-family detached residential land uses that are less dense than those allowed pursuant to the existing land use category and single-family detached zoning district; however, notwithstanding the foregoing, a zoning change proposing a single-family detached use in an existing multifamily, duplex or single-family attached zoning district located in a high density land use category shall not be approved without a comprehensive master plan amendment. Any person having a proprietary interest in any property within the corporate limits of the town, requesting a change or amendment to the comprehensive master plan shall file an application applying for such change or amendment with the department of community development. Each application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A clear statement or description of the requested change or amendment. 
(2)  A drawing, at a scale of not less than one inch to 200 feet, indicating the following: 
a.  Existing land use categories; 
b.  Proposed land use categories in a format that identifies boundaries between different land use categories; 
c.  Comprehensive master plan features, whether existing or proposed, from any or all of the following elements: land use plan, urban design plan, parks and open space plan, trail network and thoroughfare plan. 
(3)  A vicinity map indicating the general location of the subject property. 
(4)  A filing fee in the amount established in appendix A of this Code. 
(5)  If the town determines that the proposed amendment may have an impact on the water, wastewater or thoroughfare plan components of the comprehensive master plan, due to changes in population density or other factors, the town may require an evaluation of such impacts as it deems necessary. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.02(b))  
Secs. 78-182—78-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ZONING MAP AMENDMENT 
 
Sec. 78-201. - Application. 
(a)  Any person having a proprietary interest in any property within the corporate limits of the town, requesting a change or amendment to the zoning classification of such property, shall file an application for such change or amendment with the department of community development. Such application may be processed in conjunction with the development plan, subject to all of the requirements contained in article II, chapter 90 of this Code, development plan procedures, contained in subpart B of this Code. Any zoning change that is inconsistent with the comprehensive master plan shall be preceded by or accompanied by an application for an amendment to the comprehensive master plan. The application shall clearly state the requested change or amendment and be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A drawing, at a scale of not less than one inch to 200 feet, indicating the following: 
a.  Existing zoning district classifications; 
b.  Proposed zoning district classifications in a format that identifies boundaries between different zoning districts; 
c.  Comprehensive master plan features, whether existing or proposed, from any or all of the following elements: land use plan, urban design plan, parks and open space plan, trail network and thoroughfare plan; 
d.  The location of high voltage electrical lines, transmission pipelines and associated easements. 
(2)  A vicinity map indicating the general location of the subject property. 
(3)  A metes and bounds description of the subject property typewritten on an 8½-inch by 11-inch sheet of paper. 
(4)  An 8 1/12 by 11-inch photomatte (PMT) reduction of any of the above drawings. 
(5)  Proposed development standards if the application is for a planned development. 
(b)  A filing fee shall be submitted with every application in accordance with the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(c)  In addition to the filing fee required by subsection (b) of this section, a site plan review fee shall be submitted with every petition requesting a change or amendment that requires a site plan, in accordance with the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(d)  If the planning and zoning commission officially disapproves of the requested change or amendment, and the applicant desires no further action upon such requested change or amendment beyond the disapproval of the planning and zoning commission, then 25 percent of the original filing fee and 25 percent of the site plan review fee, if any, shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.02(c))  
Secs. 78-202—78-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMITIES 
 
Sec. 78-231. - Nonconforming uses and structures. 
(a)  Nonconforming status. The use of land, use of a structure, or a structure itself shall be deemed to have nonconforming status when each of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The use or structure that does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in which such use or structure is located was in existence and lawfully constructed, located and operating prior to, and at the time of, the event or action that made such use or structure nonconforming. 
(2)  The event or action that made such use or structure nonconforming was one of the following: annexation into the town, adoption of subpart B of this Code or a previous zoning ordinance, or amendment of subpart B of this Code or a previous zoning ordinance. 
(3)  The nonconforming use has been operating since the time that the use first became nonconforming without abandonment, as abandonment is defined in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Expansion. 
(1)  No nonconforming use may be expanded or increased beyond the lot or tract upon which such nonconforming use is located as of the effective date of subpart B of this Code, except to provide off-street loading or off-street parking space upon approval of the board of adjustment. 
(2)  No structure, occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered so as to increase the gross floor area. 
(3)  No nonconforming structure shall be altered or expanded so as to increase the degree of nonconformity. 
(c)  Change of use. 
(1)  Any nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use, and once such change is made, the use shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
(2)  Where a conforming use is located in a nonconforming structure, the use may be changed to another conforming use by securing a certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  Abandonment. Whenever a nonconforming use is abandoned, all nonconforming rights shall cease, and the use of the premises shall henceforth be in conformance to subpart B of this Code. Abandonment shall involve the intent of the user or owner to discontinue a nonconforming operation and the actual act of discontinuance. Any nonconforming use that is discontinued, or that remains vacant for a period of six months, shall be considered to have been abandoned. Any nonconforming use that is moved from the premises shall be considered to have been abandoned. 
(e)  Destruction. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire, the elements or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to conform to the provisions of subpart B of this Code. In the case of partial destruction, where the cost of repairing or replacing the structure does not exceed 60 percent of its most recent appraised property tax value, reconstruction may be permitted after a hearing and favorable action by the board of adjustment, provided that the repaired or new structure shall not exceed the original structure in lot coverage, gross floor area or height and shall not increase the degree of any nonconformity. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 1.05(a))  
Sec. 78-232. - Nonconforming lots. 
A lot of record that has less area than required in this subpart B may be used for a single-family dwelling, and no lot shall be reduced in area below the minimum requirements set forth in subpart B of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 1.05(b))  
Sec. 78-233. - Nonconforming signs. 
Any sign that is permitted to remain in place as a nonconforming use may be continued in use until the sign, or a substantial part of it, is blown down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled for any purpose other than maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols or other matter on the sign. A sign, or a substantial part of it, shall be considered to have been destroyed or dismantled if the cost of repairing the sign is more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 1.05(c))  
Chapter 82 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; signs, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; development plan for subdivisions, § 90-31 et seq.; vegetation, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 82-1. - Scope and applicability of chapter. 
No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any development until all of the applicable standards of this chapter are met. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.01)  
Secs. 82-2—82-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SITE PLANS 
 
Sec. 82-31. - Required. 
(a)  Site plan approval shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit for the following types of development: 
(1)  Approval of a site plan by the planning and zoning commission shall be required for the following types of development: 
a.  Development in nonresidential zoning classifications. 
b.  Planned developments, excluding areas of planned developments devoted exclusively to single-family, single-family attached, or duplex dwellings. 
c.  Multifamily dwellings. 
d.  Schools, elementary or secondary. 
e.  Church or rectory. 
f.  Community center, public. 
g.  Mobile home park. 
h.  Recreational and entertainment uses. 
(b)  Approval of a site plan by the town council, after a recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, shall be required when the site plan is in conjunction with a request for a specific use permit. 
(c)  A site plan shall be required to accompany any application for oil, natural gas, or combined permit, pursuant to section 34-421, "Oil and gas well permit application and filing fees." The oil and gas inspector shall review a submitted site plan and will determine if the site plan is administratively complete and in compliance with all applicable requirements detailed in section 82-33, "Application requirements," and section 34-421(d)(12), "Oil and gas well permit application and filing fees." 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.09(a); Ord. No. 25-03, § 2, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 46-06, §§ 2, 3, 8-7-2006; Ord. No. 52-07, § 2, 7-16-2007; Ord. No. 13-14, § 1, 3-17-2014)  
Sec. 82-32. - Scale and copies. 
There shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission and town council, if required, for its approval, a site plan drawn to an acceptable scale and with adequate copies. The scale and number of copies shall be that deemed necessary by the town manager, town manager or other designated official. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.09(b))  
Sec. 82-33. - Application requirements. 
The site plan scale drawing shall include, where applicable, but not be limited to, the following, together with any other requirements provided for by this subpart B or other valid ordinances of the town: 
(1)  The applicant's name and address and his legal interest in the subject property. 
(2)  The owner's name and address and, if different than the applicant, the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application. 
(3)  Street address (or common description) of the property. 
(4)  The zoning classification and present use of the subject property. 
(5)  The particular provision of this subpart B requiring site plan approval. 
(6)  The proposed use or uses and a general description for the proposed development. 
(7)  A survey, certified by a registered professional land surveyor, showing property boundary lines and dimensions and easements, roadways, rail lines and public rights-of-way crossing and adjacent to the subject property. 
(8)  If the property is subject to a development plan or site plan, a statement showing that the proposed use is in substantial conformity thereto. 
(9)  Any proposed grading or regrading of the subject property; and significant natural topographical or physical features of the property, watercourses, marshes, trees in excess of six inches in caliper per division 4, article II, chapter 94 of this Code, tree preservation, rock outcroppings and existing contours in one-foot intervals, unless a smaller interval is otherwise required under this subpart B, or unless otherwise approved by the town engineer, and which may be two feet to five feet in extremely steep terrain. 
(10)  Maps showing the location, size, use and arrangements of all proposed buildings and computations showing height in stories and feet, total floor area, total square feet of ground area coverage of proposed and existing buildings which will remain, if any. 
(11)  Location, dimensions and number of all vehicular and pedestrian circulation elements, including streets and roadways, driveways, entrances, curbs, curb cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces and access aisles; sidewalks, walkways and pathways; refuse areas. 
(12)  The location and size of existing and proposed water and sewer public utilities on and adjacent to the site and fire hydrant locations. 
(13)  All existing and proposed surface and subsurface drainage facilities, including culverts, drains and detention ponds, showing the size and direction of flow. 
(14)  Architectural renderings or elevations of proposed structures. 
(15)  Location, designation and total area of all open usable space. 
(16)  A detailed landscaping plan meeting the provisions of article V of this chapter, landscaping and screening. 
(17)  In the case of any use requiring a specific use permit any information necessary to demonstrate compliance with all conditions imposed thereby. 
(18)  In the case of any proposed development within any specific plan area, any information necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable specific plan area land use and planning guidelines set forth in the comprehensive master plan. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.09(c); Ord. No. 06-12, § 5, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 82-34. - Site grading plan. 
Any site plan submitted for planning and zoning commission and/or town council approval shall include a site grading plan bearing the seal of a state licensed landscape architect, engineer or architect, as applicable, as part of the site plan to ensure preservation of large native trees, soil conservation and attention to drainage considerations. Additionally, the site plan shall generally indicate the location of all existing wooded areas and/or individual trees of six inches in caliper and larger. An accurate tree survey of existing trees of six-inch caliper and larger may be required at the site plan approval stage if the planning and zoning commission and/or town council determines that the characteristics of the particular site warrants the survey. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.09(d))  
Sec. 82-35. - Action on application. 
(a)  When a site plan application has been reviewed and determined to be in conformance with all applicable provisions of this subpart B by the town manager, it shall be placed on the agenda for the next available regular planning and zoning commission meeting. If an application that requires approval by the town council is recommended for approval by the planning and zoning commission, it shall be placed on the agenda for the next available regular town council meeting. 
(b)  The town planning and zoning commission and/or town council consideration shall include conformance with specific plan area planning guidelines set forth in the comprehensive master plan, if applicable; paving and layout of streets, alleys and sidewalks; means of ingress and egress, provisions for drainage, parking spaces, protective screening and open spaces; areas designated for landscaping; and other aspects deemed by the town planning and zoning commission necessary to consider in the interest of promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. 
(c)  In the approval or disapproval of the site plan, the town planning and zoning commission and/or town council shall not be authorized to waive or vary conditions and requirements contained in this subpart B or other ordinances of the town, unless authority for such waiver or variation is specifically authorized by this subpart B. 
(d)  Any motion for disapproval of the site plan shall state the reasons for the disapproval. 
(e)  Any site plan application denied by the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the town council. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.09(e))  
Sec. 82-36. - Building permits to be in conformance with plan. 
It shall be unlawful to issue a building permit for any development for which a site plan is required pursuant to this chapter prior to the approval of a site plan. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the approved site plan or in accordance with authorized minor changes. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.09(f))  
Sec. 82-37. - Minor changes. 
Subsequent to approval of a site plan, minor changes may be authorized by the town manager or town manager when such minor changes will not cause any of the following circumstances to occur: 
(1)  A change in the character of the development. 
(2)  An increase in the maximum authorized ratio of the gross floor areas in structures to the area of the lot. 
(3)  An increase in the intensity of use. 
(4)  A reduction in the originally approved separations between buildings. 
(5)  An increase in the external effects on adjacent property. 
(6)  A reduction in the originally approved setbacks from property lines. 
(7)  An increase in the problems of circulation, safety and utilities. 
(8)  An increase of more than 20 percent or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less, in ground coverage by structures. 
(9)  A reduction in the ratio of off-street parking and loading space to gross floor area in structures. 
(10)  A decrease in the percentage of landscaping required. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.09(g); Ord. No. 06-12, § 6, 2-20-2012)  
Secs. 82-38—82-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing, parking, § 66-151 et seq. 
 
Sec. 82-71. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to require off-street parking and loading facilities in proportion to the parking demand for each use in order to ensure functionally adequate, aesthetically pleasing and secure off-street parking and loading facilities. The regulations and design standards of this article are intended to accomplish the following: 
(1)  To ensure the usefulness of parking and loading facilities. 
(2)  To ensure sufficient parking spaces on-site in order to prevent inappropriate parking on public streets and in residential neighborhoods. 
(3)  To ensure that developments are not designed with excessive parking. 
(4)  To ensure that access to parking and loading facilities does not impair the function of adjacent roadways or endanger the public safety. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(a); Ord. No. 62-04, § 2, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 82-72. - Applicability of article provisions. 
(a)  New and complying development. New development occurring after June 6, 1994, and development existing on June 6, 1994, and complying with the number of off-street parking and loading spaces required by this article, shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Every use of a building or land hereafter established shall provide the minimum off-street parking and loading spaces as required by this article. The adequate provision of parking spaces will be reviewed during rezoning, specific use permit (SUP), site plan and certificate of occupancy approvals. 
(2)  The number of parking and loading spaces may be reduced when the land use or floor area of a building is changed or reduced to a use or floor area for which fewer parking or loading spaces are required. 
(3)  When a building is expanded or a land use is changed so as to increase the number of parking or loading spaces required, the number of such spaces shall be increased. 
(b)  Existing noncomplying development. Developments with noncomplying parking and loading areas shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Existing parking and loading spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum required by this article. 
(2)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new building, building addition or expansion, change of use, remodeling or structural alterations until all of the parking and loading areas associated with the development are brought into full conformity with all of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(b); Ord. No. 62-04, § 3, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 82-73. - Computing parking and loading requirements. 
The number of parking spaces required for a specific development proposal shall be based on the requirements listed in section 82-74, Off-street parking and loading space requirements, and the following provisions: 
(1)  Deviation of required spaces. The amount of parking can be reduced or increased by 20 percent. Deviations in excess of 20 percent must be accompanied by a parking study and approved by the town council. Any approved parking in excess of 20 percent must be mitigated. Mitigation can be achieved by the use of pervious paving, increased landscaping, increased stormwater treatment, or other method to reduce the impact of the increased parking. 
(2)  Unlisted uses. Where questions arise concerning the minimum off-street parking and loading requirements for any use not specifically listed, the requirements may be interpreted by the town as those of a similar use. 
(3)  Large developments. A large development is defined as any development that is required to provide over 250 parking spaces based on the parking ratios listed in section 82-74. All large developments are required to provide a parking study as defined in this section and should provide a minimum reduction of 20 percent from the sum of the specific parking required for each use. 
(4)  Parking study. A parking study required by this article shall be reviewed by the town along with any traffic engineering and planning data that are appropriate to the establishment of a parking requirement for the use proposed. A parking study, when required by this article, shall include, but not be limited to, estimates of parking requirements based on recommendations in studies such as those from the Urban Land Institute, the Institute of Traffic Engineers, or the Traffic Institute, and based on data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same or comparable to the proposed use. Comparability shall be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity and location. The analysis must include a shared parking analysis based on the mixture of uses and corresponding peak demand. Specifically, the parking required for restaurants should be included in the study and be determined by the number, location, and type of restaurants proposed. The study shall document the source of data used to develop recommendations. 
(5)  Location. All required parking shall be located and arranged on the site to insure optimal access and use. 
(6)  Fractions. When measurements determining the number of required parking and loading spaces result in fractions, any fraction less than one-half shall be disregarded and any fraction of one-half or more shall be rounded upward to the next highest full number. 
(7)  Seating capacity. Where parking ratios are specified in terms of the number of seats, this shall be interpreted to mean maximum seating capacity as determined using the standards of the uniform building code. 
(8)  Floor area. Floor area of structures devoted to off-street parking of vehicles shall be excluded in computing the off-street parking and loading requirements of any use. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(c); Ord. No. 62-04, § 4, 7-19-2004) 
_____ 
Sec. 82-74. - Off-street parking and loading space requirements. 
The following are the off-street parking and loading space requirements: 
SCHEDULE OF PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
Use Type 	Parking 
Residential Uses 
All residential uses 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Educational, institutional and special uses 
Church or rectory 	1 space per 3 seats in main sanctuary 
College or university 	A space per classroom/instruction area plus 1 space per 3 students accommodated 
Day care center 	1 space per 4 persons accommodated 
Fraternal club or lodge 	1 space per 4 persons accommodated 
Hospital 	2 spaces per 3 beds 
Institution, drug or psychiatric treatment 	2 spaces per 3 beds 
Medical office 	1 space per 250 square feet 
Museum, library or art gallery (public) 	10 plus 1 space per 500 square feet 
Nursing or congregate care facility 	2 spaces per 3 beds 
School, elementary or secondary 	Elem. or Jr. High, 1 space per classroom plus 1 space per 3 seats in gym or assembly; high school (see college) 
Utility and public service uses 
All utility and public service uses 	To be determined by town engineer 
Transportation-related uses 
All Transportation-related uses 	To be determined by town engineer 
Retail uses 
Restaurant 	1 space per 75 square feet 
All other retail uses 	1 space per 250 square feet 
Personal service uses 
Hotel or motel 	1 space per guest suite plus specified requirements for restaurant and other associated uses 
Laboratory, medical and dental 	1 space per 300 square feet 
Office, general business and professional 	1 space per 300 square feet 
Studio, television or radio 	1 space per 300 square feet 
All other personal service uses 	1 space per 250 square feet 
Recreational and entertainment uses 
Amusement and recreation (indoors) 	10 spaces, plus 1 space per 200 square feet over 2,000 square feet; bowling alleys: 6 per bowling lane 
Health club or athletic club 	1 space per 250 square feet 
Stable, commercial boarding or rental 	1 space per 2 stalls 
Theater 	1 space per 3 seats 
Automobile and related service uses 
Car wash, self-service 	2 spaces plus 1 space per bay for drying area 
Motor vehicle fuel service station 	6 spaces 
All other automobile and related service uses 	1 space per 250 square feet 
Heavy commercial uses 
Building material sales and storage (indoors) 	1 space per 250 square feet 
Building material sales or storage (outdoors) 	1 space per 250 square feet 
Cabinet and upholstery shop 	1 space per 750 square feet 
Cleaning, dyeing or laundry plant 	1 space per 750 square feet 
Laboratory, manufacturing 	1 space per 750 square feet 
Laboratory, scientific and research 	1 space per 750 square feet 
Lithographic or print shop 	1 space per 250 square feet 
Maintenance service 	1 space per 750 square feet 
Miniwarehouse 	1 space per 75 storage bays with minimum of 3 spaces 
Office-showroom/warehouse 	Retail — 1 space per 250 square feet; 
Office — 1 space per 300 square feet; Showroom/warehouse — 1 space per 2,000 square feet 
Repair services, general 	1 space per 250 square feet 
Warehousing and wholesale, general 	1 space per 2,000 square feet 
Vehicle and equipment sales or rental 	1 space per 250 square feet 
Welding or machine shop 	1 space per 250 square feet 
Industrial uses 
All industrial uses 	1 space per 750 square feet 
Agriculture and extractive uses 
Feed store 	1 space per 250 square feet 
Greenhouse, wholesale 	1 space per 500 square feet 
 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(d); Ord. No. 75-99, § 4, 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 14-00, § 10, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 40-00, § 2, 6-5-2000; Ord. No. 48-03, § 2, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 62-04, § 5, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 06-12, § 7, 2-20-2012) 
_____ 
Sec. 82-75. - Off-site parking. 
Required off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot as the principal use, provided that all or a portion of the required parking spaces may be located on a separate lot from the lot on which the principal use is located, based on the following provisions: 
(1)  Contiguous. The off-site parking shall be located on a lot that is immediately adjacent to, and contiguous with the lot containing the principal use. 
(2)  Ownership. If a proposed off-site parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal use to which it is accessory, all necessary legal instruments shall be executed to ensure that the required number of spaces shall remain available throughout the life of the principal use. 
(3)  Zoning. An off-site parking area shall be located on a lot zoned to permit the principal use as a permitted or specific use. If the principal use is authorized as a specific use in the district in which the proposed off-site parking area is to be located, a specific use permit shall be required for the off-site parking area. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(e))  
Sec. 82-76. - Parking spaces for persons with disabilities. 
(a)  Generally. For parking areas with ten or more required spaces, a portion of the total number of required parking spaces in each off-street parking area shall be specifically designated, located and reserved for use by persons with disabilities. 
(b)  Number of spaces. The minimum number of spaces to be provided shall be a portion of the total number of parking spaces required, as determined from the following schedule. Parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall be counted toward fulfilling the overall off-street parking standards. One in every eight handicapped accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be designated "van accessible." 
Total Required 
Spaces 	Minimum Spaces 
for Disabled 
10—25 	1 
26—50 	2 
51—75 	3 
76—100 	4 
101—150 	5 
151—200 	6 
201—300 	7 
301—400 	8 
401—500 	9 
501—1,000 	2 percent of total spaces 
Over 1,000 	20 plus 1 per each 100 spaces over 1,000 
 
(c)  Minimum dimensions. Handicapped accessible parking spaces must be at least 17½ feet deep and eight feet wide with an access aisle, which may be shared by two handicapped accessible spaces. The minimum width of the access aisle shall be five feet, except when adjacent to a van accessible space, in which case the minimum width shall be eight feet. All van accessible spaces may be grouped on one level of a parking structure. The parking access aisle shall be part of an accessible route to the building or facility entrance. Parking spaces and access aisles shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding 1:50 (two percent) in all directions. Vertical clearance must be at least eight feet, two inches. 
(d)  Location of spaces. Required spaces for persons with disabilities shall be located in close proximity to building entrances and shall be designed to permit occupants of vehicles to reach the building entrance on an unobstructed path with a minimum width of three feet. The town manager may require that off-street parking spaces provided for persons with disabilities be dispersed throughout the project if deemed necessary to ensure safe, convenient and accessible parking spaces for all users of the project. 
(e)  Signs and marking. Required spaces for persons with disabilities shall be designated with signs and pavement markings identifying them as reserved for persons with disabilities. The required sign shall clearly indicate the maximum fine assessed against violators. Signs shall be posted directly in front of the parking space at a height of no less than 36 inches and no more than 60 inches above pavement level. Signs required by this article shall not exceed four square feet in area. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(f); Ord. No. 62-04, § 6, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 82-77. - Parking space and aisle dimensions. 
The minimum required dimensions of parking spaces and aisles shall be as indicated in the following table. If proposed parking angles are not shown in the table, dimensions shall be interpolated from the table by the town engineer. All dimensions are in feet. Minor deviations from these standards may be approved by the town engineer for the design of parking structures. The dimensions in the table are graphically illustrated in the figure following the table in this section: 
Parking 
Angle 
A 	Stall 
Width 
B 	Stall 
Depth 
C 	Stall 
Width 
D 	Curb Length E 	Wall Module Width 
F 	Interlock 
Module 
Width 
G 	Stall 
Depth to 
Interlock 
H 
90 degree parking angle, two-way aisle 
90 	9.00 	17.5 	26.0 	9.00 	61.0 	61.0 	17.5 
60 degree parking angle, two-way aisle 
60 	9.00 	18.0 	26.0 	10.4 	62.0 	59.0 	16.5 
75 degree parking angle, one-way aisle 
75 	9.00 	18.5 	22.0 	9.3 	59.0 	57.0 	17.5 
60 degree parking angle, one-way aisle 
60 	9.00 	18.0 	18.0 	10.4 	54.0 	51.0 	16.5 
45 degree parking angle, one-way aisle 
45 	9.00 	16.5 	15.0 	12.7 	48.0 	44.0 	14.5 
 
 
Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(g))  
Sec. 82-78. - Parking area design. 
All off-street parking areas, other than those designed solely for a single dwelling unit and not sharing a common parking area, shall comply with the following design requirements: 
(1)  Each off-street parking space shall open directly onto an aisle or driveway that is not a public street or a public alley, provided that this subsection shall not apply to parking spaces provided by the town for town parks. 
(2)  Aisles and driveways shall not be used for parking vehicles. 
(3)  Parking spaces shall be designed to permit entry and exit without moving any other vehicle. 
(4)  No parking space shall be located so as to block access by emergency vehicles. 
(5)  No off-street parking spaces shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street public alley or required joint access easement. 
(6)  For parking areas including ten or more spaces, a minimum queuing distance of 20 feet shall be provided along all access drives between the street right-of-way line and the nearest parking space. 
(7)  Parking areas containing five or more spaces shall delineate each space by single or double stripes on each side of the space. Except for parallel parking spaces, stall width shall be measured from the centerline of one stripe to the centerline of the other stripe. 
(8)  Curbs shall be provided to prevent any vehicle using a parking area from encroaching on any public right-of-way, required landscaping area or adjacent property, unless otherwise approved by the town engineer. 
(9)  Parallel parking spaces shall have a minimum length of 23 feet and a minimum width of eight feet. A minimum width of ten feet shall be required if any structure or obstacle that would impede the opening of a car door is within two feet of the curbside of a parallel parking space. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(h))  
Sec. 82-79. - Residential parking area design. 
Required parking spaces for residential dwelling units, other than multifamily, shall be a minimum of nine feet wide and 20 feet long. Such parking spaces may be located on a driveway or in an enclosed garage and may be placed end to end, but no portion of any parking space shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street or a public alley. Required parking spaces for residential dwelling units other than multifamily or mobile homes shall be located in an enclosed garage. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(i))  
Sec. 82-80. - Paving standards. 
All parking and loading spaces and driveways constructed after December 31, 1974, shall be free of weeds and surfaced with concrete, asphalt brick or other accepted pavement, as approved by the town engineer or the person so designated. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(j))  
Sec. 82-81. - Use of parking areas. 
Required off-street parking spaces and associated aisles and maneuvering areas shall be used for vehicle parking only. No sales, storage, display of merchandise (including automobiles), repair work or dismantling shall be permitted in such areas. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(k))  
Sec. 82-82. - Queuing requirements for drive-through facilities. 
In addition to meeting the off-street parking requirements of this article, drive-through facilities shall meet the following queuing standards: 
(1)  Minimum dimensions. Each queue space shall be a minimum of ten feet by 20 feet in size. Unless otherwise indicated, queuing shall be measured from the point of ultimate service to the end of the queuing lane. 
(2)  Design. Each queue lane shall be clearly defined and designed so as not to conflict or interfere with other traffic using the site. A bypass lane a minimum of 12 feet wide may be necessary if a one-way traffic flow is used in the parking lot. If utilized, the bypass lane shall be clearly designated and distinct from the queuing area. 
(3)  Number of queue spaces. The minimum number of queue spaces, including the vehicle being serviced, shall be provided for each drive-through facility as follows: 
Land Use Type 	Minimum Queue Spaces 
Bank teller lane 	Five 
Automated teller machine 	Three 
Restaurant, drive-through 	Five 
Car wash stall, automatic or full service 	Five 
Car wash stall, self-service 	Three 
Oil change station 	Four 
Dry cleaning or laundry 	Three 
Photo lab 	Four 
General retail 	Four 
Gasoline pump island 	30 feet from each end of pump island 
 
(4)  Tandem drive-through facilities. The measurement for queuing shall be measured from the last point of ultimate service to the end of the queuing lane. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(l); Ord. No. 62-04, § 7, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 06-12, § 8, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 82-83. - Off-street loading requirements. 
Loading requirements. Each development is required to detail where loading will occur and the type of vehicle servicing each specific use. The location and design of loading areas shall conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Paving standards. The surface of all open off-street loading spaces shall conform to the requirements for off-street parking areas. 
(b)  Design of loading areas. All off-street loading spaces shall comply with the following design requirements: 
1.  No off-street loading space shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street. Any loading dock or door shall be set back far enough from the right-of-way so that no portion of the right-of-way is occupied by trucks or other vehicles while loading or unloading. 
2.  The location of the loading area shall not interfere with the free circulation of vehicles in the off-street parking area. Where loading areas are directly adjacent to or integrated with an off-street parking lot, the town engineer may require installation of physical barriers or other means of separating loading areas from parking areas and pedestrian traffic. 
3.  No loading space shall be located so as to block access by emergency vehicles. 
(c)  Use of loading areas. Required off-street loading spaces and associated aisles and maneuvering areas shall be used for vehicle loading only. No sales, storage, display of merchandise (including automobiles), repair work or dismantling shall be permitted in such areas. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(n); Ord. No. 62-04, § 8, 7-19-2004)  
Secs. 82-84—82-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 82-111—82-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DRIVEWAYS AND ACCESS 
 
Sec. 82-131. - Access required. 
All required off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided with driveway access to a public street or alley. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(o)(1))  
Sec. 82-132. - Minimum driveway width. 
All driveways shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(o)(2))  
Sec. 82-133. - Nonresidential access. 
Access to parking lots or areas that are accessory to or serve nonresidential uses in nonresidential districts shall not be through or from streets in residential districts. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(o)(3))  
Sec. 82-134. - Residential access. 
Driveway cuts or entrances to a residential lot with four or fewer dwelling units or less than one acre shall not be permitted on arterial or collector streets. All ingress and egress to such residential lots shall be from an alley or local street. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(o)(4))  
Sec. 82-135. - Maximum driveway frontage. 
The combined width of driveway cuts or entrances along any street or alley shall be determined at the time of site plan in accordance with the engineering standards manual, but in no case shall exceed the following: 
(1)  For nonresidential uses, 40 percent of the frontage of the lot. 
(2)  For residential uses, 40 percent of the frontage of the lot or 20 feet, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(o)(5))  
Sec. 82-136. - Emergency access drives. 
Emergency access drives, to be used solely for the purpose of emergency vehicle access, may be required when deemed necessary by the town engineer. This access will be blocked to nonemergency traffic by means of fire department approved rapid access locking hardware or other means as approved by the town. The emergency access drive shall have 24 feet of right-of-way with 20 feet of six-inch reinforced concrete paving. All necessary drainage facilities such as flumes shall be provided to drain the roadway. Any and all additional design criteria set forth by the town engineer shall be met. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(o)(6))  
Sec. 82-137. - Residential driveway spacing from an intersection. 
No residential driveway shall be closer than 35 feet from any intersection. All drive spacing measurements shall be measured from the edge of pavement to the start of the driveway radius. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § 9, 2-20-2012)  
Secs. 82-138—82-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - VISUAL CLEARANCES 
 
Sec. 82-161. - Clear visibility standards. 
No walls, buildings, fences or other obstructions to view in excess of two feet in height shall be placed within the following triangular areas at the intersections of streets, driveways and alleys, except trees pruned higher than seven feet to permit unobstructed vision to automobile drivers: 
(1)  At the intersection of two arterial streets or an arterial and collector street, the triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting them at points a minimum of 30 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. Depending on the curvature of intersecting roads, the town engineer may require a larger triangular area. 
(2)  At all other street intersections, the triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
(3)  At all intersections of streets with driveways or alleys, the triangular area formed by the street right-of-way line and the alley right-of-way line or the driveway pavement edge and a line connecting them at points ten feet from their intersection. 
(4)  If the sight triangle formed using the stopping sight distance based on the latest edition of "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets" by the American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) is greater than the visibility clips described above, the AASHTO visibility clip shall be used. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(o)(7); Ord. No. 06-12, § 10, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 82-162. - Residential driveway. 
There shall be a minimum of four feet between driveways located on adjacent residential lots, and in no case shall such driveways abut one another. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02(o)(8))  
Secs. 82-163—82-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - IMPACT ANALYSES 
 
Sec. 82-181. - Traffic impact analysis required. 
The town engineer may require that a traffic impact analysis prepared by a traffic engineering firm designated by the town is included as part of submittals for approval of a comprehensive plan amendment, development plan, site plan, conceptual site plan required as part of a planned development, or site plan required as part of a specific use permit for new development. The traffic impact analysis may be required when one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  For the development of a tract for residential uses, when the overall size of the tract of land to be developed exceeds five acres in size, the total number of proposed residential lots exceeds five, the smallest lot size proposed is less than five acres, and the submission of a development plan is required for the development. Sequential development of any remaining portion of the original tract within a 24-month period, that appears to be intended to avoid this condition, may at the direction of the town engineer, be required to have a traffic impact analysis performed. 
(2)  Any portion of the property to be developed is within 500 feet of an intersection of arterial roadways or any combination of arterial and/or collector roadways. 
(3)  Parking required under subpart B of this Code to support the proposed land use exceeds 100 parking locations. 
(4)  For the development of tracts for nonresidential uses, when more than two curb openings are required along any roadways that abut the tract to be developed. 
(5)  A variance is requested from the town's minimum standard separation for median openings. 
(6)  A reduction in existing right-of-way section or street width is proposed to occur as part of the development. 
(7)  Any portion of the property to be developed is within 500 feet of an existing or proposed school site and shares access with that site to a common roadway. 
(8)  Signalization is proposed or anticipated in conjunction with the development. 
(9)  Other circumstances necessitating a traffic impact analysis as determined by the town engineer. 
(10)  If it is the town engineer's professional judgment that the projected trip generation for the proposed development does not warrant the submission of a traffic impact analysis, the town engineer may recommend to the planning and zoning commission and the town council that the requirements of this article be waived for such development. 
(11)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, residential development generating 50 or fewer vehicle trips per day is exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02; Ord. No. 09-00, § 1(p), 2-7-2000)  
Sec. 82-182. - Purpose. 
The traffic impact analysis, when required by the town engineer, shall be used by the town to determine: 
(1)  The impact of the proposed development on the transportation facilities of the town, including state facilities, streets, driveways, turn lanes, median openings, intersections, signs, signals, illumination, pedestrian facilities, bike facilities, or other transportation system components; 
(2)  That the town's transportation facilities, including state facilities, are adequate to meet the additional demands caused by the proposed development and to maintain the level of service standards of the town; 
(3)  The need to adjust, place conditions on or add facilities to the proposed site plan to minimize the impact of the proposed development on the town's transportation facilities; 
(4)  The need for the developer to make or pay for legally authorized and related improvements to the transportation system in order to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development on the transportation system and to maintain the level of service standards of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02; Ord. No. 09-00, § 1(q), 2-7-2000)  
Sec. 82-183. - Payment of cost. 
(a)  The applicants of the proposed development shall pay to the town a fee to cover the expense of the traffic impact analysis. The fee determination will be made by the town after review of the type, size and location of the proposed development. 
(b)  The owners of the property to be developed shall pay for any required traffic impact analysis. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.02; Ord. No. 09-00, § 1(r), (s), 2-7-2000)  
Secs. 82-184—82-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Guidelines on landscape and irrigation improvements, § 14-331 et seq.; environment, ch. 34. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 82-211. - Purpose. 
This article is designed to provide standards for the installation and maintenance of landscaping, walls and screening devices so as to promote the general welfare of the community. This is accomplished by, encouraging the creation of an attractive appearance along public streets and by screening from view those uses that may be unattractive to the public eye. Landscaping materials, including ground covers, shrubs and trees, further facilitate the control of erosion and the reduction of glare and dust, as well as the visual softening of building masses. Walls and screening devices allow for the separation of incongruous uses and for the buffering of intensive activities. Landscaping, walls, screening devices and their combination, help to effectuate privacy, logical development and the enhancement of property values. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(a))  
Sec. 82-212. - Applicability of article provisions. 
This article shall apply to the following: 
(1)  Nonresidential. New nonresidential development in all districts shall be subject to all provisions of this article, provided that a one-time expansion of the floor area of buildings on a lot or building tract not exceeding 15 percent of the existing floor area shall not be subject to the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Residential subdivisions and multifamily. New residential development, including new residential subdivisions, but excluding the construction of single-family detached, single-family attached or duplex dwellings on lots of record, shall be subject to the provisions of this subsection: 
a.  All such new residential development shall be subject to the standards of section 82-242, street buffer landscaping, and section 94-122, street buffer trees, along the frontage with such roadway. 
b.  Multifamily development shall be subject to the standards of section 82-301, residential compatibility standards. 
(3)  Residential lots. The development of single-family, duplex and multifamily uses shall be subject to the standards of section 94-125, tree planting requirements, residential lots. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(b))  
Sec. 82-213. - Approving bodies. 
Nonresidential developments shall submit a landscape plan in conjunction with any site plan or SUP application and be approved in conjunction with the site plan or SUP approval. For residential developments, landscape plans shall be submitted in conjunction with a development plan and record plat application and approved in conjunction with those applications. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(c)(2); Ord. No. 06-12, § 11, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 82-214. - Landscape plan. 
Any proposed building or use shall be shown on a landscape plan indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, parking areas, street improvements, locations and types of landscaped areas, walls, and screening devices. The appropriate number of copies of the landscape plan, as outlined in the application packet, shall be submitted to the town at the time any application for a development plan, record plat, specific use permit, or site plan is submitted. The approval of a landscape plan shall be considered a part of the respective application approval process. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(c)(1); Ord. No. 06-12, § 12, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 82-215. - Location of utilities. 
Proposed utilities shall be located, when possible, so that their installation will not adversely affect vegetation to be retained on a site. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(c)(3))  
Sec. 82-216. - Installation. 
Landscaping, watering devices, trees, walls and screening structures shall be installed in accordance with the approved final landscape and site plan prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the building or use. The building official may grant a temporary certificate of occupancy during the months when installation is impractical or not feasible, subject to the filing of a town approved affidavit with the town manager to this effect, indicating that such installation is to be complete by March 1 of the following year in which the affidavit was filed. Failure to comply with the requirements of this article shall be considered a misdemeanor, punishable as such by a fine in accordance with section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(c)(4))  
Sec. 82-217. - Removal of topsoil. 
No person shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil except in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on such premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(c)(5))  
Secs. 82-218—82-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LANDSCAPING 
 
Sec. 82-241. - Street yard landscaping. 
All undeveloped areas of the street yard shall be landscaped. In addition, each lot or building tract shall be required to provide landscaped areas within the street yard equal to the following minimum amount: 
(1)  A minimum of 20 percent of the street yard of each lot or tract shall be landscaped. 
(2)  A minimum of 50 percent of the street yard of each lot or tract with frontage on a scenic or country roadway shall be landscaped. 
(3)  Landscaping required to satisfy other provisions of this article and lying within the street yard may be used to satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(d)(1))  
Sec. 82-242. - Street buffer landscaping. 
The area of the lot adjacent to the street right-of-way line and extending into the lot for a minimum width as provided in subsections (1)—(3) of this section shall be landscaped, except for necessary driveways. Street buffer landscaped area shall be counted toward the street yard landscaping requirement. 
(1)  The minimum width of the landscaped street buffer from the street right-of-way line adjacent to a scenic roadway shall be 50 feet. 
(2)  The minimum width of the landscaped street buffer from the street right-of-way line adjacent to a principal or country roadway shall be 25 feet. 
(3)  The minimum width of the landscaped street buffer from the street right-of-way line adjacent to all other streets shall be 15 feet. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(d)(2))  
Sec. 82-243. - Parking area landscaping. 
Landscaped areas shall be provided within off-street parking areas at a minimum ratio of 90 square feet per 12 parking spaces, provided that off-street parking areas on lots or building tracts adjacent to a scenic roadway shall be provided with 170 square feet of landscaped area per 12 parking spaces. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, churches and/or schools shall be required to provide landscaped areas within off-street parking areas at a minimum ratio of 45 square feet per 12 parking spaces. Landscaped areas within parking lots shall be counted toward the street yard landscaping requirement. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(d)(3))  
Sec. 82-244. - Irrigation. 
All required landscaped areas shall include an irrigation system to ensure the health and growth of the landscape. Medians, rights-of-way, visibility clips and other common areas that are landscaped shall be irrigated, with irrigation plans for such landscaped areas approved by the town prior to the acceptance of public improvements for the development. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(d)(4))  
Sec. 82-245. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Landscaped areas shall be reasonably maintained by the owner or the lessee of the property, including pruning, trimming, watering and other requirements necessary to create an attractive appearance for the development. 
(b)  Any plant material not surviving shall be replaced within 30 days of its demise. Variances because of seasonal requirements can be granted by the town manager or designated representative. 
(c)  Lack of maintenance of required landscaping material shall constitute a violation of subpart B of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(c)(6))  
Sec. 82-246. - Outdoor patios and seating areas. 
Outdoor patios and seating areas associated with nonresidential uses shall be shown on a site plan and/or landscape plan. These regulations do not apply to sidewalks or other pedestrian spaces. An elevation drawing may be required to determine compliance with this section. In addition, outdoor patios and seating areas are subject to the following standards: 
(1)  The area must be clearly defined as part of the plan. The area must be clearly defined through the use of ornamental fencing or similar fencing that is consistent and complementary to the building or development in which it is located. Outdoor patios and seating area for restaurants that serve alcoholic beverages shall be required to physically define the space by using one of the options listed herein above. 
(2)  Additional elements such as roofs, arbors, trellises, tables, chairs, umbrellas and awnings, shall be consistent and complementary in material, design, and color to the building or development in which it is located. 
(3)  The area shall not impede pedestrian circulation or encroach into a designated parking area or fire lane. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § 13, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 82-247. - Aggregate or inorganic materials. 
Aggregate or inorganic materials (AIM) may be used to satisfy the landscape requirements of this article if such materials do not predominate over plant material. For the purposes of this requirement, the following more particularly describes the criteria applicable for use of AIM as a soil cover: 
(1)  The use of AIM shall be restricted by the following requirements: 
a.  Coverage cannot exceed 20 percent of the total open green space on a site, excluding decomposed granite pathways and patios. 
b.  Substitution for soil as a planting medium is not allowed. 
c.  Placement over an entire island or landscape planting bed is not allowed. 
d.  Synthetic turf is restricted only to outdoor recreation and play areas. Town council may approve additional locations and coverage amounts for properties located in areas master planned for campus industrial uses within the lakeside business district. All synthetic turf applications must meet the criteria for synthetic turf installation as maintained by the town manager or his designee. 
(2)  The use of AIM shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Installation shall mitigate migration of material over time. 
b.  Material must be sized appropriately to provide for slope stabilization. 
c.  Depth may not exceed four inches. 
d.  Size must be greater than the no. 4 sieve (4.75 mm) and smaller than 3 inches in diameter. 
e.  Material must be washed or screened and free of "fines" in order to aid in water infiltration. 
f.  Polypropylene and non-porous based weed barrier is strictly prohibited. 
g.  Subsurface drip irrigation is the only allowed type of irrigation in bed areas covered with AIM. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town may approve alternate plans, designs, and materials that comply with the intent of this section and that are in accordance with generally accepted industry standards. 
( Ord. No. 09-17 , § 1, 3-20-2017; Ord. No. 06-19 , § 1, 3-18-2019)  
Secs. 82-248—82-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SCREENING 
 
Sec. 82-271. - Parking areas. 
Parking areas shall be screened from street view to a minimum height of three feet above the highest finished grade adjacent to the street or curbline of the parking area. Such screening may be accomplished by the use of plants, earth berms, walls or fences, or natural topography, provided that walls or fences shall not be used for screening parking areas from principal, country or scenic roadways. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, schools shall be exempt from the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(f)(1))  
Sec. 82-272. - Outdoor storage areas. 
All outdoor storage areas for materials, trash, mechanical equipment (to include ground-based satellite dishes), vehicles, and fountain equipment (retention ponds) or other similar items shall be screened by a screening device of sufficient height, and subject to the following conditions. 
(1)  Wood fencing or screening is prohibited. 
(2)  Smaller items measuring three feet in height or less may be screened by either plant material or a wall constructed of or finished with materials that match the main building of the site. 
(3)  Dumpster enclosures, and screening walls four feet in height or greater shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Primary screening shall consist of a wall constructed of or finished with materials that match the main building of the site. 
b.  Landscaping shall be added adjacent to and along and about the outer perimeter of dumpster enclosures and larger screening walls to soften their appearance except where dumpsters and their enclosures are located behind a building and are not visible from a public street. 
c.  Dumpster enclosures should be located at least 50 feet off of and away from adjacent roadways so as not to be visible from said roadways. 
d.  Enhanced landscaping is required for any dumpster that is located within 50 feet of a public roadway. Enhanced landscaping should include aesthetically designed perimeter shrubs, natural grasses, and canopy and ornamental trees as appropriate to soften and screen the dumpster enclosure. 
e.  Enclosure gates shall be constructed of sheet metal with steel frame and painted to complement the building. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(f)(2); Ord. No. 06-12, § 14, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 82-273. - Roof-mounted units and/or equipment. 
(a)  In all nonresidential developments, roof-mounted mechanical units and/or equipment shall be screened from view by parapet walls, mansard roofs or other architectural elements. 
(b)  Parapet walls, mansard roofs or other architectural elements shall be constructed to a height not less than one foot above the horizontal plane of the highest roof-mounted mechanical unit and/or piece of equipment. 
(c)  Parapet walls, mansard roofs and architectural elements shall be constructed of materials compatible to those used in the development. 
(d)  If parapet walls or mansard roofs are used to meet the screening requirements of this section, they will be constructed in a continuous, unbroken method along any wall plane. 
(e)  The height of required screening elements shall not contribute to the calculation of building height. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(f)(3); Ord. No. 84-99, § 1, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 82-274. - Loading and service bays. 
All loading, delivery and service bays, except for driveway openings, shall be screened from street view by a minimum six-foot high screening device. Such screening device shall consist of plant material, brick, masonry wall with stucco or mortar wash, or compatible alternatives approved by the planning and zoning commission, provided that only plant material shall be used for screening such bays from scenic or country roadways. Materials used for screening shall be of sufficient height at installation to screen the areas intended for screening and maintained at such height in perpetuity. Service bays in automobile service stations shall not be oriented to face any public street. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(f)(4); Ord. No. 06-12, § 15, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 82-275. - Outdoor lighting. 
(a)  All outdoor lighting shall not produce a disability glare or a nuisance or create light intrusion as defined in section 74-3. 
(b)  Luminaires or lighting standards installed for the purpose of illuminating a private outdoor recreational activity shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  No building permit shall be issued for the installation of lighting standards for the purpose of illuminating private outdoor recreational activities until outdoor lighting plans have been submitted, as required in section 78-125(a), "Procedures," and have been approved by the town. 
(2)  Permanent or temporary luminaries [luminaires] or lighting standards installed for the purpose of illuminating private outdoor recreational activities shall: 
i.  Use full cutoff fixtures, as defined in section 74-3; 
ii.  Not exceed a height of 30 feet; 
iii.  Not be closer than 40 feet from a property line; and 
iv.  The maximum measurable foot-candle illumination in the horizontal plane shall not exceed 20 foot-candles. 
(3)  When permanent or temporary luminaires or lighting standards are installed for the purpose of illuminating private outdoor recreational activities and do not comply with subsection (b)(2), a waiver will be required, as set forth herein, prior to installation. 
i.  A waiver as to the requirements set forth in subsection (b)(2) may be permitted by the town council after recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
ii.  A waiver is permissible as to the requirements set forth in subsection (b)(2) only where application by the property owner or his designee has been submitted to the town. Upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, the town council may grant a waiver if the town council determines that the permanent or temporary luminaires or lighting standards would not: 
a.  Create a nuisance as defined in section 74-3; 
b.  Create disability glare as defined in section 74-3; 
c.  Create a light intrusion as defined in section 74-3; 
d.  Be aesthetically inconsistent with the surrounding development, considering the following factors: 
1.  The location of the permanent or temporary luminaire or lighting standard; 
2.  The type of construction material used for the permanent or temporary luminaire or lighting standard; 
3.  The location of the subject property; and 
4.  The outdoor lighting used on adjacent or surrounding property. 
iii.  Any applicant requesting an outdoor lighting waiver shall place an informational sign on such lot or tract of land or property in accordance with section 78-152 of this Code. 
iv.  The procedures set forth in section 78-153 and section 78-154 of this Code must be followed before any action is taken on a request for an outdoor lighting waiver. 
(c)  Architectural lighting of fences, signs, and structures in residential open space common areas shall be installed so that the axis of illumination is adjusted to minimize the amount of light escaping above, below, and to the side of the illuminated object. 
(d)  Architectural lighting of landscaping in open space common areas shall be installed according to the following requirements: 
(1)  Any lighting that is to be placed in the canopy of a tree shall be directed in a downward position to simulate natural light received by the area. 
(2)  The fixture shall be shielded so that all of the light is directed downward and shall not be directed toward neighboring properties, to reduce light intrusion. 
(3)  All proposed lighting that is to be placed in a tree shall be affixed to the trunk or branch through the use of an adjustable bracketing system that will allow for the continued growth of the tree. 
(4)  The mounting height of landscape lighting shall not exceed 25 feet. 
(5)  No lighting shall be bolted, nailed, or glued to the trunk or any appendages of the tree, and such unauthorized attachment will be treated as a violation of chapter 94, Vegetation, of the town's Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Street lighting in agriculture and single family estate zoned areas shall be installed as follows: 
(1)  Street lighting specifications shall be included in the approved construction plans for the development. 
(2)  Street lighting shall use full cutoff fixtures, as defined in section 74-3, and shall not exceed a height of 25 feet. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 14-03, § 3, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 101-04, § 4, 12-20-2004)  
Sec. 82-276. - Height of screening devices. 
The height of screening devices shall be measured from the highest finished adjacent grade of the element to be screened. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(f)(6))  
Sec. 82-277. - Screening plant selection list. 
Plants used to satisfy screening standards may include, but shall not be limited to, the following species: 
Arborvitae (Arborvitae sp.) 
Azaleas (Rhododendron sp.) 
Cherry Laurel (Prunus caroliniana) 
Elaeagnus (Elaeagnus sp.) 
Glossy Privet (Ligustrum lucidum) 
Hollies (Ilex sp.) 
Indian Hawthorn (Raphiolepis indica) 
Junipers (Juniperus sp.) 
Oleander (Nerium oleander) 
Pampas grass (Cortaderia selloana) 
Photinia (Photinia fraseri) 
Pittosporum (Pittosporum tobira) 
Privet (Ligustrum sp.) 
Pyracantha (Pyracantha sp.) 
Sweet Viburnum (Viburnum sp.) 
Texas Purple Sage (Leucophyllum frutescens) 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(f)(7))  
Sec. 82-278. - Exposed concrete and retaining walls. 
All exposed concrete, including but not limited to retaining/detaining walls, turn-down curbs, and tree retaining walls, shall be clad in a material to match the materials on the main building on the site. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § 16, 2-20-2012)  
Secs. 82-279—82-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 82-301. - Applicability of division provisions. 
The residential compatibility standards of this article apply to the following: 
(1)  Nonresidential development adjacent to or separated only by an alley from developed residential property or vacant land zoned or designated on the comprehensive master plan for residential use. 
(2)  Multifamily development adjacent to or separated only by an alley from developed single-family detached residences or vacant land zoned or designated on the comprehensive master plan for such use. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(g)(1))  
Sec. 82-302. - Compatibility buffer. 
A landscaped buffer shall be located on the site of the nonresidential or multifamily use along all property lines adjacent to the existing or proposed residential uses, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  A brick wall or masonry wall with stucco or mortar wash finish, both exterior finishes being the same, shall be constructed along the property line. Such walls shall have no vehicular access point into or from an alley and shall be a minimum of six feet in height, except that the first 25 feet in from the street line may be stepped down to a minimum height of four feet. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, churches and/or schools shall be exempt from the requirements of this division. 
(2)  For nonresidential development, except for churches and/or schools, the landscaped setback shall consist of a minimum 25-foot landscaped buffer. Understory plants of species included in section 82-277, Screening plant selection list, shall be provided in order to achieve a continuous dense six-foot screen. Native shade trees, a minimum of three-inch caliper and of species included in section 94-66 of this Code, Approved tree lists, shall be provided at a ratio of one tree per 400 square feet of buffer area. 
(3)  For multifamily development, the landscape setback shall consist of a minimum 50-foot landscaped buffer. Understory plants of species included in section 82-277, Screening plant selection list, shall be provided in order to achieve a continuous dense six-foot screen. Native shade trees, a minimum three-inch caliper and of species included in section 94-66 of this Code, Approved tree lists, shall be provided at a ratio of one tree per 500 square feet of buffer area. 
(4)  For churches, the landscape setback shall consist of a minimum 25-foot landscape buffer, with native shade trees, a minimum three-inch caliper and of species included in section 94-66 of this Code, approved tree lists, provided at a ratio of one tree per 500 square feet of buffer area. Additionally, churches shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection (1) of this section, requiring the construction of a brick wall or masonry wall with stucco or mortar wash finish. 
(5)  For schools, the landscape setback shall consist of a minimum 25-foot landscape buffer, with native shade trees, a minimum three-inch caliper and of species included in section 94-66 of this Code, "approved tree lists", provided at a ratio of one tree per 800 square feet of buffer area. A six-foot tubular steel fence with masonry columns, spaced a minimum 40-foot on center, shall be constructed along school property lines adjacent to vacant residential property. A school constructed adjacent to an existing residential neighborhood shall comply with the requirements of subsection (1) of this section, requiring the construction of a brick wall or masonry wall with stucco or mortar wash finish. 
(6)  Waiver or modification of buffer requirement. Written notification to all adjacent property owners and adjacent homeowners' associations shall be provided no less than ten days prior to the consideration of a site plan containing a modification or waiver of the compatibility buffer requirements. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(g)(2); Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 71-07, §§ 2, 3, 9-4-2007; Ord. No. 46-09, § 2, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 06-12, § 17, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 82-303. - Compatibility setback. 
(a)  One-story, nonresidential or multifamily buildings, main or accessory, shall be set back from the property adjacent to an existing or proposed residential use 60 feet. 
(b)  Nonresidential or multifamily buildings, more than one story, main or accessory, shall be set back from the property line adjacent to an existing or proposed residential use five feet for every one foot of building height. 
(c)  Schools shall be set back from the property adjacent to an existing or proposed residential use 60 feet. 
(d)  Waiver or modification of setback requirement. Written notification to all adjacent property owners and adjacent homeowners' associations shall be provided no less than ten days prior to the consideration of a site plan containing a modification or waiver of the compatibility setback requirements. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(g)(3); Ord. No. 69-08, § 2, 11-3-2008)  
Secs. 82-304—82-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SIDEWALKS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 82-321. - Applicability of division provisions. 
Builders shall be required to construct sidewalks on all streets adjacent to their building sites in all zoning districts except A agricultural, and SF-E single-family estate. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the requirements of this division are met. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.04(a))  
Sec. 82-322. - Exemption. 
The town council, by resolution, may exempt sidewalk requirements, upon evidence that adequate or equivalent pedestrian circulation is otherwise provided for. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.04(b))  
Sec. 82-323. - Sidewalk width. 
Sidewalks shall be four feet in width and constructed a minimum distance of four feet from the adjacent curb or edge of the pavement, unless otherwise approved by the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.04(c))  
Sec. 82-324. - Ramps. 
Sidewalk ramps shall be provided at all street intersections pursuant to the requirements of the Americans for Disabilities Act and the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.04(d))  
Sec. 82-325. - Construction specifications. 
The construction specifications of sidewalks will conform with those that have been adopted in the Flower Mound Engineering Standards Manual, Volume 3. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.04(e))  
ARTICLE VI. - WATER AND WASTEWATER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 82-350—82-370. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CAPACITY ANALYSES 
 
Sec. 82-371. - Water and/or wastewater capacity analysis required. 
The town engineer may require that a water and/or wastewater capacity analysis be prepared by an engineering firm designated by the town and be included as part of submittals for approval of a master plan, land use, or zoning amendment for new development. The water and/or wastewater capacity analysis may be required when one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  For any project triggering a change in anticipated demand on the water and/or wastewater system. 
(2)  For any project requesting a change in master plan, land use or zoning. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 2, 2-15-2010)  
Sec. 82-372. - Purpose. 
The water and/or wastewater capacity analysis, when required by the town engineer, shall be used by the town to determine: 
(1)  The impact of the proposed development on the water and/or wastewater infrastructure of the town, including any necessary revisions to size, location and or direction of the flows to accommodate the new development; 
(2)  That the town's infrastructure is adequate to meet the additional demands caused by the proposed development and to maintain the level of service standards of the town; 
(3)  The need to adjust, upsize or reconfigure the town's facilities to minimize the impact of the proposed development on the town's infrastructure facilities; 
(4)  The need for the developer to make or pay for legally authorized and related improvements to the infrastructure system in order to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development on the water and/or wastewater system and to maintain the level of service standards of the town. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 2, 2-15-2010)  
Sec. 82-373. - Payment of cost. 
(a)  The applicants of the proposed development shall pay to the town a fee to cover the expense of the water and/or wastewater capacity analysis. The fee determination will be made by the town after review of the type, size and location of the proposed development. 
(b)  The owners of the property to be developed shall pay for any required water and/or wastewater capacity analysis. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 2, 2-15-2010)  
Secs. 82-374—82-390. - Reserved.  
Chapter 86 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, adopted Feb. 7, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 86, Art. I, §§ 86-1—86-5, Art. II, Div. 1, Div. 2, §§ 86-61—86-76, Div. 3, §§ 86-101—86-105, Art. III, Div. 1, §§ 86-141—86-147, Div. 2, §§ 86-171—86-176, Div. 3, §§ 86-201—86-209, Div. 4, §§ 86-231—86-246 and enacted a new Ch. 86 as set out herein. The former Ch. 86 pertained to signs. For a complete derivation of the former Ch. 86 see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; development standards, ch. 82; traffic signs in subdivisions, § 90-216; zoning, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 86-1. - Purpose and intent of chapter. 
The purpose of the regulations of this chapter is to encourage and promote a signage element of the town that is consistent with the high aesthetic standards established in other standards of the town's development. The regulations of this chapter are intended to be a positive tool to accomplish this purpose for the benefit of the citizens, as well as the business community, and are not designed to discourage or inhibit aesthetically pleasing signage design, materials and placement. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-2. - Definitions. 
Sign means any letter, figure, character, mark, plane, design poster, pictorial, picture, stroke, stripe, line, trademark or reading matter of illuminated or non-illuminated surface that shall be so constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever, so that the same shall be used for the attraction of the public to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or merchandise whatsoever, that is displayed in any manner whatsoever out of doors. 
Sign, agricultural, means an accessory sign identifying the farm or ranch on which it is placed and advertising the produce, crops, animals or poultry raised or quartered thereon. 
Sign area (effective area) means the area enclosed by drawing a rectangle around the outermost extremities of the sign or its letters, insignias, logos, etc., if the same is placed on a wall. The area of a ground sign shall include the sign base and sign cabinet. 
Sign, awning or canopy, means any sign that is part of or attached to an awning or canopy or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. 
Sign, ball field, means any temporary or permanent sign placed inside ball field fencing which is intended for advertising to raise funds for recreation programs. 
Sign, blinking or flashing, means a repetitious or intermittent illumination of a sign face, message or conveyed information. 
Sign, building identification, means a sign used to identify the name of a building or development, with placement being on the primary building wall and/or a ground sign. 
Sign cabinet means the actual enclosure of a sign and its internal parts. A sign cabinet shall include the sign faces and the external limits of the sign face frame including its width, height and thickness. 
Sign, double-faced means a sign with a sign face message on both sides shall be counted as a single sign. The two sides of a double-faced sign shall be parallel to one another with only one sign face visible from any point. 
Sign face means the actual surface upon which the message of a sign is displayed. In the case of wall signs, the area contained within the outermost limits of the letters, logos, numbers, insignias, etc. shall be considered the sign face. 
Sign, ground, means a sign characterized by construction of stone, concrete, metal or brick, etc. set on a monument, ground-mounted base. 
Sign, height, means the vertical distance measured from the adjacent street curb level or the mean street grade elevation if no curb exists, to the highest point of the sign. 
Sign, human, means a person dressed in costume, and/or holding a sign or having a sign affixed to the person for the purpose of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, activity or product. 
Sign, off-premises, means any sign identifying or directing attention to a business, profession, activity, commodity, service or entertainment other than one conducted, sold or offered for sale upon the site where such sign is located. 
Sign, on-premises, means any sign located on the same site to which location, facility or place of business the sign refers. 
Sign, permanent, means a sign so constructed as to be a lasting and enduring condition and in a permanent manner affixed to the, ground, wall or building, excluding such signs for which a specific time limit has been designated for the removal of such sign. 
Sign support means the mechanism, device or structure that upholds the sign cabinet and/or face. 
Sign, pole, means a sign mounted on vertical pole supports. 
Sign, temporary, means any sign that does not meet the definition of sign, permanent. 
Sign, wall, means a sign attached to a building, wall or principal facade. 
Sign, window, means a sign that is painted, attached, etched or formed into a window, door or other translucent opening of a facade. 
Window area means the total square footage of a window or group of windows without separation, calculated per plan view elevation. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-3. - Applicability of chapter provisions. 
The regulations of this chapter shall govern the placement and construction of all outdoor advertising display within the town, except special event signs that are allowed under section 98-976 of this Code in conjunction with a properly permitted or otherwise lawfully allowed special event. In accordance with state law, the provisions of this chapter are extended to the fullest extent possible to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-4. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs or outdoor advertising display are prohibited within all zoning district classifications in the town: 
(1)  Projected signs. Signs that are projected more than 12 inches from a facade, wall, fence, roof or other principal means of support shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Billboards. Large, off-premises outdoor advertising signs primarily located along arterials and highways and used for the express purpose of product advertisement shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Portable signs. Signs mounted on portable or movable frames or structures, including signs placed on, but not affixed or attached to, the ground, shall be prohibited, unless specifically addressed in this chapter. 
(4)  Searchlights. Large lighting fixtures used to attract attention to a business or specific location shall be prohibited. 
(5)  Vehicular signs. Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers that are parked on a public right-of-way, public property or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property shall be prohibited. However, this is not in any way intended to prohibit signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and trailers, such as lettering on motor vehicles, where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer. 
(6)  Balloon or inflatable device. Any sign or form of advertisement in the form of or attached to a balloon or other inflatable, inflated or floating device shall be prohibited, except as provided for in subsection 86-73[(b)(9)], grand opening signs. 
(7)  Flags or banners. Any pole mounted flag, banner, or material of cloth, vinyl, plastic, canvass, leather or other similar material used for the express purpose of attracting attention to a place of business or location shall be prohibited, except as provided for in sections 86-73(b)(8), coming soon or now open signs, 86-73(b)(9), grand opening signs, 86-73(b)(10), now hiring signs, 86-73(b)(11), change of business/ownership signs, and 86-107, public announcement signs. This shall not include public display of a state, national, local, religious or institutional flag or emblem, or a registered corporate logo which shall be allowed in any zoning district classification within the town, provided that the number of flag poles does not exceed three flag poles per platted lot with a maximum height of the flag pole not to exceed 25 feet and the maximum flag area does not exceed 15 square feet per flag in a residential zoning district; and provided the maximum height of the flag pole does not exceed 40 feet and the maximum flag area does not exceed 40 square feet per flag in a nonresidential zoning district. One registered corporate logo flag shall be permitted per platted lot provided that two or more flag poles have been erected on the lot and the other flag pole or poles are being used to display the national, state, or local flag. A registered corporate logo shall be limited to one flag. The 36 U.S.C.A. Sections 173-176, Chapter 10 Patriotic Customs, a copy of which is on file in the office of the town secretary is hereby adopted and incorporated in this section as if it was copied in its entirety and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the town, except as amended in this section. 
(8)  Nuisance signs. Any sign with moving parts, animated features, flashing, blinking or rotating illumination or any other visual and/or audible features that cause a distraction or public nuisance shall be prohibited. 
(9)  Illegal or unlawful signs. Any sign that shall be considered unlawful or illegal by this [section] and including, but not necessarily limited to, the following signs shall be prohibited: 
a.  Signs containing obscene, indecent or immoral words, pictures, descriptions or other matter. 
b.  Signs imitating governmental signs, including traffic control signs. 
c.  Signs blocking or obstructing public access, fire escapes, traffic visibility, utilities, etc. 
d.  Signs placed on or attached to other signs, utility poles, fire hydrants, trees, flagpoles, streetlamps or other means of support of an outdoor advertising display. 
e.  Any painting, marking or attachment of a sign to the street, sidewalk or building, other than house numbers or occupant names or as provided by this [section]. 
f.  Any permanent sign located within the public right-of-way. 
g.  Any sign, permanent or temporary, in violation of this [section]. 
h.  Any sign that is unsafe or unsecure, abandoned or maintained in a dilapidated condition. 
(10)  V signs. Any sign constructed of two panels in the form of a V, when viewed from above, shall be prohibited. 
(11)  Glare. No sign shall be illuminated to such intensity or in such a manner as to cause glare or brightness to such a degree that it constitutes a hazard or nuisance to traffic. Indirect lighting for signs shall not overshoot the facade of the sign. 
(12)  Neon . There shall be no unshielded neon except as provided in section 86-69. 
(13)  Pole signs. Any pole sign erected prior to the adoption of this chapter shall be eliminated when the property on which the pole sign is located changes zoning designation, ownership, or business names or becomes unsafe and poses a public danger as specified in section 86-7 and shall thereafter comply with this section. 
(14)  Off-premises signs. All off-premises signs shall be prohibited except as provided in sections 86-67, 86-71, and 86-73. 
(15)  Signs, painting, marking, and the like attached to poles, walls, railings, fences, etc. No person shall attach any sign, paint, stencil or write anything (except the correct physical address) on any walls, railings, fences, sidewalk, curb, gutter, street, utility pole, public building, or structure, unless otherwise allowed in this code. 
(16)  Signs on architectural features. No sign shall be allowed on any architectural element such as a cupola, tower, dome, parapet wall, or any other aesthetic element unless such sign is located ten feet or less from the top of the roof line of the building. This measurement will be taken from the roof line to the top of the sign. 
(17)  Human signs. All human signs shall be prohibited except as allowed in section 86-72. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 56-16 , § 1, 10-17-2016)  
Sec. 86-5. - Licensing of sign installers. 
Any person or business engaging in the operation of erecting, installing, servicing or maintaining signs within the town must be registered to conduct such business with the town. For the purposes of this division, persons engaging in the business of erecting, installing and maintaining signs, shall be designated as sign installers, including those responsible for erecting temporary signs requiring a permit. No permit for the erection or alteration of a sign shall be issued to any person (other than a property owner erecting his own sign on his own property, provided that all requirements of this chapter are met) unless such person is registered pursuant to provisions of this division. Such registration shall be as set forth in appendix A of this Code, and shall be payable on January 1 of each year which fee will not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-6. - Revocation of registration. 
Any contractor registration regulated by this code may be placed on hold or suspended by the building official thereby preventing any additional permits being issued to such contractor, if it is determined by the building official that corrective action is needed for compliance with the requirements of section 18-32 of this Code. If any contractor registration regulated by this code is suspended, the procedures outlined in Chapter 18, Article II of this Code shall apply. Any registration placed on hold more than three times in a calendar year may be subject to suspension by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-7. - Maintenance and removal. 
(1)  All signs and all their components, including, without limitation, supports, braces and anchors, shall be kept in a state of good repair. The area within ten feet in all directions of any part of a pole or ground sign shall be kept clear of all debris and all undergrowth more than five inches in height. 
(2)  If a sign advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted, that sign shall be considered abandoned and shall, within 30 days of such abandonment, be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located, or other party having control over such sign. 
(3)  If the message portion of a sign is removed, leaving only the supporting "shell" of a sign or the supporting braces, anchors or similar components, the owner of the sign or the owner of the property where the sign is located or other person having control over such sign shall, within 30 days of the removal of the message portion of the sign, either replace the entire message portion of the sign or remove the remaining components of the sign. This subsection shall not be construed to prevent the changing of the message of a sign. 
(4)  Should any sign become unsafe or in any way pose a public danger, the owner of the sign or the persons responsible for the maintenance of the sign shall, upon written notice, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within ten days, secure the same in a manner in conformity with the provisions of this chapter or remove such sign. If such order is not complied with within ten days, the sign shall be removed at the expense of the owner or lessee. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-8. - Presumption; violations in or on public property. 
(a)  If any sign of any nature is erected, constructed or maintained on public property in violation of this chapter, including but not limited to garage sales, neighborhood sales, weekend real estate directional signs, real estate signs, moving services, housekeeping services, lawn care services or any other type of service or sales, such sign shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The sign may be subject to confiscation by town personnel. 
a.  Signs confiscated will be retained for a period of seven calendar days from the day after confiscation; 
b.  Confiscated signs may be reclaimed by the owner within the seven day retention period provided that an administrative fee as set forth in appendix A of this Code is paid; 
(2)  When any address appears on such a sign, it shall be prima facie evidence that the record property owner at the address so specified is responsible for the offense of erecting, constructing or maintaining such sign, and that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, upon conviction; and 
(3)  If such a sign contains no identifying information other than a telephone number, such information shall be prima facie evidence that the record property owner at the telephone number so specified is responsible for the offense of erecting, constructing or maintaining such sign, and that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, upon conviction. 
(b)  The following evidence relative to the name, address or telephone number contained in the following records is prima facie evidence of the contents of the record. 
(1)  Name. An authenticated photograph of the sign showing the name of the person allegedly responsible, or the sign itself. 
(2)  Address. A copy of that section of the most recent tax roll which shows the name and address of the record property owner and an authenticated photograph of the sign or the sign itself. 
(3)  Telephone number. An authenticated photograph of the sign or the sign itself, showing the telephone number, and a copy of the most recent telephone directory showing the listing, or a letter or other document showing the listed person and address at that telephone number. 
(c)  Any presumption contained in this section is rebuttable and shall have the effects and consequences set forth in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 2.05. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Secs. 86-9—86-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-41. - Requirement for permit. 
No sign shall hereafter be erected, constructed, altered or maintained, until a permit for the sign has been issued by the building official pursuant to this article; unless such sign is specifically noted as exempt from a permit otherwise in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-42. - Fees and procedures. 
No sign permit shall be issued until all appropriate sign permit fees have been paid to the town as provided in this section as follows: 
(1)  Initial permit fee. Initial permit fees shall be as listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(2)  Renewal. A renewal permit fee as listed in appendix A of this Code shall be required for all on-premises and off-premises project or development signs renewed in accordance with section 86-73(b)(4), development or project signs (on-premises) or section 86-73(b)(5), development or project signs (off-premises). 
(3)  Sign repair permit. Any repair or alteration to any sign requiring a permit by this division shall require an additional repair permit obtained by the building official upon application and payment of a repair permit fee as listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(4)  Electrical permit. Any sign in which electrical wiring and connections are used shall require an electrical permit obtained according to the town's existing fee schedule. 
(5)  Expiration. Every permit issued under the provisions of this division shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 60 days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of more than 120 days. Before such work can be recommended, a new permit shall be first obtained. 
(6)  Failure to pay permit fees. If a sign is installed, erected, replaced, altered, or relocated without a permit for such work, the applicable permit fee shall be doubled. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-43. - Sign illumination. 
A sign may be lighted by internal lighting from a light source entirely within the sign or by a lighting source located a distance away from the sign and projecting light onto the sign, subject to the following: 
(1)  The light source shall be continuous and uninterrupted so as not to be flashing. 
(2)  Lighting shall be in a manner so as not to interfere with traffic safety or to pose other safety hazards. 
(3)  All electrical wiring shall conform to the electrical codes of the town. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-44. - Comprehensive sign package. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow for a specialized review of signs which may have meritorious design and seek to promote a unique quality for an existing or proposed development, but which require special consideration. Such specialized review shall encompass the number, size, height, color, location, lighting, and/or relation to adjacent property, to promote the public health, safety, and welfare and be consistent with the goals of community character. The permitting of such signs shall not be based on the content of any sign, but is intended to allow for the evaluation of the physical impact of the proposed comprehensive sign package on adjacent properties and to ensure adequate mitigation of potentially unfavorable factors, such as the number, size, height, color, location, lighting and other potentially unfavorable impacts. Under these provisions, any form of monument, statue, art work, tower, signage, as defined herein, or as proposed for a particular development as an architectural feature, other than a prohibited sign, may be presented as a comprehensive sign package for approval as stated herein. 
(b)  Applicability. No building permit shall be issued in any zoning district for any use for which a comprehensive sign package is sought under this chapter until a special sign permit has been approved according to the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Submittal requirements. Any person, firm or corporation having a proprietary interest in any property within the corporate limits of the town requesting approval of a special sign permit shall file an application with the office of development services. The completed application shall include the following information: 
(1)  A clear description of the proposed comprehensive sign package. 
(2)  A drawing of the proposed sign, at a scale of not less than one-quarter inch to one foot. 
(3)  The location of each proposed sign illustrated on a site plan at a scale of not less than one inch to 200 feet. 
(4)  A metes and bounds description of the subject property typewritten on an 8½-inch by 11-inch sheet of paper. 
(5)  A filing fee shall be submitted with every application in accordance with the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. In addition, a site plan review fee shall be submitted with every application requesting a special sign permit that requires a site plan in accordance with the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(6)  Development of the comprehensive sign package shall be in accordance with the approved site plan. 
(d)  Issuance. The town council, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected and after public hearing and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, may authorize the issuance of special sign permits for the comprehensive sign package. 
(e)  Additional information. The planning and zoning commission, in considering and determining its recommendations to the town council on any request for a special sign permit, may require from the applicant plans, information, operating data and expert evaluation concerning the location, function and characteristics of any sign proposed. 
(f)  Additional requirements. The town council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to ensure compliance with this section and the urban design criteria, establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement, proportionality scale, materials and construction of any use for which a permit is authorized. In authorizing the location of any use listed as a special sign permit, the town council may impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and location indicate important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property from glare, offensive view or other undesirable conditions. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Secs. 86-45—86-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL SIGNS 
 
Sec. 86-61. - Nameplates. 
No permit shall be required for wall signs showing only the name and address of the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is erected or placed not exceeding a total sign area of six square feet. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-62. - Interior signs. 
No permit shall be required for signs located inside a building. Signs located within a building (interior signs) and visible to the outside of the building through the windows shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the building store front containing such windows. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-63. - Directional signs. 
No permit shall be required for small signs not exceeding five square feet in sign area and three feet in height that are displayed on private property for the convenience of the public, including signs to identify entrance and exit drives, location of drive-up windows, directions to parking areas, one-way drives, restrooms, freight entrances and the like. These signs shall be directional only and may contain advertising with registered corporate logos. Maximum height applies to ground mounted signs and is not intended to prohibit placement of these signs over doorways, freight entrances, etc. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-64. - Menu signs. 
No permit shall be required for signs that display menus and related prices in connection with outdoor drive-through food service windows. Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area and eight feet in height. These signs are strictly for on-site informational purposes and, therefore, shall be oriented so as to not be readable from the fronting public street. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-65. - Ball field fencing signs. 
No permit shall be required for any temporary or permanent sign placed inside ball field fencing which is intended for advertising to raise funds for recreation programs. 
(1)  All such signs shall be one-sided and only face toward the interior of the field. 
(2)  No portion of such signs shall project over the fence in which it is attached. 
(3)  No such sign shall exceed the height of eight feet. 
(4)  Advertising on a scoreboard is not considered a sign for the purpose of this section and no permit is required. 
(5)  The back side of all such signs shall be protected with an application of paint or other protective coating and must be uniform in color. 
(6)  All such signs shall be maintained in good condition, as evidenced by lack of deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-66. - Agricultural signs. 
A temporary or permanent sign advertising produce, crops or animals shall be permitted in the A agricultural district subject to the following: 
(1)  Only one such sign shall be permitted for each street frontage. 
(2)  All such signs shall be on-premises only. 
(3)  All such signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of 48 square feet. 
(4)  The height of the sign shall not exceed 15 feet. 
(5)  All such signs shall be set back at least 20 feet from the public street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-67. - Ground signs. 
All ground signs shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The height of a ground sign shall not exceed ten feet. The height of the ground sign shall be measured from the adjacent street curb level or the mean street grade elevation if no curb exists. 
(2)  The width of a ground sign shall not exceed ten feet. 
(3)  The sign area of a ground sign shall not exceed 60 square feet (per side if a double-faced sign). 
(4)  A ground sign shall identify only the following: 
a.  Churches shall be allowed to identify the name, church logo, address, name of pastor, hours of major services, phone number, and denominational affiliation. Secondary signs, when allowed by ordinance, shall identify only the name, address and church logo. 
b.  Schools shall be allowed to identify the name of school and/or school district, school logo or mascot, address, phone number. Secondary signs, when allowed by ordinance, shall identify only the name, address and school logo or mascot. 
c.  Nonresidential uses other than schools or churches shall be allowed to identify the name of the building, building complex and/or the names of the tenants, provided that no more than 75 percent of the sign area is devoted to the identification. 
(5)  In addition to subsection (4) above, each ground sign may identify the street number, the area of which shall not exceed one square foot. 
(6)  All ground signs shall be set back at least 15 feet from any public street right-of-way line. 
(7)  A ground sign shall be architecturally compatible with the colors and materials of the building that it is identifying and must include a masonry border around the entire perimeter of the sign. 
(8)  Ground signs shall be located at least 120 feet apart and at least 60 feet from the property lines of any other lot. 
(9)  Changeable message signs, including both electronic and changeable panels, shall not be permitted. Notwithstanding the foregoing, changeable message signs shall be allowed subject to the following restrictions. 
a.  Churches shall be allowed a changeable panel of up to 16 square feet with a maximum height of two feet and with letters being no more than 12 inches in height. The sign face of the changeable panel shall be designed and constructed in a manner capable of changing characters or panels attached to the face of the sign. 
b.  Schools shall be allowed a changeable panel of up to 16 square feet with a maximum height of two feet and with letters being no more than 12 inches in height. The sign face of the changeable panel shall be designed and constructed in a manner capable of changing characters or panels attached to the face of the sign. 
c.  High schools located in any zoning district shall be allowed a digital electronic sign face. Such sign face shall not blink, flash scroll or contain moving or animated parts, messages or components and shall be limited to 32 square feet in sign area. 
d.  Fuel-price sign means a sign which displays only the brand, type or prices of various types of gasoline or diesel fuel available at a motor-vehicle fuel-service station and may be constructed as electronic or changeable panel. These signs shall not flash, blink, scroll or contain moving or animated parts, messages or components. These signs must be included and sized as part of a ground sign or must follow the requirements located in subsection 86-73(b)(12). 
e.  Institutional uses shall be allowed changeable message signs. Institutional uses include facilities owned and/or operated by the federal government, state government, county government, and/or a political subdivision of the state, including public works projects. 
(10)  Unless prohibited for safety reasons, any existing, legally permitted, ground sign that is damaged or destroyed by any force beyond the owner's control may be rebuilt using the same dimensions, including location as the original sign. In addition, a permit to rebuild such sign must be submitted within ten days of the event, must be submitted to replicate the original sign, and must follow the permitting timeframes located in the town adopted building code. If any permit is allowed to expire for any reason or is not submitted within the ten-day timeframe, that sign will be required to meet the current ordinance. 
(11)  Off-premises signs shall be permitted for a multitenant building complex, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Only one such sign shall be permitted for any building complex. 
b.  The off-premises sign shall be located on a contiguous tract to the building complex. 
c.  A town-approved unity agreement between affected property owners shall be required. 
d.  Any such sign shall comply with the distance requirements of subsection [86-96(a)(7) sic]. 
(12)  An elementary or secondary school or a college or university shall be permitted the following signage: 
a.  Schools that have less than 1,000 feet of continuous frontage on a street shall be permitted one ground sign. 
b.  Schools that have at least 1,000 feet of continuous frontage on a street shall be permitted two ground signs, provided that such signs shall be separated by a minimum of 700 feet. In addition, one small monument sign of a commemorative or memorial nature shall be permitted, if not located within 200 feet of other permitted signs, and provided that the sign face shall not exceed 19.2 square feet (per side if double-faced sign). 
(13)  Nonresidential buildings other than schools shall be permitted one ground sign for each street frontage with a maximum of two ground signs, subject to all other requirements in this section. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-68. - Wall signs. 
(a)  Generally. All wall signs shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Wall signs shall only be attached to building walls, mansard roofs with slopes of 60 degrees or greater, or subdivision screening walls. 
(2)  No wall signs attached to a mansard roof shall extend above the roofline, nor shall wall signs attached to building walls or fences extend above those structures. 
(3)  No wall sign shall protrude more than 12 inches from the principal structure to which it is attached (i.e., the depth of the sign shall not exceed 12 inches). 
(4)  No wall sign shall exceed 300 square feet of surface area. Wall signs used for identification of residential subdivisions shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area. 
(5)  For tenants with 60 feet or more of lineal frontage of building wall, one primary sign shall be allowed, with up to two secondary signs allowed. The total dimensions for all primary and secondary signs shall not exceed the maximum allowed dimensions shown in subsection (6) of this section. 
(6)  The maximum allowable height and width of wall signs shall be as follows: 
Lineal Footage of 
Building Wall 	Maximum 
Sign Width 	Maximum 
Sign Height 
Less than 20 feet 	80% of lineal footage 	36 inches 
20 feet up to 25 feet 	75% of lineal footage 	42 inches 
25 feet up to 35 feet 	70% of lineal footage 	48 inches 
35 feet up to 45 feet 	65% of lineal footage 	54 inches 
45 feet up to 60 feet 	60% of lineal footage 	60 inches 
60 feet or more 	55% of lineal footage 	72 inches 
 
(7)  No wall sign shall be closer than one foot from the edge of the storefront on which the sign can be placed. 
(8)  A single-tenant building within a corner development that faces an arterial or collector street and does not have the legal address may place an additional wall sign on this side wall, subject to the standards set forth in subsection (6) of this section. 
(b)  Specific signs. Specific wall signs shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Nonresidential multitenant buildings with exterior access to more than two individual office or business suites may be allowed more than two wall signs for tenant identification, subject to the following: 
a.  Each tenant with exterior access shall be permitted one wall sign, with the height and width of such sign based on the lineal footage of the storefront and the standards set forth in subsection (a)(6) of this section. 
b.  An end or corner tenant with secondary frontage may place an additional wall sign on this side wall, subject to the standards set forth in subsection (a)(6) of this section. 
c.  A tenant in a building that backs up to a street, does not have parking between the building and the street, and does not have an entrance facing the street shall be allowed one additional wall sign on that back elevation, subject to the standards set forth in subsection (a)(6) of this section. 
d.  Wall signs authorized in this section are to be allowed in lieu of, and not in addition to, the general limitations on wall signs set forth in subsections (a)(2) and (3) of this section. 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings (multitenant interior access). 
a.  One wall sign shall be permitted per building wall not to exceed two walls to identify a maximum of two tenants. 
b.  One additional wall sign shall be permitted, to be utilized as a "directory" sign to list building tenants, with uniform lettering and oriented so as not to be readable from a public street. Such additional wall sign shall not exceed six feet in height, shall not exceed 18 square feet of sign area, shall not contain lettering exceeding two inches in height, and shall not be visible from any public street. 
(3)  Nonresidential buildings (other). 
a.  One wall sign shall be permitted per tenant, plus one additional wall sign for each end or corner tenant that has secondary frontage. 
(4)  Building identification wall signs. Building identification walls signs shall be permitted in accordance with section 86-68 et seq., subject to the following: 
a.  Building identification wall signs are in addition to wall signs allowed for multitenant buildings. 
b.  Building identification walls must be designed with an architectural focal point to accommodate such wall signs. 
c.  Building identification wall signs must be placed on the designated focal point and must be a minimum of five feet from any other sign located on the same building wall. 
d.  Multi-building complexes shall be allowed only one building identification wall sign. 
e.  Building identification wall signs shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the lineal building wall length with a maximum sign surface area not exceeding 150 square feet. 
f.  The maximum allowable height and width of building identification wall signs shall be as follows: 
Lineal Footage of 
Shell Building Wall 	Maximum 
Sign Width 	Maximum 
Sign Height 
Less than 150 feet 	25% of lineal footage 	18 inches 
151 feet up to 300 feet 	25% of lineal footage 	24 inches 
301 feet or more 	25% of lineal footage 	30 inches 
 
g.  When building identification wall signs are to identify a building/development, the tenant signs for that building must be reduced by 50 percent of the allowed width, height and overall square footage pursuant to subsection (a)(6) of this section. 
h.  Building identification wall signs shall be allowed only on the primary building wall. 
i.  Building identification wall signs shall only be attached to building walls, mansard roofs with slopes of 60 degrees or greater. 
j.  No building identification wall sign attached to a mansard roof or building wall shall extend above the roofline. 
k.  No building identification wall sign shall protrude more than 12 inches from the principal structure to which it is attached (i.e., the depth of the sign shall not exceed 12 inches). 
l.  No building identification sign shall be closer than one foot from the edge of the building wall or mansard roof that it is attached to. 
(5)  Multifamily developments. Multifamily developments of eight units or more shall be permitted one wall sign for identification of the development for each street frontage. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-69. - Window signs. 
Window signs shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Window signs shall be limited to a maximum of 20 percent of window area. 
(2)  No blinking, flashing, moving or neon signs shall be allowed as window signs; provided, however, that for retail or commercial uses, one interior nonintermittent and nonmoving neon window sign stating "OPEN," not exceeding five square feet in area as measured from the outer dimensions of such sign and consisting of not more than two colors, shall be allowed. 
(3)  In lieu of window signs a tenant may have permanently mounted, framed, posters within three feet of the window. Such signs must comply with subsection (1) of this section and may not have any lighting associated with such poster sign. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-70. - Awning or canopy signs. 
An awning or canopy sign can be used as the primary sign in lieu of a wall sign or neon sign, subject to the following: 
(1)  The maximum height of the lettering of a canopy or awning sign shall not exceed eight inches. 
(2)  One business logo is permitted to be applied to the slope portion of the canopy, centered over the primary entrance. 
(3)  A second logo is allowed if the storefront wraps a corner, one per frontage. 
(4)  The logo shall not exceed four feet in width and three feet in height. 
(5)  Only gooseneck type full cutoff light fixtures shall be permitted when indirect lighting for awning or canopy signage is preferred. 
(6)  No backlighting of canopy or awning signs is allowed. 
(7)  All outdoor lighting for canopy or awning signs must comply with the outdoor lighting provisions set forth in section [82-275 sic.] and sections 98-1101 et seq. of this Code. 
(8)  The light fixture shall not extend more than four feet from the building facade from which it is attached. 
(9)  The total sign area for an awning or canopy sign shall not exceed the maximum allowance as outlined in section 86-68 of this chapter. 
(10)  Multiple canopies shall be permitted provided the maximum sign area as outlined above is not exceeded. 
(11)  The following typefaces for awning or canopy signs shall be allowed as outlined in illustration 8.11.2. following chapter 98 of this Code: 
a.  Americana Bold. 
b.  Bembo Semi-Bold. 
c.  Bodini. 
d.  Copperplate 30BC. 
e.  Helvetica medium. 
f.  Palatino. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-71. - Businesses in water recreation zoning districts. 
Off-premises signs shall be permitted for business establishments located in the WR water recreation district, and located adjacent to Grapevine Lake or on United States Army Corps of Engineers property, subject to the following: 
(1)  Only three such signs shall be permitted for any such business establishment. 
(2)  All such signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of 24 square feet. 
(3)  The maximum height of the sign shall be 20 feet. 
(4)  All such signs shall be set back at least 20 feet from the public street right-of-way. 
(5)  No such sign shall be located within 500 feet of another such sign or within a platted subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-72. - Human signs. 
No permit shall be required for human signs. Human signs are prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing, human signs announcing a fund-raising event for a charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational or civic institution shall be allowed but are subject to the following restrictions. 
(1)  The human sign shall be limited to on-premises display only. 
(2)  Human signs shall not be located in the right-of-way. 
(3)  Human signs shall only be permitted during the fund-raising event. 
(4)  The fund-raising event shall last no longer than six hours per day. 
(5)  No more than one fund-raising event is held on the premises hosting the fund-raising event within any four-month time period. 
(6)  The human sign shall not utilize any lighting device or other item that will distract or otherwise interfere with the attention of the driving public. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-73. - Temporary commercial signs. 
(a)  Generally. All temporary commercial signs shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Such signs may not be placed so as to impair the corner visibility of intersections of streets, driveways and alleys pursuant to section 82-161 of this Code. 
(2)  Such signs shall not be placed within the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Such signs shall not be placed on public property including but not limited to parks, public facilities and public open spaces. 
(4)  All such signs must be placed on private property only. 
(5)  Only one sign for every 50 feet of lineal frontage of private property shall be permitted. 
(6)  Such signs shall not be affixed to utility poles or official signs. 
(b)  Specific signs. Specific temporary signs shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Real estate signs. 
a.  No permit shall be required for signs not exceeding six square feet in sign area and three feet in height advertising the sale, lease or rental of real estate. 
b.  For sale (residential structures on small tracts). Real estate signs advertising the sale, lease or rent of individual housing units shall be permitted provided that: 
1.  One such sign shall be allowed pursuant to subsection [(b)(2)] of this section. 
2.  One such sign may be placed on-premises any day of the week. 
c.  Open house signs. Signs advertising the display of an open or unlocked unit for sale, lease or rent shall be permitted in place of or in addition to a real estate sign provided that: 
1.  The number of open house signs permitted is limited to one sign placed on-premise and five open house signs place off-premise. 
2.  On-premises open house signs may be placed any day of the week. 
3.  Off-premise open house signs may be placed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on the day of the event and must be removed by 8:00 pm the day of the event. 
4.  The address of the open house property must be located somewhere on the face of each sign, and should at a minimum be legible at a close distance. 
d.  Weekend real estate directional signs. Any temporary weekend directional sign placed for off-premises advertising or direction of traffic or to call attention to a real estate project, development or subdivision shall be limited to off-premises directional signs and model home signs. Weekend real estate directional signs shall be permitted on a temporary basis provided that: 
1.  Weekend real estate directional signs may be placed between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays and must be removed no later than 8:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
2.  Weekend real estate directional signs may display only the name and/or logo of the builder, developer or real estate company and may include a directional graphic such as an arrow. 
3.  Only one sign for every 50 feet of lineal frontage of private property shall be permitted. 
(2)  Advertising sale, lease or rental of nonresidential structures. Real estate signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of any nonresidential structure shall be limited to the following conditions: 
a.  All signs shall be on-premises only. 
b.  The sign area of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
c.  The height of the sign shall not exceed ten feet. 
d.  No more than one sign shall be permitted per property for each arterial or collector street frontage. 
e.  Temporary window signs are permitted up to 20 percent of the total window area. 
(3)  Advertising sale of vacant or large tracts. Real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of undeveloped land or developed land of two acres or more shall be limited by the following conditions: 
a.  All signs shall be on-premises only, except land owners with contiguous property for sale may advertise the land for sale as a whole. 
b.  The sign area of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
c.  The height of the sign shall not exceed eight feet. 
d.  Only one sign shall be permitted for tracts up to five acres. Additional signs shall be permitted for each additional five acres up to a maximum of four signs. 
e.  No signs may be placed closer than 500 feet to any other real estate sign on the same property. 
f.  All signs shall be set back at least three feet from the public right-of-way. 
g.  The permit number contained on the sign permit shall be affixed to the back of each sign. 
(4)  Development or project signs (on-premises). On-premises signs identifying residential, retail, office, commercial, industrial, mixed land use or planned developments shall be permitted, but limited by the following conditions: 
a.  The maximum sign area of such a sign shall be based on the size of the development as follows: 
Less than five acres 	48 square feet 
five to 50 acres 	64 square feet 
50 to 100 acres 	100 square feet 
More than 100 acres 	200 square feet 
 
b.  The height of the sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height. 
c.  Only one sign shall be permitted for tracts up to five acres. Additional signs shall be permitted for each additional five acres up to a maximum of two signs. 
d.  No signs may be placed closer than 500 feet to any other real estate sign advertising the sale of the same property, unless it is attached to such sign. The attachment of two such signs will be permitted only once for each tract of land for sale. 
e.  All signs shall be set back at least 20 feet from the public right-of-way. 
f.  No sign may be erected until a record plat has been approved for the project or for the first phase, if a multiphase project. 
g.  Permits for on-premises development or project signs shall be for a period of one year from the date of issuance and shall be renewable by the building official for additional one-year periods, until the development is 80 percent sold or leased. 
h.  The sign permit fee for on-premises development or project signs initially erected without a permit shall be double the amount set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
(5)  Development or project signs (off-premises). Off-premises signs identifying residential, retail, office, commercial, industrial, mixed land use or planned developments shall be permitted but limited by the following conditions. 
a.  The maximum sign area of such a sign shall be based on the size of the development as follows: 
Less than five acres 	48 square feet 
Five to 50 acres 	64 square feet 
More than 50 acres 	100 square feet 
 
b.  The height of the sign shall not exceed 20 feet. 
c.  Only one sign shall be permitted for tracts up to five acres. Additional signs shall be permitted for each additional five acres up to a maximum of three signs. 
d.  No signs shall be placed closer than 500 feet of one another. 
e.  No sign shall be located within a platted residential subdivision or on a developed nonresidential lot or tract. 
f.  All signs shall be setback at least 20 feet from the public right-of-way. 
g.  Permits for off-premise signs shall be for a period of one year from the date of issuance and shall be renewable by the building official for additional one-year periods, until the development is 80 percent sold or leased. 
h.  No sign may be erected until a record plat has been approved for the project or for the first phase, if a multiphase project. 
i.  The sign permit fee for off-premise development or project signs initially erected without a permit shall be double the amount set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
(6)  Model home signs. Signs identifying model homes, and model home centers, including sales offices, shall be permitted, but are limited to the following conditions: 
a.  Model home signs shall be on-premises and only allowed on the lot developed with the model home or on any lot developed with an approved parking lot for such model home. 
b.  Only one sign advertising a model home may be permitted per builder or developer in the subdivision. 
c.  Model home signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area. 
d.  Model home signs shall be limited to a maximum of six feet in height. 
e.  All signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the public right-of-way. 
f.  No model home sign shall be erected until the final utilities have been approved and released. 
(7)  Work in progress sign. No permit shall be required for private signs identifying work in progress. Such signs shall be permitted in any zoning district provided that the signs may be placed 24 hours prior to the commencement of the work and removed within 24 hours after the conclusion of the work and are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The sign area shall not exceed six square feet. 
b.  The height of the sign shall not exceed three feet. 
c.  Signs shall be limited to one sign per street frontage. 
(8)  Coming soon or now open signs. Signs announcing the coming or recent arrival of a new development, facility or place of business shall be allowed on a temporary basis provided that: 
a.  Only one such sign shall be permitted for each business. 
b.  Such signs shall be for on-premises advertising only. 
c.  Such signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of 20 square feet for buildings less than 50,000 square feet. 
d.  The maximum sign area shall be 50 square feet for buildings over 50,000 square feet. 
e.  No such sign shall be illuminated in any manner. 
f.  No portion of such sign shall extend above or beyond the roof or building to which it is attached. 
g.  Such signs shall be allowed for a maximum period of 45 calendar days, after which it must be removed. 
h.  Such signs shall be attached to the building about which it is advertising. 
(9)  Grand opening signs. Signs announcing the grand opening of a new development, facility or place of business shall be allowed on a temporary basis provided that: 
a.  Such signs shall be allowed only one time for each business. 
b.  Such signs shall be for on-premises advertising only. 
c.  Such signs may include banners, balloons, flags, pennants, streamers or inflatable signs, provided that no such sign shall exceed a height of 35 feet. 
d.  No such sign shall be illuminated in any manner. 
e.  No portion of any such sign shall be located in the street right-of-way. 
f.  No permit for such signs shall be issued more than 90 days after the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. A permit fee shall be charged for each such application as set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
g.  Such signs may be displayed for a maximum of 30 calendar days, after which they must be removed. 
(10)  Now hiring signs. Signs announcing the employment opportunity for the recent arrival of a new development, facility or place of business shall be allowed on a temporary basis provided that: 
a.  Such signs shall be allowed only one time for each business. 
b.  Such signs shall be for on-premises advertising only. 
c.  Such signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of 20 square feet for buildings less than 50,000 square feet. 
d.  The maximum sign area shall be 50 square feet for buildings over 50,000 square feet. 
e.  No such sign shall be illuminated in any manner. 
f.  No portion of such sign shall extend above or beyond the roof or building to which it is attached. 
g.  Such sign shall be allowed for a maximum period of 45 calendar days, after which it must be removed. 
h.  Such sign shall be attached to the building about which it is advertising. 
i.  No permit for such signs shall be issued more than 30 days after the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(11)  Change of business/ownership. A temporary sign advertising a new business/ownership of an existing building while a new sign is being made shall be permitted subject to the following: 
a.  Only one such sign shall be permitted for each business. 
b.  Such signs shall be for on-premises advertising only. 
c.  Such signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of 20 square feet. 
d.  No such sign shall be illuminated in any manner. 
e.  No portion of such sign shall extend above or beyond the roof or building to which it is attached. 
f.  Such signs shall be allowed for a maximum period of 45 calendar days, after which it must be removed. 
(12)  Gasoline price signs. No permit shall be required for temporary gasoline price or credit card signs placed on pump islands. Such signs are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Only one sign per pump island shall be allowed. 
b.  The maximum total sign area of any single sign shall not exceed four square feet. 
(13)  Informational zoning or land use plan change signs. No permit shall be required for temporary informational signs required to be installed by applicants for a change to the comprehensive master plan land use category or zoning on a parcel of land pursuant to section 78-152. Such signs shall be authorized according to the provisions of that section. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 42-12, § 2, 9-17-2012)  
Secs. 86-74—86-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OTHER MISCELLANEOUS SIGNS 
 
Sec. 86-101. - Official signs. 
No permit shall be required for any permanent or temporary sign, notice, marker or symbol required or authorized by the local, state or federal government or a governmental agency shall be permitted as required or authorized in any zoning district classification within the town. Such signs shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
(1)  Traffic control signs required by any governmental agency designed and erected under specifications set forth by the manual on uniform traffic control devices. 
(2)  Signs identifying public or private utility lines or easements. 
(3)  Air traffic control signs required by the federal aviation administration. 
(4)  Any sign or public notice required by any governmental agency or court of law. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-102. - Personal or incidental use signs. 
No permit shall be required for any signs for personal or individual use to identify the sale of personal property or advertise garage, yard or estate sales and/or incidental private signs identifying private ownership or a danger to the public. Such signs shall be subject to the following. 
(1)  Such signs may not be placed so as to impair the corner visibility of intersections of streets, driveways and alleys pursuant to section 82-161 of this Code. 
(2)  Such signs shall not be placed within the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Such signs shall not be placed on public property including but not limited to parks, public facilities and public open spaces. 
(4)  The sign area shall not exceed six square feet. 
(5)  The height of such signs shall not exceed three feet. 
(6)  All such signs must be placed on private property only. 
(7)  Only one sign for every 50 feet of lineal frontage of private property shall be permitted. 
(8)  Such signs shall not be affixed to utility poles or official signs. 
(9)  For garage, yard or estate sales, such signs may be placed 24 hours prior to the sale and must be removed within 24 hours after the conclusion of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-103. - Memorial signs. 
No permit shall be required for memorial signs, markers, plates, plaques, etc., when deemed an integral part of a structure, building or landscape. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-104. - Flags. 
No permit shall be required for public and/or private flag poles for the public display of a state, national, local, religious, institutional flag or emblem or a registered corporate logo not exceeding a height of 25 feet in residential zoning districts and 40 feet in nonresidential zoning property. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-105. - Holiday decorations. 
No permit shall be required for signs or materials displayed in a temporary manner on or prior to traditional civic, patriotic or religious holidays. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-106. - Political signs. 
No permit shall be required for signs supporting, encouraging or identifying any candidate, proposed amendment or bond proposal in an upcoming election. Such signs shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The candidate, his campaign treasurer or assistant campaign treasurer or the campaign treasurer of a political committee shall be responsible for the erection and removal of the political signs or advertisements and for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, an exception shall be made to the time, placement, and location of political signs at an officially designated polling place, as that term is defined and enforced under state law, as follows: 
a.  Said signs may be placed on public property designated as an official polling place on election day. 
b.  Said signs may be posted not more than 12 hours preceding the designated time for the opening of the polls for early voting, and must be removed not more than 12 hours after the designated time for closing of the polls on election day. Said signs do not have to be removed in the time between early voting and election day. 
c.  Any such placement shall be in accordance with state law limitations. 
d.  Election day shall be as defined by state law and/or town ordinance for a particular election. 
e.  Subject to state law regulating the placement of said signs at a polling place, each candidate, or political committee supporting or opposing a proposed amendment or bond proposal, shall be permitted to place at the polling place two of said signs per public vehicular access point to the property on which the polling place is located. 
(3)  Political signs shall not be illuminated in any manner. 
(4)  Political signs shall not have any moving elements. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 55-12, § 2, 10-15-2012; Ord. No. 29-15 , § 1, 5-4-2015)  
Sec. 86-107. - Public announcement signs. 
A sign or notice posted to announce public information concerning, bazaars, rallies, or other similar activities sponsored by charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational or civic institutions shall be allowed as temporary signs provided that: 
(1)  Such signs shall be allowed up to 30 days prior to such event, but shall be removed within two days after the scheduled event. 
(2)  All signs shall be on-premises only. 
(3)  The sign area shall not exceed 36 square feet. 
(4)  The height of such signs shall not exceed eight feet. 
(5)  The town is excepted from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-108. - Single-family and duplex lots. 
Each lot developed with a single-family detached or attached dwelling unit or a duplex shall be permitted one wall sign to identify the family name, property name or street address not to exceed three square feet in area for lots less than one acre and not to exceed six square feet for lots one acre and larger. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 86-109. - Residential subdivision wall signs. 
No permit shall be required for residential subdivision wall signs. Such signs must be approved by the planning and zoning commission and town council in conjunction with approval of the record plat for the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 2-7-2011)  
Chapter 90 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance regarding plats or subdivisions saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(12); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; mobile homes, § 14-371 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; development standards, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 98; application of subdivision provisions, § 98-971 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Applicability of chapter provisions. 
All subdivisions of land within the corporate limits of the town, and all land outside the corporate limits of the town that the town council may annex, and all land within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town, shall conform to the rules and regulations of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.01(a))  
Sec. 90-2. - Creation of building site. 
No permit for the construction of a building upon any tract or plot shall be issued until a building site, building tract or building lot has been created by compliance with one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The lot or tract is part of a plat of record, properly approved by the planning and zoning commission of the town and all documentation has been submitted to the town for filing the plat. 
(2)  The plot, tract or lot is an unplatted lot of record with frontage upon a dedicated public or private street or right-of-way. 
(3)  The plot, tract or lot is a portion of an unplatted lot of record, conveyed without the approval of a record plat after January 9, 1975, zoned A agricultural district, with frontage upon a dedicated public or private street or right-of-way (having a minimum area of one acre) and not served by a public or private sanitary sewer system or an on-site sewerage facility, for the construction of barns or other related accessory buildings for housing and maintenance of livestock or agricultural purposes, provided that such barns or accessory buildings shall comply with the minimum 50-foot setback from any property line. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.01(b); Ord. No. 02-00, § 1, 1-6-2000; Ord. No. 06-12, § 18, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 90-3. - Annexation and subdivision. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission of the town shall not approve any subdivision within any area where a petition or ordinance for annexation or a recommendation for annexation to the town is pending before the town council, unless and until such annexation shall have been approved by ordinance by the town council. 
(b)  If the planning and zoning commission holds a hearing on a proposed annexation, it may, at its discretion, at the same time hold a hearing upon the permanent zoning (other than IH interim holding) that is to be given to the area or tract to be annexed, and make a recommendation on both matters to the town council so that the town council can, if it desires, act on the matter of zoning and annexation at the same time. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.01(c))  
Secs. 90-4—90-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT PLAN[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Development standards, ch. 82. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-31. - Purpose and applicability of article provisions. 
A development plan shall be submitted and approved prior to the submittal of a record plat whenever a subdivision of five or more lots is proposed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a development plan is not required prior to the submittal of a record plat for a nonresidential subdivision that is being record platted in conformity to a concept plan previously approved by the town council. The development plan is intended to show all the planning factors necessary to enable the proper town approving authorities to determine whether the proposed plan for land development is satisfactory from the standpoint of public health, safety and welfare and is in accordance with the general guidance provided by the comprehensive master plan. The development plan and its review are intended to produce a subdivision design in which all planning factors have been recognized and reconciled, as distinguished from the record plat, in which the engineering factor of dimensional precision is the predominant objective. The record plat is the legal document filed of record with the county. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.03(a); Ord. No. 53-13, § 2, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 90-32. - Preapplication conference. 
Prior to the filing of a development plan, the subdivider shall meet with the town manager or his designated agent to acquaint himself with the requirements of the town and the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the comprehensive master plan. At such meeting, the density standards, street requirements, utility service and general character of the development may be discussed. At the preapplication conference, the subdivider may be represented by a land planner, engineer, surveyor or legal counsel. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.03(b))  
Sec. 90-33. - Submittal requirements. 
The subdivider or owner shall file the appropriate number of copies of the development plan, as outlined in the development plan application packet. Each drawing shall measure 24 inches by 36 inches and shall be drawn to a scale of no less than 100 feet to one inch, unless otherwise approved by the town manager. When necessary, the development plan may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. Such development plan shall be accompanied by a completed application and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Boundary lines and bearings. Boundary lines, bearings and distances sufficient to locate the exact area proposed for subdivision. At least one subdivision corner shall be referenced to a survey (abstract) corner. The area, in acres, of the subdivision shall also be shown. 
(2)  Adjacent subdivisions. The name and location of a portion of all adjoining subdivisions shall be drawn to the same scale and shown in dotted lines adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivision in sufficient detail to show the existing streets and alleys and other features that may influence the layout and development of the proposed subdivisions. Where adjacent land is not subdivided, the owner's name of the adjacent tract shall be shown with the most recently recorded volume and page number from the appropriate county deed records. 
(3)  Intersecting streets. The angle of intersection of the centerlines of all intersecting streets. 
(4)  Streets, alleys and easements. The development plan shall indicate the location, dimension and name of all proposed streets, cul-de-sacs, alleys, easements and ways, and all known rights-of-way and/or easements within or affecting the area to be subdivided. Any easements shall clearly indicate to whom they are dedicated for public or private ownership, operation or maintenance purposes. Existing and proposed median breaks and distances between median breaks, both off-site and on-site, including left turn storage space and transition length shall also be required. 
(5)  Proposed phase lines. If the proposed subdivision is to be developed in sections or phases, any proposed phase lines shall be indicated. Each phase indicated shall individually comply with section 90-304, street layout, and section 90-305, street connections. 
(6)  Proposed blocks, lots and building lines. The subdivision shall show all proposed blocks, lots, front yard building lines, and rear or side yard building lines adjacent to rights-of-way, with principal dimensions. 
(7)  Preliminary lot and block analysis. A preliminary lot and block analysis shall be provided indicating, at a minimum, that the square footage or acreage of each proposed lot meets the minimum applicable zoning standards. The plan shall also indicate the maximum number of lots in the proposed development. 
(8)  Contours. Topographic contours at five-foot intervals and major physical features within the proposed development. 
(9)  Subdivision title, ownership and preparation. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner, all lenders or lienholders, and the engineer, surveyor or land planner who prepared the plat. 
(10)  Dedicated parks, playgrounds and other public uses. Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, trails, pedestrian access easements, or other public uses. Any parks, trails or pedestrian access easements shall be indicated by a legal description (i.e., a lot and block designation) and shall clearly indicate to whom they are dedicated for ownership, operating and maintenance purposes. 
(11)  Scale, north point and date. The scale of the development plan shall not be less than one inch equals 100 feet, unless otherwise approved by the town manager. A north arrow shall be provided for plan orientation. The plan shall also indicate the date of preparation. 
(12)  Preliminary utility plans. Preliminary water and sanitary sewer plans, including a preliminary layout of sanitary sewer and water lines to serve the subdivision, as well as connections or off-site extension to existing town systems. The water utility plan shall include, but not be limited to, existing/proposed water lines, pipe sizes, valves, lot service lines, easements, fire hydrants and related appurtenances. The sanitary sewer plan shall include, but not be limited to, existing/proposed gravity lines, pipe sizes, direction of flow, service laterals, manholes, cleanouts, lift stations, force mains, easements and related appurtenances. Both water and sanitary sewer layouts may be shown on the same drawing. 
(13)  Preliminary drainage plans. A preliminary drainage plan shall accompany the development plan. This study shall show contours, acreages, runoff, existing/proposed storm drain lines, pipe sizes, direction of flow, inlet locations, headwalls, points of discharge, detention/retention features, channels, creekways, 100-year floodplain limits, and connections to any existing systems. The engineer shall also analyze any off-site acreage that contributes to the subdivision, as well as any off-site storm drain extensions, grade to drain locations or required easements. 
(14)  Proposed land uses. A designation of the proposed uses of land within the subdivision. 
(15)  Vicinity map. A vicinity map on a smaller scale showing the proposed subdivision and its relationship to the surrounding area. 
(16)  Subdivision master plan. If the proposed subdivision is a portion of a tract that is later to be subdivided in its entirety, then a tentative subdivision master plan of the entire subdivision may be required with the development plan of the initial phase to be subdivided. The subdivision master plan shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the development plan, except it may be on a scale of not more than one inch equal to 400 feet. 
(17)  Subdivisions outside town. The information shown on a development plan for subdivisions located outside the corporate limits of the town, but within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, and the procedure for approval, modification or disapproval, shall be the same as required for development plans within the town. 
(18)  Adjacent jurisdiction acknowledgement. If a subdivision abuts an adjacent entity or jurisdiction, a letter of acknowledgement from such adjacent entity or jurisdiction indicating receipt of a copy of the proposed subdivision. 
(19)  Tax certificates. Tax certificates indicating that all taxes on the land being subdivided have been paid to the current year. 
(20)  Tree survey. A tree survey subject to the requirements and conditions enumerated in division 2, article II of chapter 94, tree permits. 
(21)  Landscape and screening plans. The type and location of all proposed landscaping and screening, including any areas to be irrigated. 
(22)  Comprehensive master plan features. All applicable features of the comprehensive master plan relative to the proposed subdivision, including land use plan, urban design plan, park and open space plan, water master plan, wastewater master plan, drainage/stormwater master plan, and specific area plans, if applicable. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.03(c))  
Secs. 90-34—90-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REVIEW PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 90-51. - Scheduling and consideration. 
The appropriate fees and number of copies of the development plan, as described in section 90-33, shall be submitted to the town manager. The development plan shall be considered administratively complete after it is examined and determined to be in compliance with the general and administrative provisions of this article by the town manager and the director of public works. The development plan shall be scheduled for consideration on the first available planning and zoning commission agenda as determined by the date of acceptance for review and the calendar schedule as maintained by the town manager. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.03(d)(1))  
Sec. 90-52. - Distribution of development plans. 
The following notice shall be stamped on the face of each development plan: "Development plan - for inspection purposes only; not an official document approved for record purposes." The town manager shall distribute the development plans immediately upon receipt to the development review committee. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.03(d)(2); Ord. No. 06-12, § 19, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 90-53. - Distribution to county. 
Whenever a development plan involving land in the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction outside its corporate limits is submitted to the planning and zoning commission for approval, two additional copies shall be provided and forwarded for comment and review to the county commissioners court. One of the copies shall be specifically directed to the attention of the commissioner in whose district the subdivision is located. The submittal to the commissioners court shall specify the date at which the planning and zoning commission will act on the development plan and request a reply setting forth the improvement standards and other requirements essential to the acceptance of streets, roads and other public dedications proposed by the development plan. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.03(d)(3))  
Sec. 90-54. - Comments; written report. 
Based on the development review committee's review, a written report and analysis shall be prepared and submitted to the planning and zoning commission relative to the proposed subdivision's compliance to the regulations of this article, the comprehensive master plan and other master plans such as utility plans. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.03(d)(4); Ord. No. 7-99, § 1, 1-18-1999; Ord. No. 06-12, § 20, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 90-55. - Review by planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  Items for consideration. The planning and zoning commission shall, in its action on the development plan, consider the physical arrangement of the subdivision, including the alignment and configuration of street and thoroughfare rights-of-way and determine compliance with the land use plan, thoroughfare plan, and any other applicable provisions of the comprehensive master plan, taking into consideration the recommendations of town staff. The planning and zoning commission shall also review and recommend that appropriate easements for proposed or future utility service and surface drainage are provided, and that the lot size and area comply with the minimum requirements for the type of sanitary sewage disposal proposed. Where connection to an approved sanitary sewage collection and treatment system is not proposed, all lots and building sites shall contain a minimum area of two acres, unless otherwise approved based upon studies of the particular soil conditions and evaluation of the topographic and geologic character of the area being subdivided. 
(b)  Action. Following review of the development plan and other materials submitted for conformity to the regulations of this article, including changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider, the planning and zoning commission shall act thereon as submitted or modified, and, if approved, the planning and zoning commission shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor. 
(c)  Notation of action. The action of the planning and zoning commission shall be noted on two copies of the development plan, referenced and attached to any conditions relative thereto. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the town manager. A notation of the action taken and requisite reasons therefor shall be entered in the records of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.03(e))  
Sec. 90-56. - Review by town council. 
(a)  Submittal. The town manager shall, at the next available town council meeting following recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, submit the development plan with the conditions established by the planning and zoning commission to the town council for their consideration. 
(b)  Action. The town council shall approve or disapprove the development plan with or without special provisions. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.03(f))  
Sec. 90-57. - Effect of development plan approval. 
(a)  Not to constitute approval of plat. Approval of a development plan shall not constitute approval of the record plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the development plan as a guide to the preparation of the record plat. 
(b)  Lapse of approval. Approval of the development plan shall be valid for a period of 18 months from the date of approval, and the general terms and conditions under which the development plan approval was granted will not be changed. The town council shall withdraw its approval of a development plan unless the record plat is filed within such 18-month period or unless the 18-month period is extended by the town council at the request of the subdivider. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.03(g))  
Sec. 90-58. - Preliminary grading release; bonding. 
Upon approval of construction plans, but prior to approval of the record plat, right-of-way and lot grading may commence; provided, however, that such grading does not authorize any utility-related construction. Any such right-of-way and/or lot grading conducted prior to the approval of the record plat shall be entirely at the sole option and risk of the owner/developer. Such optional right-of-way or lot grading shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Submission of an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP); 
(2)  Submission of a copy of the application to the EPA of a notice of intent (NOI) to begin lot grading; 
(3)  Submission of grading plans to be approved by the director of public works; and 
(4)  Submission of a restoration bond to the town in the amount of $1,000.00 per acre that is valid for a period of one year. The purpose of such bond is to provide the town with a mechanism to restore proper grading and vegetation to the job site if the developer/owner fails to complete the subdivision improvements after initial clearing has occurred. The town reserves the right to call the bond at any point during the one-year period that it appears the job site has been abandoned, the contractor fails to respond to written notice, and the time limits for maintaining or proceeding with such construction activity are in violation of EPA requirements. The bond shall be returned subsequent to the filing of a record plat for the subdivision. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.03(h))  
Secs. 90-59—90-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLATS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-91. - Applicability of article provisions. 
Approval of a development plan by the planning and zoning commission and the town council shall constitute conditional approval of a record plat, subject to a determination of compliance with the provisions of divisions 1 and 2 of this article. After approval of a development plan, the applicant may submit for filing of record with the county a record plat conforming to the approved development plan that contains all or a portion of the property contained in the approved development plan (see section 90-122, conformance with development plan). Any application for a plat shall include all property under common ownership. Application for record plats for proposed subdivisions containing four or fewer lots and requiring no public improvements may be filed without an approved development plan. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.04(a); Ord. No. 14-08, § 2, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 90-92. - Conveyance of land. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of divisions 1 and 2 of this article, record plats for the express purpose of conveying land to the town for municipal purposes and requiring no public improvements are not subject to approval of a development plan, and may be approved by the town manager upon recommendation of the town engineer, director of public works and the executive director of development services without the approval of the planning and zoning commission and town council. The town may waive certain record plat submittal requirements as may be appropriate for such record plats. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.04(h); Ord. No. 14-08, § 3, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 90-93. - Record plat submittal requirements. 
(a)  The owner of land on which approval has been obtained for a development plan shall have prepared and submitted a record plat to the planning and zoning commission. The owner shall submit the appropriate fees and number of copies of the record plat and construction plans as outlined in the record plat application packet. Each drawing shall measure 18 inches by 24 inches and shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to one inch, unless otherwise approved by the executive director of development services. When necessary, the record plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions, the record plat may be submitted for approval progressively in sections satisfactory to the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  The completed application for a record plat shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  Control points; acres. The primary control points, or descriptions and ties to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred shall be placed on the record plat. The area of the subdivision, in acres, shall be shown. 
(2)  Boundary lines and bearings. Tract boundary lines sufficient to locate the exact area proposed for subdivision, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites; with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and central angles of all curves shall be placed on the record plat. 
(3)  Streets. The name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way shall be placed on the record plat. 
(4)  Easements. Location and dimensions of all proposed and existing easements, indicating volume and page numbers, both onsite and offsite, shall be placed on the record plat. Any proposed offsite easements shall be filed by separate instrument with the record plat. 
(5)  Lot and block numbers. Numbers to identify each lot or site and each block, and the dimensions of lots and blocks, shall be placed on the record plat. 
(6)  Purpose of sites. The purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved shall be indicated on the record plat. 
(7)  Building lines. Minimum building setback lines, when required or approved by the planning and zoning commission, shall be placed on the record plat. 
(8)  Monuments. Location and description of monuments shall be placed on the record plat. 
(9)  Adjacent land. References to recorded subdivision plats or adjoining platted land by record name shall be placed on the record plat. 
(10)  Legal description. A legal description together with a signed and sealed surveyor's or engineer's certificate, conforming to the form provided in the town's Standard Language Format Guide, shall be placed on the record plat. 
(11)  Approval certification. Certification of approval by the planning and zoning commission, conforming to the form provided in the town's Standard Language Format Guide, shall be placed on the record plat. 
(12)  Title; scale. A title, scale and north point shall be placed on the record plat. 
(13)  Street intersections. The location of the point of intersection and points of tangency of street intersections, and the bearing and distance of each street right-of-way centerline shall be placed on the record plat. 
(14)  Plat identification. A positive reference and identification of the plat and date of the plat shall be placed on the record plat. 
(15)  Dedication in fee simple and certificate. The property owner's certificate or deed of dedication shall be placed on the record plat. The dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall be in fee simple and executed by all persons owning an interest in the property subdivided and platted, including lenders and lienholders, and shall be acknowledged in the manner prescribed by the laws for the state for conveyances of real property. The spouse of all married persons executing such dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall join therein unless satisfactory proof be provided showing that the property to be subdivided does not constitute community property or any portion of such party's homestead, in which case the instrument of dedication shall state the fact that the property subdivided and platted does not constitute a part of such party's actual community property or homestead. In the case of surface lienholders, they may execute a subordination agreement subordinating their liens to all public streets, alleys, parks, school sites and any other public areas shown on the plat of such subdivision as being set aside for municipal uses and purposes. The dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall, in addition to the above requirements, contain the following: 
a.  An accurate description of the tract of land being subdivided that is signed and sealed in accordance with state law. 
b.  A statement and express representation that the parties joining in such dedication are the sole owners of such tract of land. 
c.  An express dedication in fee simple without reservation to the town for municipal purposes of the streets, alleys, rights-of-way and any other public areas shown on the attached record plat. 
d.  A positive reference and identification of the record plat of such subdivision, date of record plat and engineer or surveyor. 
e.  Dedication language, substantially conforming to the form provided in the town's Standard Language Format Guide, shall be placed on the face of the record plat. 
(16)  Tax certificates. Tax certificates indicating that all taxes on the land being subdivided have been paid to the current year shall be submitted with the record plat. 
(17)  Construction plans. Construction plans for required improvements 24 inches by 36 inches in size, along with all data and calculations related to utilities, drainage or other construction in the subdivision, shall be submitted with the record plat. Such plans shall also show all existing or proposed surface and subsurface improvements and obstructions. 
(18)  Permits from federal, state or local agencies. Any applicable permits required by any federal, state or local regulatory agency, including the state department of transportation, shall be provided prior to the record plat being recorded with the county. 
(19)  Mandatory homeowners' association documents. Two copies of any mandatory homeowners' association documents, in accordance with the town's standard format and the requirements of article IV of this chapter, mandatory homeowner's associations, shall be submitted with the record plat for review by the town attorney's office. 
(20)  FEMA/town stream hydraulic submittals. Hydraulic study and hydraulic analysis shall be provided if the development abuts a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) designated floodplain. Town staff will forward this information to FEMA for their approval. FEMA processing will take between three to nine months. Any reclamation must be approved by FEMA prior to consideration by the planning and zoning commission. 
(21)  Separate conveyance for dedicated public lands and rights-of-way. Dedicated public lands and rights-of-way shall be separately conveyed to the town by a special warranty deed prior to the record plat being recorded in the deed records of the county. 
(22)  Planned development sunset provision. For subdivisions located within a planned development district, a note shall be included on the face of the record plat indicating that the zoning may be changed by the town council to IH interim holding district if a record plat is not recorded within five years pursuant to chapter 78 of this Code. 
(23)  Digitized submittal. A copy of the record plat drawing must be submitted in a digitized format compatible with the town's geographic information system (GIS). 
(24)  Tree survey. If a record plat is submitted for which the submission of a development plan is not also required, then the record plat shall be submitted with a tree survey prepared in accordance with the requirements of division 2, article II of chapter 94 of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.04(b); Ord. No. 12-00, § 3, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 14-08, § 4, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 90-94. - Administrative approval of minor plats. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, minor plats or replats involving four or fewer lots and requiring no public improvements may be approved by the town manager, upon recommendation of the town engineer, the director of public works, and the executive director of development services, without the approval of the planning and zoning commission or town council. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.04(g); Ord. No. 14-08, § 5, 2-4-2008)  
Secs. 90-95—90-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REVIEW PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 90-121. - Filing. 
After approval of the development plan by the planning and zoning commission and town council, and within 18 months of the approval date unless extended by action of the town council, the subdivider may submit for approval the record plat. A completed application for a record plat, meeting all the requirements of section 90-93, shall be submitted to the executive director of development services at least 45 days prior to the meeting at which consideration is desired. The official date of the record plat, and the date on which it shall be considered administratively complete, shall be the date upon which the record plat is determined to be in compliance with the general and administrative provisions of this chapter, by the executive director of development services, or the date upon which the construction plans are found to be in full compliance with this chapter's standards, by the director of public works, whichever occurs later. The record plat will then be scheduled for consideration on the first available planning and zoning commission agenda as determined by the date of acceptance for review and the calendar schedule as maintained by the executive director of development services. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.04(c)(1); Ord. No. 14-08, § 6, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 90-122. - Conformance with development plan. 
The record plat shall conform to the development plan, as approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion or phase of the approved development plan that he proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion or phase conforms to all requirements of the regulations of this article and to the phasing indicated on the development plan, if any. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.04(c)(2))  
Sec. 90-123. - Review of construction plans. 
The director of public works shall review the construction plans and submit to the planning and zoning commission his report at the record plat presentation. The developer shall pay the reasonable cost of review of the construction plans before the record plat is presented to the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.04(c)(3))  
Sec. 90-124. - Review by planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  Action. The record plat shall be presented to the planning and zoning commission, along with any appropriate recommendation by the executive director of development services. The planning and zoning commission shall act on the record plat within 30 days after the official filing date, unless such time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If no action is taken by the planning and zoning commission within 30 days after the official filing date or such longer period as may have been agreed upon, the record plat shall be deemed approved. A certificate showing the official date and failure to take action thereon within 30 days of such date shall, on demand, be issued by the planning and zoning commission, and this certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of a written endorsement or other evidence of approval. 
(b)  Review. A subdivider may obtain approval of a section or phase of a subdivision, provided that the application conforms to the phasing indicated on the development plan and meets all the requirements of this subpart B with reference to such section or phase in the same manner as is required for a complete subdivision. If a subdivision and its record plat is approved by the planning and zoning commission in sections or phases, each record plat of each section is to carry the name of the entire subdivision, but is to bear a distinguishing letter, number or subpart. Block numbers shall run consecutively throughout the entire subdivision, even though such subdivision may be finally approved in sections or phases. 
(c)  Approval. 
(1)  After the planning and zoning commission has determined that the record plat is in proper form, that the arrangement of the development proposed for the property being subdivided is consistent with zoning regulations and that the subdivision complies with the provisions of this subpart B and is in conformance with the development plan, it shall act to approve the record plat. 
(2)  If the planning and zoning commission determines that the record plat is in proper form, that the arrangement of the development proposed for the property being subdivided is consistent with zoning regulations and that the subdivision complies with the provisions of this subpart B, but is not in conformance with the development plan, it shall forward the record plat to the town council with a recommendation to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove such plat. 
(d)  Disapproval. Record plats that are disapproved by the planning and zoning commission shall be returned to the subdivider by the executive director of development services with an attached statement of the reasons for such action. 
(e)  Appeal. Any subdivider aggrieved by any finding or action of the planning and zoning commission that involves the disapproval of a record plat or the jurisdiction of the town council as to dedication or improvements, shall have the right of appeal to the town council within 30 days from the date of such finding or action, but any appeal must be taken within 30 days of such action and not thereafter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.04(d); Ord. No. 14-08, § 7, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 90-125. - Review by town council. 
When required, the town council shall consider all proposals with respect to the dedication of rights-of-way for municipal use, the construction of utilities, streets, drainage, and other improvements, and when satisfied with the proposals, shall authorize the establishment of agreements for same and ratify the approval action of the planning and zoning commission relative to the record plat. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.04(e))  
Sec. 90-126. - Action following approval. 
(a)  Certification of approval. The planning and zoning commission's approval and, if required, the town council's approval of the record plat shall authorize the chair of the planning and zoning commission to execute the certificate of approval on the original copy of the record plat. 
(b)  Plats within the town. The record plat for any subdivision located within the corporate limits of the town shall then be caused to be filed of record by the town in the plat records of the county, but only after the planning and zoning commission and the town council, if required, has officially acted upon the record plat with reference to improvements, dedications and utilities. Filing fees shall be paid by the developer. 
(c)  Plats within the county. The record plat for any subdivision located outside the corporate limits of the town, but within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be submitted for review and approval to the commissioners court of the county, including the approval and execution of any agreements required by the county, prior to such record plat being approved by the planning and zoning commission and town council, if required. 
(d)  No plat to be filed without approval. The attention of each subdivider is directed to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6626 and amendments, which state, in part: 
"That in cases of a subdivision or resubdivision of real property, no map, plat of any such subdivision or resubdivision shall be filed or recorded unless and until the same has been authorized by the commissioners court of the county in which the real estate is situated, by order duly entered in the minutes of said court, except in cases of the partition or other subdivision through a court of record; provided that where the real estate is situated within the corporate limits or within the specified extraterritorial jurisdiction of the corporate limits of any incorporated city or town, the governing body thereof or the planning commission, as the case may be, as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212, shall perform the duties herein above imposed upon the commissioners court." 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.04(f))  
Sec. 90-127. - Easements after approval of record plat. 
When easements are needed or required after a record plat, replat or amended plat has been approved, the owner or developer of the property burdened by such easements shall file with the executive director of development services a survey showing property boundary lines, location and dimensions of all proposed and existing easements, indicating volume and page numbers, both onsite and offsite, roadways, rail lines and public rights-of way crossing and adjacent to the subject property. The survey shall be certified by a registered professional land surveyor and submitted to the town for the review and approval of all separate instrument easements. 
(Ord. No. 14-08, § 8, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 90-128. - Vacating plat. 
(a)  The proprietors of the tract covered by a plat may vacate the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner prescribed for the original plat. 
(b)  If lots in the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the plat, may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots in the plat with approval obtained in the manner prescribed for the original plat. 
(c)  On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the vacated plat has no effect. 
(Ord. No. 14-08, § 9, 2-4-2008)  
Secs. 90-129—90-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REPLATS AND PLAT AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 90-151. - Replats. 
(a)  Replatting without vacating preceding plat. A replat of a subdivision or part of a subdivision may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat if the replat: 
(1)  Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted; 
(2)  Is approved, after a public hearing on the matter at which parties in interest and citizens have an opportunity to be heard, by the municipal authority responsible for approving plats; and 
(3)  Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions. 
(b)  Replatting without vacating preceding plat: certain subdivisions. 
(1)  A replat of a part of a subdivision may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat if the replat: 
a.  Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted; and 
b.  Involves only property: 
1.  Of less than one acre that fronts an existing street; and 
2.  That is owned and used by a nonprofit corporation established to assist children in at-risk situations through volunteer and individualized attention. 
(2)  An existing covenant or restriction for property that is replatted under this section does not have to be amended or removed if: 
a.  The covenant or restriction was recorded more than 50 years before the date of the replat; and 
b.  The replatted property has been continuously used by the nonprofit corporation for at least ten years before the date of the replat. 
(3)  Sections 90-151(a) and 90-151(d) do not apply to a replat under this section. 
(c)  Additional requirements for certain replats. 
(1)  In addition to compliance with section 90-151(a), a replat without vacation of the preceding plat must conform to the requirements of this section if: 
a.  During the preceding five years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot; or 
b.  Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot. 
(2)  Notice of the hearing required under section 90-151(a) shall be given before the 15th day before the date of the hearing by: 
a.  Publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the municipality is located; and 
b.  By written notice, with a copy of subsection (c)(3) hereof attached, forwarded by the municipal authority responsible for approving plats to the owners of lots that are in the original subdivision and that are within 200 feet of the lots to be replatted, as indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll or in the case of a subdivision within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, the most recently approved county tax roll of the property upon which the replat is requested. The written notice may be delivered by depositing the notice, properly addressed with postage prepaid, in a post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(3)  If the proposed replat requires a variance and is protested in accordance with this subsection, the proposed replat must receive, in order to be approved, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members present of the municipal planning commission or governing body, or both. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least 20 percent of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed replat and extending 200 feet from that area, but within the original subdivision, must be filed with the town in accordance with the provisions of section 78-154(d)(1). 
(4)  In computing the percentage of land area under subsection (c)(3), the area of streets and alleys shall be included. 
(5)  Compliance with subsections (c)(3) and (c)(4) is not required for approval of a replat of part of a preceding plat if the area to be replatted was designated or reserved for other than single or duplex family residential use by notation on the last legally recorded plat or in the legally recorded restrictions applicable to the plat. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.05(a); Ord. No. 14-08, § 10, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 90-152. - Plat amendments. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the town manager, upon the recommendation of the town engineer, the director of public works and the executive director of development services, is authorized to approve and issue an amending plat that is signed by the applicants only, and that is for solely one or more of the following purposes, and such approval and issuance shall not require notice, hearing or approval of other lot owners: 
(1)  The purpose of the amendment is to correct an error in any course or distance shown on the prior plat. 
(2)  The purpose of the amendment is to add any course or distance that was omitted on the prior plat. 
(3)  The purpose of the amendment is to correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the prior plat. 
(4)  The purpose of the amendment is to indicate monuments set after death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments. 
(5)  The purpose of the amendment is to show the proper location or character of any monument that has been changed in location or character or that originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character on the prior plat. 
(6)  The purpose of the amendment is to correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission as previously approved by the planning and zoning commission or the town council; such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent recorded plats. 
(7)  The purpose of the amendment is to correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots where both lot owners join in the application for plat amendment and neither lot is abolished, provided that such amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions and does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the owners in the plat. 
(8)  The purpose of the amendment is to relocate a lot line in order to cure an inadvertent encroachment of a building or improvement on a lot line or on an easement. 
(9)  The purpose of the amendment is to relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots where the owner or owners of all such lots join in the application for the plat amendment, provided that such amendment does not: 
a.  Attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; 
b.  Increase the number of lots; or 
c.  Alter orientation to a street. 
(10)  The purpose of the amendment is to make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat, provided that such amendment does not: 
a.  Affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the municipality; 
b.  Attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and 
c.  Change an area that is located in an area that the municipal planning commission or other appropriate governing body of the municipality has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area. 
(11)  The purpose of the amendment is to replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if: 
a.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; 
c.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and 
d.  The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities. 
(12)  A public hearing and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an amending plat. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.05(b); Ord. No. 14-08, § 11, 2-4-2008)  
Secs. 90-153—90-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MANDATORY HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATIONS 
 
Sec. 90-181. - Applicability of article provisions. 
When a residential subdivision contains streets, sewers, sewage treatment facilities, water supply systems, drainage systems or structures, parks, landscaping systems or landscape elements or features (including fountains and statues), landscape irrigation systems, screening walls, living screens, buffering systems, subdivision entryway features, including monuments or other signage, or other physical facilities or grounds held in common and necessary or desirable for the welfare of the area or subdivision, or that are of common use or benefit and that are not or cannot be satisfactorily maintained by the town or another public agency, the town may require the establishment and creation of a mandatory homeowners' association to assume and be responsible for the continuous and perpetual operation, maintenance and supervision of such facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.07(a))  
Sec. 90-182. - Approval. 
If the establishment and creation of a mandatory homeowners' association is required by the town, a copy of the agreements, covenants and restrictions establishing and creating the association must be approved by the town attorney and town council prior to the approval of the record plat of the subdivision and must be filed of record with such record plat in the map and plat records of the county. Such record plat shall clearly identify all facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds that are to be operated, maintained and/or supervised by such association. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.07(b))  
Sec. 90-183. - Responsibilities. 
Such mandatory homeowners' associations shall be responsible for the continuous and perpetual operation, maintenance and/or supervision of landscape systems, features or elements located in parkways, common areas, between screening walls or living screens and adjacent curbs or street pavement edges, adjacent to drainageways or drainage structures, or at subdivision entryways. Subdivision entryway treatments or features shall not be allowed unless a mandatory homeowners' association as required in this article is established and created. The town shall be responsible for all median maintenance and all paving maintenance (except for private streets or roads) and the repair of landscape systems, features or elements damaged by town-initiated utility work in dedicated easements. Other damage occurring during utility repairs will be the responsibility of the appropriate utility company. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.07(c))  
Sec. 90-184. - Dedications to association. 
All facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds that are to be operated, maintained and/or supervised by a mandatory homeowners' association, other than those located in public easements or rights-of-way, shall be dedicated by easement or deeded in fee simple ownership interest to such association. Such easements or ownership shall be clearly identified on the record plat of the applicable subdivision. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.07(d))  
Sec. 90-185. - Contents of agreements. 
At a minimum, the agreements, covenants and restrictions establishing and creating a mandatory homeowners' association required in this article shall contain and/or provide for the following: 
(1)  Definitions of terms contained therein; 
(2)  Provisions acceptable to the town for the establishment and organization of the mandatory homeowners' association and the adoption of bylaws for such association, including provisions requiring that the owner of any lot within the applicable subdivision and any successive buyer shall automatically and mandatorily become a member of the association; 
(3)  The initial term of the agreements, covenants and restrictions establishing and creating the association shall be for a 25-year period and shall automatically renew for successive ten-year periods, and the association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the town; 
(4)  Provisions acceptable to the town to ensure the continuous and perpetual use, operation, maintenance, and/or supervision of all facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds that are the responsibility of the association and to establish a reserve fund for such purposes; 
(5)  Provisions prohibiting the amendment of any portion of the association's agreements, covenants or restrictions pertaining to the use, operation, maintenance and/or supervision of any facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds that are the responsibility of the association without the prior written consent of the town; 
(6)  The right and ability of the town or its lawful agents, after due notice to the association, to remove any landscape systems, features or elements that cease to be maintained by the association; to perform the responsibilities of the association if the association fails to do so in compliance with any provisions of the agreements, covenants or restrictions of the association or of any applicable town codes or regulations; to assess the association for all costs incurred by the town in performing such responsibilities if the association fails to do so; and/or to avail itself of any other enforcement actions available to the town pursuant to state law or town codes or regulations; and 
(7)  Provisions indemnifying and holding the town harmless from any and all costs, expenses, suits, demands, liabilities or damages, including attorney's fees and costs of suit, incurred or resulting from the town's removal of any landscape systems, features or elements that cease to be maintained by the association or from the town's performance of the operation, maintenance or supervision responsibilities of the association due to the association's failure to perform such responsibilities. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.07(e))  
Sec. 90-186. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-12, § 21, adopted Feb. 20, 2012, deleted the former § 90-186 which pertained to specific use permits and derived from the Code of 1989, ch. 12, § 6.08; Ord. No. 12-08, § 2, 2-4-2008. In addition, Ord. No. 06-12, § 21, recodified the provisions pertaining to specific use permits as § 98-953 of this Code.  
Secs. 90-187—90-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 90-211. - Administrative approval. 
Subdivision improvements shall be subject to acceptance by the town manager, upon the recommendation of the town engineer, the director of public works and the town manager. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.06(a))  
Sec. 90-212. - Time frame for completion. 
(a)  Plan resubmittal. If construction has not commenced within one year after approval of the plans, resubmittal of plans may be required by the town engineer for meeting current standards and engineering requirements. These plans will be reviewed and comments noted within 30 days. A fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code is required upon the resubmittal of plans for review. The term "construction" shall mean the start or commencement of construction of town-maintained facilities. 
(b)  Expiration and extension of approval. If the public improvements for a subdivision have not been constructed and accepted by the town, and the corresponding record plat for such subdivision filed in the map and plat records of the appropriate county within 18 months from the date of record plat approval by the town, such record plat shall be null and void and shall conclusively be deemed to be withdrawn, without further action by the town; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to record plats approved by the town prior to September 1, 1992. If the public improvements for a subdivision that was approved prior to September 1, 1992, have not been constructed and accepted by the town, and the corresponding record plat for such subdivision filed in the map and plat records of the appropriate county by February 1, 1994, such record plat shall be null and void and shall conclusively be deemed to be withdrawn, without further action by the town. An approved, unexpired record plat may be extended once for a period not to exceed 12 months, pursuant to the following provisions: 
(1)  The town council may extend the approval of the record plat, for good cause shown by the applicant, if there has been no significant change in development conditions affecting the subdivision plan and the record plat continues to comply with all applicable standards and ordinances. 
(2)  A request for an extension of time to complete final public improvements for a subdivision pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be submitted to the town manager no later than the date the record plat expires. The request shall be in writing, and the application shall state the reason and justification for the requested extension. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.06(b))  
Sec. 90-213. - Improvements required. 
The improvement of all streets, ways, alleys, drainageways, utility lines and walkways as required in this article shall be in accordance with the standard specifications of the town for installation of such improvements. The town shall withhold all improvements and services of whatsoever nature from all additions that have not been approved in accordance with the regulations contained in this article. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.06(c))  
Sec. 90-214. - Inspection. 
All construction work, such as street grading, street paving, storm sewers, curb and/or gutter work, sanitary sewers or water mains performed by the owner, developer or contractor, shall be subject to inspection during construction by the proper authorities of the town and shall be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications approved by the town council, and in accordance with the provisions of any other ordinance of the town applicable thereto. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.06(d))  
Sec. 90-215. - Street posts and markers. 
The developer shall pay the cost of purchasing and installing, and shall install, street posts and markers at each street intersection, which posts and markers shall be the same type as used throughout the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.06(e); Ord. No. 6-99, § 1, 1-18-1999) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58.  
Sec. 90-216. - Traffic signs. 
The developer shall pay the costs of purchasing and installing traffic signs at each street intersection, which traffic signs and posts shall be the same type as used throughout the town. The developer shall also pay the cost for and install regulatory signage for the subdivision necessary for the safety of the public. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.06(f)) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; signs, ch. 86.  
Sec. 90-217. - Street lighting. 
The developer shall pay the costs of purchasing and installing all street lighting equipment. The developer shall also pay the cost of all street lighting service for a period of two years. Prior to the issuance of any building permits or certificates of occupancy in the subdivision, the developer shall enter into a contract with the town, in a form approved by the town, setting forth the specific street lighting requirements for such subdivision. The type of equipment, method of installation and location of the wiring and light poles shall meet the minimum standards and requirements of the electric company from which electricity is to be purchased. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.06(g))  
Sec. 90-218. - Street improvements. 
All record plats shall be subject to the following requirements regarding street improvements, provided that compliance with this section shall not be required for plat amendments approved and issued pursuant to section 90-152, plat amendments: 
(1)  No permit will be issued on property abutting any street in a subdivision prior to the approval of street improvements by the town. Construction of the street improvements as required by the provisions of this subpart B will not be necessary where the town has determined that such street improvements are not possible or practical at the time the street improvements are required to be constructed. If the town makes such a determination, a cost estimate for the construction for the required street improvements shall be prepared by the town. The developer shall enter into an agreement with the town, in a form approved by the town, for the deposit of funds in accordance with the agreement and shall have no further liability for the construction of the required street improvements. The terms and conditions under which construction shall be accomplished and a disposition of the escrow account shall be provided for in the agreement. In lieu of depositing such funds in escrow, an irrevocable letter of credit made out to the town in an amount approved by the town and in a form approved by the town attorney will be accepted. 
(2)  No permit will be issued on property in a subdivision abutting a state roadway until compliance with this subsection has been met. 
a.  The town shall make a determination whether the state will require participation in the cost of the improvements, and shall prepare a cost estimate for the required participation of the improvement of the state roadway. 
b.  If participation in the cost of improvements is required, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the town, in a form approved by the town, to deposit funds equal to the required cost of participation, including the cost for curbs, gutters, parallel storm sewer system, rights-of-way and utility adjustments. 
c.  The developer shall then deposit funds in accordance with the agreement and shall have no further liability for the construction of the required street improvements. The terms and conditions under which construction shall be accomplished and a disposition of the escrow account shall be provided for in the agreement. 
(3)  Approval of the plat shall not impose any duty upon the town or county concerning the maintenance of improvements of any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the town or county have made acceptance of the same by entry, use or improvement. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.06(h))  
Sec. 90-219. - As-built plans. 
Prior to the acceptance of a subdivision by the town, the engineer for the developer shall submit to the town staff two complete sets of drawings of the paving, drainage, water and sewer improvements showing all changes made in the plans during construction and containing on each sheet an as-built stamp bearing the signature of the engineer and the date. In addition, the engineer shall submit to the town staff four copies of a revised tree survey prepared in accordance with the requirements of division 2, article II of chapter 94 of this Code, tree permits. This revised tree survey shall be superimposed upon the record plat to indicate the location of all protected, specimen, majestic and historic trees, as defined in division 4, article II of chapter 94 of this Code, on the tract after completion of construction. One complete set of reproducible drawings of the utility plan sheets, containing the as-built information, shall be submitted. In addition, all of the above-cited drawings must be submitted in a digitized format compatible with the town's geographic information system (GIS). 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.06(i); Ord. No. 12-00, § 4, 2-17-2000)  
Sec. 90-220. - Maintenance bond. 
Prior to the acceptance of a subdivision by the town, the subdivider shall furnish a good and sufficient maintenance bond in the amount of ten percent of the contract price with a reputable and solvent corporate surety in favor of the town, to indemnify the town against any repairs that may become necessary to any part of the construction work performed in connection with the subdivision arising from defective workmanship or materials used therein, for a full period of two years from the date of final acceptance of the entire project. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.06(j))  
Sec. 90-221. - Inspection fee. 
Prior to the acceptance of a subdivision by the town, the subdivider shall pay a design review and inspection fee equal to three percent of the construction costs of the water and sewer utilities, drainage facilities and streets in each subdivision. The subdivider shall file copies of the executed construction contracts with the town manager for a determination of the actual amount of the fee to be assessed against the subdivider. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 6.06(k))  
Sec. 90-222. - Cash escrow. 
At the discretion of the town engineer, if extenuating circumstances exist beyond control of the developer/owner, the town may allow the developer/owner to provide a cash escrow in the amount equal to 125 percent of the cost of the installation of the landscaping. There shall be no interest paid on the cash escrow. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 2, 1-4-2001)  
Sec. 90-223. - Acceptance of subdivision improvements. 
Prior to the acceptance of a subdivision by the town, the developer/owner shall install all required perimeter screening, landscaping, irrigation, and fences adjacent and parallel to dedicated park, trail, or open space areas. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 3, 1-4-2001)  
Secs. 90-224—90-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-251. - Special roadway and area standards. 
New residential subdivisions within a specific plan area or with frontage on principal, country or scenic roadways shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Specific plan area. New residential subdivisions within a specific plan area shall conform to the land use and planning guidelines established in the comprehensive master plan for such areas. 
(2)  Special roadways. New residential subdivisions with frontage on a principal, country or scenic roadway shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  Landscaped buffer. A landscaped buffer shall be provided adjacent to such roadway as required in section 82-212(2)a, landscaping and screening applicability. Such landscaped buffer shall be located in a dedicated easement or separate parcel, and shall be maintained by the mandatory homeowners' association. 
b.  Scenic roadway setback. The scenic roadways designated in the comprehensive master plan, namely FM 1171 from Old Settlers Road west to U.S. 377 and FM 2499 from FM 3040 (Flower Mound Road) south to the town limits, are to have the maximum preservation of existing natural features, trees and views, extensive landscaping of the roadside where it does not currently exist, and limitations on density of new development within 1,000 feet of the roadway centerline. Compliance with this section shall be at the determination of the town council, upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.02)  
Secs. 90-252—90-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LOTS AND BLOCKS 
 
Sec. 90-271. - Building lot configuration. 
The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated and shall not be less than those specified as minimum standards by the zoning district. The depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.03(a))  
Sec. 90-272. - Lot depth, lines and frontage. 
(a)  Depth. Lot depth should not exceed 2½ times the lot width. 
(b)  Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines, unless otherwise approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Street frontage required. Each lot or building tract shall front upon a public street or an approved alternate means of access. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.03(b)—(d))  
Sec. 90-273. - Double frontage lots. 
Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. In instances where a double frontage lot is acceptable, one frontage must be indicated with a rear building line and must indicate that access is not permitted. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.03(e))  
Sec. 90-274. - Large lots. 
Where the area is divided into larger lots than for normal urban building sites and, in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, any or all of the tracts are susceptible of being resubdivided, the original subdivision shall be such that the alignment of future street dedications conform to the general street layout in the surrounding area, so that the larger tracts may be later subdivided in conformance with the requirements of this subpart B and the minimum standards specified by the zoning district. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.03(f))  
Sec. 90-275. - Multiple structure tracts. 
Building tracts that are subject to site plan approval for the location of multiple structures in a planned development district, shopping center, housing project or similar complex may be platted as building tracts and are subject to the same standards of access, utility service and improvement as lots, except that the site plan for multiple structure use must be approved by the planning and zoning commission in accordance with the provisions of article II of chapter 82, site plans. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.03(g))  
Sec. 90-276. - Exception for industrial lots. 
An industrial subdivision shall be processed for approval in the same manner as provided for a residential subdivision, except that individual lots are not required on such plat, and only streets, blocks, easements and minimum building lines shall be indicated. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.03(h))  
Secs. 90-277—90-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STREETS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 90-301. - Exceptions to street standards. 
(a)  The town council may grant an exception to the street design standards as contained in this division, provided that the council finds and determines that such standards work a hardship on the basis of utility relocation costs, right-of-way acquisition costs, and other related factors. 
(b)  Streets within certain specified subdivisions including, but not limited to, Franklin Hills, Twin Coves Estates, Roanoke Hills, Red Bud Acres, and Red Bud Point that are a part of a replat are hereby excepted from complying with the ordinance regarding street design standards for replats within existing residential subdivisions where the existing streets: 
(1)  Are constructed of asphalt or other approved paving material; 
(2)  Do not meet the current standards for any street design adopted by the town; and 
(3)  Were established and constructed with the development of the original subdivision. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(a); Ord. No. 18-10, § 2, 3-25-2010; Ord. No. 15-13, § 2, 4-1-2013)  
Sec. 90-302. - Concrete streets. 
On and after the passage of the regulations of this division, all builders/developers shall be required to construct concrete streets according to the design criteria and construction standards manual. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(b))  
Sec. 90-303. - Access. 
All platted lots shall have safe and reliable street access for daily use and emergency purposes. Except for lots that are provided access from an approved cul-de-sac, all subdivisions shall have two means of access or approach. Where development phasing or constraints of the land prevent the provision of a second, separate means of access, the town council may accept a temporary street connection, a median divided entry or other appropriate means of access to satisfy the requirement of this section. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(c))  
Sec. 90-304. - Street layout. 
Unless otherwise approved by the planning and zoning commission, provisions shall be made for the extension of arterial streets in accordance with the thoroughfare plan of the town. Collector streets shall be provided for the circulation of traffic through the subdivision and their connection to arterial streets. Adequate local streets shall be provided to accommodate the subdivision and provide access to lots. Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged and grid patterns avoided. Where the layout of streets is not shown in the thoroughfare plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection to existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to a plan for a neighborhood or planned development approved or adopted by the planning and zoning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable or where neighborhood design makes a varied plan appropriate. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(d))  
Sec. 90-305. - Street connections. 
The system of streets designated for the subdivision, except in unusual cases, must connect with streets already dedicated in adjacent subdivision; and where no adjacent connections are platted, must, in general, be the reasonable projection of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts, and must be continued to the boundaries of the tract subdivided, so that other subdivisions may connect therewith. Reserve strips of land controlling access to or egress from other property or to or from any street or alley, or having the effect of restricting or damaging the adjoining property for subdivision purposes, or that will not be taxable or accessible for special improvements, shall not be permitted in any subdivision, unless such reserve strips are conveyed to the town in fee simple. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(e))  
Sec. 90-306. - Half streets. 
Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and where the planning and zoning commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half of a street when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. Half streets on bounding property lines shall be permitted for major or collector streets, and one-half of the street shall be required from each property. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(n))  
Sec. 90-307. - Street intersections. 
More than two streets intersecting at a point shall be avoided, except where it is otherwise impractical to secure a proper street system. All intersections shall be as near 90 degrees as possible, and in no case shall the intersection angle be less than the following: 
(1)  No street shall intersect any other street at an angle of less than 70 degrees. 
(2)  Where several streets converge at one point, or acute intersecting angles are present, setback lines, special rounding or cutoff corners may be required to ensure safety and facilitation of orderly traffic movement. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(f))  
Sec. 90-308. - Street jogs. 
Nonintersecting local streets with centerline offset of less than 150 feet and nonintersecting collector or arterial streets with centerline offset of less than 300 feet shall not be approved, except in special cases when approved by the planning and zoning commission and town council. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(g))  
Sec. 90-309. - Block lengths. 
Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet without special approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(h))  
Sec. 90-310. - Culs-de-sac. 
Cul-de-sacs may be permitted and are encouraged where the subdivision design or the shape of the property makes such street design appropriate. Cul-de-sacs shall provide proper access to all lots and shall not exceed 600 feet in length, provided that a cul-de-sac shall not exceed 1,200 feet in the A and SF-E districts. A turnaround shall be provided at the closed end that has a minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet and a minimum paved surface radius of 50 feet (measured from face of curbs), unless an equally safe and convenient form of paved space is approved by the town council in place of a turning circle. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(i))  
Sec. 90-311. - Street design standards. 
(a)  The criteria of this section shall be used as a guide in street design, subject to additional provisions in this section and the engineering design criteria and construction standards manual. Pavement width for major arterials and urban streets shall be measured from the face of the curb. Pavement standards for rural streets, where no curb is required, shall be measured from the edge of the pavement. 
Design 
Feature 	Major (Principal) 
Arterial 	Greenway Urban 
Arterial 	Greenway Rural 
Arterial 	Urban Minor 
Arterial Divided 	Urban Minor 
Arterial with Bike Lane 	Urban Minor 
arterial with On-Street Parking 	Urban Minor 
Arterial Undivided 	Urban Collector 	Rural Collector 	Local Res. 
Urban 	Local Res. 
Estate 	Local Commercial 	Local Conservation 	Alley 
Number of Lanes 	6 	4 	4 	4 	4 	4* 	4 	2-3 	2 	2 	2 	2-3 	2 	2 
Lane Width 	12' 	12' 	11' 	12' 	12' 	10' 	12' 	12' 	12' 	15' 	12' 	12' 	12' 	Varies 
Pavement Width 	72' 	48' 	44' 	48' 	58' 	76' 	48' 	36' 	24' 	30' 	26' 	36' 	24' 	Varies 
Right-of-way Width 	120' 	90' 	100' 	90' 	100 	120' 	70' 	60' 	80' 	50' 	26' 	60' 	26' 	Varies 
Design Speed (mph) 	45 	45 	40 	40 	40 	30 	35 	40 	40 	30 	30 	40 	30 	15 
Maximum Grade 	5% 	5% 	7½% 	7½% 	7½% 	7½ % 	7½% 	7½% 	7½% 	8% 	8% 	7½% 	8% 	8% 
Min. Centerline Radius 	800' 	800' 	640' 	640' 	640' 	275' 	475' 	640' 	640' 	275' 	275' 	640' 	275' 	50' 
Median Width 	20' 	42' 	40' 	16' 	16' 	16' 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 
Median Break 	530' 	530' 	530' 	320' 	320' 	250' 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 
Drive Spacing 	360' 	360' 	360' 	250' 	250' 	200' 	250' 	200' 	200' 	n/a 	n/a 	200' 	n/a 	n/a 
 
* Also has 18' angled parking lane on the outside of cross section on both sides of the street. Access management will follow the local road standards. 
(b)  Local residential streets in the A and SF-E districts shall conform to the standards shown for "local residential estate" streets in the above table, subject to the following criteria. If the criteria are not met, 60 feet of right-of-way shall be provided. 
(1)  The lots are located within a subdivision platted subsequent to September 14, 1987; and 
(2)  The lots are adjacent to a street having a minimum street pavement width of 24 feet and which street shall be: 
a.  A residential street; 
b.  Dedicated to the town subsequent to September 14, 1987; and 
c.  Not designated on the thoroughfare plan for future expansion; 
(3)  An 18-foot street, utility, drainage, construction and maintenance easement shall be dedicated, at the time the subdivision is platted, on each lot adjacent to the residential street described in subsection (b) of this section. The maintenance easement shall be provided for utility and street maintenance. The 18-foot street, utility, drainage, construction and maintenance easement shall be maintained by and at the expense of the owner of the lot over and across which the easement lies; and 
(4)  The front yard building lot line shall be measured from the edge of the 18-foot easement that is farthest from the street pavement. 
(c)  The spacing of median breaks and drive approaches shall be as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, unless otherwise approved by the town engineer. The criteria for the spacing of median breaks shall not apply in specific plan areas of the town's comprehensive master plan, as amended. In addition to the above criteria, no residential drive shall be closer than 35 feet from any intersection. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(j); Ord. No. 70-08, §§ 2—4, 11-5-2008; Ord. No. 57-11, §§ 2—4, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 06-12, § 22, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 21-12, § 3, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 51-12, § 3, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 90-312. - State highway ROW widths. 
Street right-of-way widths for state highways shall not be less than as follows: 
Roadway 	Limits 	ROW Widths 
(in feet) 
FM 2499 	SH 121 to FM 3040 	120 
FM 2499 	FM 3040 to FM 1171 	120 
FM 2499 (new) 	FM 1171 to a point 720 feet north of FM 1171 	120 
FM 2499 (new) 	From 720 feet north of FM 1171 to FM 407 	180 
FM 1171 	West city limits to Karnes Road 	180 
FM 1171 	Karnes Road to Lewisville city limits 	120 
FM 407 	West city limits to a point 963 feet west of the east city limits 	120 
FM 407 	From 963 feet west of the east city limits to the east city limits 	100 
FM 3040 	FM 2400 to east city limits 	180 
 
Differences exceed one percent. Curve design should be in accordance with the engineering standards manual, or as approved by the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(k))  
Sec. 90-313. - Street grade and curves. 
Major streets may have a maximum grade of five percent, unless the natural topography is such as to require steeper grades, in which case a 7½ percent grade may be used for a maximum continuous distance of 200 feet. Secondary streets may have a maximum grade of 7½ percent. Minor or local residential streets may have a maximum grade of ten percent. All streets must have a minimum grade of at least one-half of one percent. Vertical curves are required where algebraic grade differences exceed one percent. Curve design should be in accordance with the engineering standards manual, or as approved by the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(l))  
Sec. 90-314. - Street curve radii. 
Major arterials shall have minimum radii at the centerline of 800 feet. Minor arterials shall have a minimum radii at the centerline of 425 feet. Collector streets shall have a minimum radii at the centerline of 250 feet. Local residential streets shall have a minimum radii at the centerline of 150 feet, unless in special circumstances the town council approves a local residential street with a smaller minimum radius; in which case, the developer shall pay any additional cost of installing the water and sewer lines caused by the smaller radius. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(m))  
Sec. 90-315. - Construction and dedication of internal streets. 
When the street is within a subdivision or industrial area, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Local and collector streets. Local and collector streets shall be constructed by the developer and dedicated to the town, along with all necessary rights-of-way, with no cost participation from the town. 
(2)  Major and minor arterials. If a planned major or minor arterial is shown on the thoroughfare plan passing through the subdivision or industrial area, no development plan or record plat shall be approved and no development permits shall be issued until such arterial is constructed or until agreement is reached between the town and the developer on the financing and construction of such arterial. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(n))  
Sec. 90-316. - Construction and dedication of boundary streets. 
Where a subdivision or industrial area abuts a street that does not meet the minimum design standards of this division, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Local and collector streets. Abutting substandard local and collector streets shall be constructed or reconstructed as necessary by the developer to bring them up to minimum standards, and all rights-of-way from the centerline of such roadway necessary to meet minimum right-of-way requirements dedicated to the town, with no cost participation from the town. The federal government, the state and political subdivisions of the state may be exempt from the provisions of this subsection. 
(2)  Major and minor arterials. If the subdivision or industrial area proposes access to a planned major or minor arterial shown on the thoroughfare plan, no development plan or record plat shall be approved and no development permits shall be issued until such arterial is constructed or until agreement is reached between the town and the developer on the financing and construction of such arterial. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(o))  
Sec. 90-317. - Street names. 
Street names shall be subject to the approval of the planning and zoning commission and shall be in accordance with the town's street naming plan. No street names shall be used that will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(p))  
Sec. 90-318. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-12, § 23, adopted Feb. 20, 2012, deleted the former § 90-318 which pertained to thoroughfare buffers and derived from the Code of 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(q).  
Sec. 90-319. - Railroad buffers. 
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, the planning and zoning commission and/or town council may require the provision of landscaping, buffers and other screening and separation measures that are deemed necessary to protect adjacent properties from the adverse visual, noise and pollution effects associated with railroad installations and rail traffic and to ensure adequate separation of the same from adjacent properties. The protection measures required by the planning and zoning commission and/or town council may include, but shall not be limited to, the protection measures identified in section 90-318. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.04(r))  
Sec. 90-320. - Procedure to be followed by persons seeking street name change of an existing street. 
(a)  Any person may request a street name change by filing a request for a street name change with the planning department. The request shall identify the street proposed to be renamed by its current name and the block numbers thereof, state the reason for the requested street name change, and state the proposed name for such roadway segment. 
(b)  The proposed name change will be considered by various town departments interested in the naming of streets and roadways within the town's corporate limits possibly including, but not limited to, engineering, public works, the police department and the fire department. Following such consideration the town manager or designee may, but is not required to, schedule consideration of the proposed street name change on the next available agenda for the transportation commission. 
(c)  Following receipt of the transportation commission's recommendation regarding the proposed street name change, the town may schedule consideration of the proposed street name change on the next available agenda for the town council. 
(d)  The town will notify each owner of property adjacent to, abutting and/or having an address on the street that is the subject of the requested name change regarding the proposed street name change and the time, date and location of the town council meeting at which the proposed street name change will be considered. Said notification will be sent by regular U.S. mail, postage prepaid, to the owners of real property adjacent to, abutting, and/or having an address on the subject street as their names and addresses appear on the most recently approved Town of Flower Mound tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § 24, 2-20-2012)  
Secs. 90-321—90-340. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ALLEYS AND EASEMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 90-341. - Alley or utility easements required. 
Alleys or utility easements shall be provided in all residential areas, unless otherwise approved by the town, and in commercial and industrial districts, except that the town may waive the requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.05(a))  
Sec. 90-342. - Minimum width. 
The minimum right-of-way width of an alley or utility easement shall be 20 feet and 15 feet, respectively. The minimum pavement width of alleys shall be 12 feet. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.05(b))  
Sec. 90-343. - Utility easements. 
Utility easements shall be provided within the proposed subdivision as may be necessary to ensure the proper design, installation and maintenance of either underground or aerial utilities. Easement widths shall be determined by the type of utility; however, an easement shall not normally be required along the rear of any lots served by a dedicated alley. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.05(c))  
Sec. 90-344. - Drainage easements. 
When a proposed subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement conforming substantially with the line for such watercourse. The easement for such watercourse shall be determined by good engineering practice and may require improvement or realignment to ensure proper drainage of stormwater. The drainage easement may include park or open space dedication of any floodplain or low area involving hazard if built upon. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.05(d))  
Sec. 90-345. - Adjoining areas. 
When the town manager finds that easements in areas adjoining proposed subdivisions are necessary to provide adequate drainage or to serve such subdivisions with utilities, the subdivider shall obtain such easements. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.05(e))  
Secs. 90-346—90-370. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PRIVATE STREETS AND ALLEYS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 90-371. - Applicability of division provisions. 
The town council may allow a subdivision of land into residential lots that do not abut public streets, provided that such subdivision provides access for each lot to and from a public street by means of a private street shown on the plat. The town council may approve private alleys where private streets are allowed. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.06(a))  
Sec. 90-372. - Layout and names. 
Private streets and private alleys shall comply with the thoroughfare plan of the town and shall not interrupt public through streets. Such private streets shall be named so as not to conflict with other street names, whether public or private. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.06(b))  
Sec. 90-373. - Specifications. 
The specifications for private streets and private alleys, including construction standards, widths, all geometric standards, grades and alignments, shall be same as required for public streets and public alleys. The width of the easement required for private streets and private alleys shall be the same as required for the right-of-way of a public street or public alley of a similar projected carrying capacity. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.06(c))  
Sec. 90-374. - Construction. 
Prior to recommendation of approval of the record plat by the town staff, the subdivider shall have provided construction plans of the proposed private streets and private alleys that meet the standards of this chapter for streets and alleys dedicated to public use. In addition, the construction of the private streets and private alleys shall be inspected by the town and inspection fees shall be paid to the town just as if such private streets and private alleys were public streets and public alleys. Water and sanitary sewer mains and sidewalks must be installed in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.06(d))  
Sec. 90-375. - Streetlights and traffic control devices. 
Streetlights comparable with those required on public rights-of-way must be provided. Street lighting design plans shall be approved by the town manager or his designee. Design plans and locations of all traffic control devices shall be approved by the town engineer or his designee. The design, size, color and construction of all traffic control devices must comply with those required in public rights-of-way. A sign stating that a street is private shall be provided at the entrance to every private street from a public street. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.06(e))  
Sec. 90-376. - Utility connection. 
Utilities to any part of the subdivision shall not be connected until the requirements of this chapter are met, and the town engineer has issued a certification of compliance of proper construction of the private streets and private alleys. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.06(f))  
Sec. 90-377. - Lot areas. 
The area included within the private street or private alley shall not be counted toward the minimum lot size requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.06(g))  
Sec. 90-378. - Setback and frontage. 
All private streets and private alley easements shall be treated as public streets and public alley rights-of-way for purposes of determining the building setback required from such private street or private alley easements, as well as determining lot frontage. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.06(h))  
Sec. 90-379. - Access. 
Private streets and private alleys shall be labeled as such on the plat, and such plat shall provide access easements over the private streets and private alleys to the owners and residences served by such private streets and private alleys. In addition, such plat shall provide access and service easements over the private streets and private alleys including, but not limited to, the following easements: utilities, fire lane, street lighting, government vehicle access, ambulances and other emergency care, vehicles, mail collection and delivery access, utility meter reading access and school buses. A subdivision served by private streets and containing more than 20 dwelling units shall have a minimum of two access points to a public street. All private entrances must be constructed to permit opening of the passageway in emergencies. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.06(i))  
Sec. 90-380. - Maintenance. 
(a)  The plat shall provide for perpetual maintenance of the private streets and private alleys through restrictive covenants that may not be altered without the approval of the town. Private streets and private alleys shall be maintained to the standards for public rights-of-way and easements and shall be subject to the approval of the town. A legal entity must be created that is responsible for street lighting, street maintenance and cleaning, and the installation and maintenance of interior traffic control devices. The legal instruments establishing the responsibility for a private street or private alley shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission and the town council for approval, be approved as to legal form by the town attorney, and recorded in the office of the county clerk prior to any building permit being issued within the subdivision. 
(b)  The town shall have no obligation to maintain a private street or private alley. If a private street or private alley is not maintained in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the town shall have the right, but not the obligation, to send written notice to the legal entity responsible for maintaining the private street or private alley that failure to comply with requirements in this chapter within 30 days shall entitle the town to take those actions necessary to put the private street or private alley in compliance. The legal entity responsible for maintaining the private street or private alley shall pay the town for the work performed within a period of 120 days from the presentation of the bill. Failure to pay the bill within the required time shall be deemed an intent by the owners of the private street or private alley to dedicate such private street or private alley to the town for public use. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.06(j))  
Sec. 90-381. - Hold harmless. 
Every plat containing a private street or a private alley shall contain language on the face of the plat whereby the owners of lots served by private streets and private alleys agree to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless any governmental entity for damages to the private street or private alley occasioned by the reasonable use of the private street or private alley by the government entity for governmental purposes, and for damages arising from the condition of the private street or private alley. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.06(k))  
Sec. 90-382. - Restricted entry. 
A gate and a guard house may be constructed at the entrance of any private street from a public street. The gate provided shall incorporate the use of fire department approved rapid access locking hardware. The guard house shall be at least 25 feet from the public right-of-way, and shall provide a passageway of at least 25 feet in width and at least 14 feet in height. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.06(l))  
Secs. 90-383—90-400. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - DRAINAGE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 70. 
 
Sec. 90-401. - Adequate drainage required. 
Areas within the jurisdiction of the town, subject to flood conditions or indicated by a floodplain prefix on the zoning district map, will not be considered for subdivision purposes, until adequate drainage has been provided. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.08(a))  
Sec. 90-402. - Minimum drainage standards. 
(a)  The physical design of the proposed subdivision or development shall conform to the minimum storm sewer, drainage and floodplain criteria and standards set forth in the town's engineering standards manual, as amended; provided, however, that notwithstanding anything contained therein to be contrary, the planning and zoning commission and/or the town council may require for a development plan approved by the town council after March 1, 1992, and for which an approved and adopted zoning concept plan does not exist as of that date, that: 
(1)  Excepting construction associated with public infrastructure crossings or stormwater detention in the fully developed FEMA floodplain, the 100-year (hereinafter "one percent chance") floodplain must be kept in its natural state and that no construction or construction-related activity shall be allowed therein; or 
(2)  If such construction or construction-related activity is allowed, that there shall be zero increase in the one percent chance water surface elevation and zero increase in the water velocity on any property upstream, downstream or on the opposite bank and/or lot (if under different ownership) from the proposed construction or construction-related activity. 
The one percent chance floodplain referred to herein is divided into two different component areas identified as the "fully developed FEMA floodplain," and the "special flood hazard area (FEMA floodplain)," as such components are further described in this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.08(b) ; Ord. No. 104-07, § 3, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 15-13, § 3, 4-1-2013; Ord. No. 44-14 , § 2, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 90-403. - Fully developed FEMA floodplain. 
(a)  The fully developed FEMA floodplain shall mean the special flood hazard area (FEMA floodplain) that would be inundated by the one percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future hydrology provided in the town-wide hydrologic study (i.e., fully developed flows). 
(b)  No construction or construction-related activities and no structures or uses are allowed in the fully developed FEMA floodplain. 
(c)  Exception: If such construction, construction-related activity, structure or use is allowed, there shall be zero increase in the fully developed water surface elevation and zero increase in the water velocity on any property that is upstream, downstream, or on the opposite bank and/or lot (if under different ownership) from the proposed construction or construction-related activity. 
(d)  A hydraulic study must be provided by a licensed professional engineer for review by the town to verify conformance with the above-identified exception(s). 
(e)  Any request for an exception must be presented to the town council for their review and approval. 
( Ord. No. 44-14 , § 3, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 90-404. - Special flood hazard area (FEMA floodplain). 
(a)  The special flood hazard area (FEMA floodplain) is the land in the floodplain within the town subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map ("FHBM"). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. The special flood hazard area is known as the FEMA floodplain, which area is reflected within the flood insurance study and the boundaries shown on the town's flood insurance rate map ("FIRM") panels. 
(b)  No construction or construction-related activities and no structures or uses are allowed in the special flood hazard area (FEMA floodplain). 
(c)  Work within the FEMA floodway designated area is prohibited. 
(d)  Exception: If such construction, construction-related activity, structure or use is allowed, there shall be zero increase in the one percent chance water surface elevation and zero increase in the water velocity on any property that is upstream, downstream, or on the opposite bank and/or lot (if under different ownership) from the proposed construction or construction-related activity. 
(e)  Exception to the designated FEMA floodway: If such construction, construction-related activity, structure or use is allowed, there shall be zero increase in the one percent chance water surface elevation and zero increase in the water velocity on any property that is upstream, downstream, or on the opposite bank and/or lot from the proposed construction or construction-related activity. Only subdivisions platted after the effective date of this section are permitted to receive an exception for floodway reclamation. Subdivisions platted prior to the effective date of this section are ineligible to receive the floodway reclamation exception. Platted and re-platted lots and lots of record are ineligible to receive the floodway reclamation exception regardless of the plat or re-plat date. 
(f)  A hydraulic study must be provided by a licensed professional engineer for review by the town to verify conformance with the above-identified exception(s) criteria. 
(g)  Any request for an exception must be presented to the town council for their review and approval. Upon approval of the exception by town council, the applicant must provide the town a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) application. After town review of the CLOMR, the developer must submit the application to FEMA for FEMA's review and approval. No construction or construction-related activity may begin prior to receipt of FEMA's approval of the CLOMR and a town approved floodplain development permit. 
(h)  Upon completion of the reclamation activity an as-built survey and a revised hydraulic model are to be provided to staff for review of conformance with the approved exception. Upon verification of compliance, a letter of map amendment (LOMR) application is to be submitted, by the developer, to FEMA for their review and approval. 
(i)  Prior to receiving FEMA's LOMR approval, any structure situated within the reclamation area or which has its foundation or footing affected by the fill placed within the reclamation area will not receive a building permit. 
(j)  Letter of compliance will be issued and the floodplain development permit will be closed. 
( Ord. No. 44-14 , § 3, 8-4-2014)  
Secs. 90-405—90-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - UTILITIES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 70. 
 
Sec. 90-421. - Water supply. 
Proposed subdivisions shall have access to an approved public water supply or have approved plans for such access. Water lines shall be looped wherever possible, and in no case should a dead-end water main exceed 600 feet in length. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.09)  
Sec. 90-422. - On-site sewage facilities. 
In proposed subdivisions where public sanitary sewers are not available, the subdivider shall ensure in a manner acceptable to the town that the soil conditions, lot area and other terrain features are adequate for on-site sewage facilities. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.10)  
Sec. 90-423. - Underground utilities. 
All existing overhead utilities, save and except transmission facilities identified herein below, and all new utility extensions shall be placed underground in conjunction with the development or redevelopment of a property, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Each of the utility companies shall be responsible for developing administrative policies and cost reimbursement procedures for the installation and extension of their underground utilities. Nothing in this section shall prohibit or restrict any utility company from recovering the difference in cost of overhead facilities and underground facilities in accordance with the provisions of such utility company's approved tariff. No utility company shall be required to begin construction of underground facilities unless and until the customer, owner, developer and/or party requesting such facilities has made arrangements satisfactory to the specific utility company for the payment of such difference between the cost of overhead utilities and underground facilities. 
(2)  All electrical, telephone, data transmission, and cable television support equipment (transformers, amplifiers, switching devices, etc.) necessary for underground installation shall be pedestal- and/or pad-mounted or placed underground, and the difference in cost of such facilities shall be paid to the installing utility in accordance with provisions established in subsection (a)(1). 
(3)  In those cases where temporary overhead service is necessary (e.g., emergency repairs, construction field offices, etc.) these installations shall not be in service for a period exceeding six months. 
(4)  Transmission facilities as indicated in exhibit A are not required to be placed underground upon the development or redevelopment of the properties containing such facilities. 
(5)  Exceptions to the standards contained in this section may be granted by the town council subsequent to a public hearing scheduled upon request of the owner or developer. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.11; Ord. No. 93-05, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
 
Exhibit A  
Secs. 90-424—90-440. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 54. 
 
Sec. 90-441. - Purpose of division. 
The requirements for park and recreational areas contained in this division are intended to ensure that in, or within reasonable proximity to, new residential developments in the town, there will be sufficient land dedicated to meet the demand and need of the future residents of such development for parks, containing passive or active recreational areas and amenities that are reasonably attributable to such development. In determining the size of the parcel that should be dedicated in this division, the town council has taken into consideration the projected growth in population and development within the town, the ill effects of rapid and intense urbanization and the provisions of the town's comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.07(a); Ord. No. 13-00, § 2, 2-17-2000)  
Sec. 90-442. - Applicability of division provisions. 
Acceptance of public improvements shall not be issued for any residential subdivision or development subsequent to the passage of this division, unless park and recreational areas shall have been dedicated for such development, or cash shall have been paid in lieu of such dedication in accordance with the standards and criteria in this division. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.07(b); Ord. No. 13-00, § 2, 2-17-2000)  
Sec. 90-443. - Character and minimum dedication. 
(a)  Land dedicated for park and recreational areas shall be of such size, dimensions, topography and general character as is reasonably required by the town for the type of use necessary to meet the demand and need of future residents, e.g., multipurpose trail, equestrian trail, open space buffer, active recreation for team or individual sports, playground, tot lot, picnic area and similar uses. 
(b)  Sufficient land shall be dedicated and trails constructed to conform with the trail network plan of the town's comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Unique or other natural areas that provide an opportunity for linkages between parks or that preserve the natural character of the surrounding environment may be required by the town to be included in the calculated areas dedicated for park and recreational purposes. 
(d)  The minimum amount of park and recreational area that shall be dedicated pursuant to this division shall be: 3.36 acres per 100 dwelling units for single-family detached, and single-family attached uses; 2.78 acres per 100 dwelling units for multi-family uses, and; 2.4 acres per 100 dwelling units for age-restricted residential uses meeting the provisions of the Federal Housing for Older Persons Act. Land within floodplain and floodway designated areas shall not be counted toward meeting the requirement of this subsection, except as allowed in section 90-449. 
(e)  No land dedicated in compliance with this division shall have dimensions smaller than 100 feet in width and 150 feet in depth. In any development that includes wooded areas, trees subject to division 4 of article II of chapter 94 of this Code, tree preservation, or other natural features that are desirable to maintain, the town council may grant an exception from the strict application of these minimum dimensions, whenever it determines that by doing so the protection and preservation of such areas will be promoted. 
(f)  Extensions of the town's trail network and trail linkages, other than extensions of the primary trail network as depicted in the comprehensive plan, shall be included in the calculation of the amount of park and recreational area dedicated pursuant to this division. 
(g)  Trail standards. Trails constructed within public or private open space and park and recreational areas, or trails providing access to such areas, shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  General. Unless specified otherwise, all such trails shall be constructed of concrete and shall conform to the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act, as may be amended. Specifications for concrete, bollards and signs shall be provided by the town's parks and recreation division. 
(2)  Multipurpose trails. Trails designated as multipurpose trails in the parks and trails plan shall be a minimum of eight feet in width. 
(3)  Transmission pipeline trails. Trails within a transmission pipeline easement linking to an existing or proposed multipurpose trail shown in the parks and trails plan shall be a minimum of ten feet in width. 
(4)  Auxiliary trails. Walkways within open space areas not linking to a multipurpose trail shown in the parks and trails plan shall be a minimum of six feet in width. 
(5)  Access walkways. All access walkways linking to the multipurpose trail network shown in the parks and trails plan shall be a minimum of six feet in width. 
(6)  Equestrian trails. Equestrian trails shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Equestrian trails shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width. 
b.  Equestrian trails shall be cleared of all obstructions for a minimum of eight feet in width and ten feet in height. 
c.  Generally, equestrian trails should not have a grade steeper than 15 percent. 
d.  Equestrian trails may be subject to additional standards as determined by the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.07(c); Ord. No. 13-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 13-19 , § 1, 4-15-2019; Ord. No. 66-19 , § 1, 12-16-2019)  
Sec. 90-444. - Platting requirements for dedicated park land. 
Any land dedicated for park and recreational areas shall be shown on the face of a development plan submitted for approval by the planning and zoning commission and town council. Simultaneously with the filing of the development plan, the land proposed to be dedicated shall be submitted by the developer or owner to the parks board of the town for recommendation to the planning and zoning commission and the town council. Upon approval, the record plat shall be filed of record with the county. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.07(d); Ord. No. 13-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 13-09, § 2, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 2, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 90-445. - Payment of cash in lieu of dedication. 
Payment of cash in lieu of the dedication of land for park and recreational purposes shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Applicability. Unless otherwise recommended by the parks board, in any case in which the land required to be dedicated by this division would be less than one acre, and in all cases in which the town council determines, upon recommendation of the parks board, that the park and recreational needs of a proposed development would be better served by a park in a different location or the expansion or improvement of an existing park or recreational area, the developer or subdivider shall pay to the town a sum of money that is equal to the fair market value of the parkland otherwise required for dedication as set forth in section 90-443(d). In addition, for any existing lots replatted in accordance with the requirements set forth in division 3 of article III of this chapter that results in the creation of additional lots, such park dedication fees in lieu of dedication per residential lot shall be paid to the town for each lot for which cash in lieu of dedication fee has not previously been paid. 
(2)  Calculation of fee. The amount of the fee in lieu of dedication shall be calculated as follows: The town shall calculate the average estimated fair market value per acre of the land being subdivided at the time of development plan approval. Evidence of comparable sales in the area may be provided by the developer or subdivider in calculating the amount of the fee in lieu of dedication. The per acre fair market value shall be multiplied by the amount of land otherwise to be dedicated as stipulated in section 90-443(d). 
(3)  Appraisal. If the developer or subdivider objects to the town's fair market value determination, the developer or subdivider, at his own expense, may obtain an appraisal of the property by a state certified real estate appraiser, mutually agreed upon by the town and the developer or subdivider. The appraisal will be considered by the town in determining fair market value. 
(4)  Credit for park improvements. At the discretion of the town council, upon recommendation of the parks board, the developer or subdivider may be authorized to substitute actual construction receipts for approved improvements to park land or facilities for all or a portion of the required in-lieu of fee. Such improvements may include, but are not limited to, extensions of the town's trail network, trail linkages and playground equipment, as approved by the director of parks and recreation or his designee in conformance with departmental park standards. No credit shall be given for improvements required to be made pursuant to section 90-448, criteria for acceptance of park land, or for extensions of the primary trail network as depicted in the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Timing of payment. Such payment shall be made prior to the acceptance of public improvements by the town. If no public improvements are required, such payment shall be made prior to filing the record plat. 
(6)  Notation of agreement. Such agreement to make a payment of cash in lieu of dedication shall be clearly noted on the face of the record plat at the time of submission to the town for action by the planning and zoning commission and town council. 
(7)  Accounting and expenditure of funds. All cash in-lieu of payments shall be segregated in a separate fund to be spent only for the acquisition and improvements of park and recreational areas within the town that will meet the needs of the residents of the development or subdivision in respect to which such payment was made. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.07(e); Ord. No. 13-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 13-09, § 2, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 2, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 90-446. - Park development fees. 
(a)  Applicability. In all cases in which land is dedicated or cash is paid in lieu of dedication as stipulated in this division, the developer or subdivider shall pay to the town a sum of money that is equal to the estimated cost to develop the typical neighborhood park, as set forth by the town council, upon the recommendation of the parks board. 
(b)  Fee. Park development fees shall be $1,388.00 per unit as listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(c)  Credit for park improvements. At the discretion of the town council, upon recommendation of the parks board, the developer or subdivider may be authorized to substitute actual construction receipts for approved improvements to park land or facilities for all or a portion of the park development fee. Such improvements may include, but are not limited to, extensions of the town's trail network, trail linkages and playground equipment, as approved by the director of parks and recreation or designee in conformance with departmental park standards. No credit shall be given for improvements required to be made pursuant to section 90-448, criteria for acceptance of park land, or for extensions of the primary trail network as depicted in the comprehensive plan. 
(d)  Timing of payment. Such payment shall be made prior to the acceptance of public improvements by the town. If no public improvements are required, such payment shall be made prior to filing the record plat. 
(e)  Accounting and expenditure of funds. All park development fee payments shall be segregated in a separate fund to be spent only for the improvement of park and recreational areas within the town that will meet the needs of the residents of the development or subdivision in respect of which such payment was made. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.07(f); Ord. No. 13-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 59-07, § 2, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 13-09, § 2, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 2, 12-19-2016; Ord. No. 13-19 , § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 90-447. - Credit for prior contributions. 
(a)  Credit shall be given for any dedication of park land or payment of cash in lieu of dedication made pursuant to this division or deed restriction prior to the date of passage of this division. 
(b)  If a dedication or cash payment in lieu of dedication requirement arose prior to the passage of this division, that dedication or cash payment in lieu of dedication requirement shall be controlled by the provisions of the ordinance in effect at the time such obligation arose, provided that a development plan has been filed with the town for approval prior to the passage of this division. 
(c)  At the discretion of the town council, any former gift of land to the town may be credited on a per-acre basis toward eventual land dedication requirements imposed on the donor of such lands. The town council shall consider the recommendation of the parks board in exercising its discretion under this section. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.07(g); Ord. No. 13-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 13-09, § 2, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 2, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 90-448. - Criteria for acceptance of park land. 
The following requirements shall be met before land required to be dedicated pursuant to this division shall be accepted by the town. The developer or applicant shall meet with the director of parks and recreation or designee to ensure compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The owner and/or developer shall agree that no construction materials be disposed of or deposited within the park by its contractors, subcontractors, employees or agents at any time while the subdivision is being built. If materials are deposited or disposed of within the park, the owner and/or developer will be required to remove these materials within 72 hours of written notice by the town. 
(2)  Each corner of the park land to be dedicated shall be marked with a permanent monument consisting of three-fourths-inch iron pins set in concrete. These shall be located and identified on a recordable land survey completed by a land surveyor registered in the state and provided to the town by the owner and/or developer. 
(3)  Before the town accepts land, the developer shall clear and grade the land as approved; remove all trash, dead trees and other nonusable material; and spray with an approved herbicide to eliminate dangerous and undesirable plant materials, such as briars, poison ivy, bull nettles and similar undesirable plant materials. Before spraying is begun, the plant selection to be treated and herbicide shall be approved by the director of parks and recreation or his designee. The developer shall establish permanent grass by the appropriate methods dependent on season at the approval of the director of parks and recreation or his designee. Should the planting of rye grass be necessary during the winter months, the developer shall pay to the town an amount equal to the cost of permanent grass seed to be planted at the proper time as determined by the town. 
(4)  The developer shall provide for adequate drainage through the proposed park to eliminate standing water and health hazards, to be approved by the director of parks and recreation or designee. 
(5)  A water main and any other utilities deemed appropriate by the town shall be stubbed to the park area of a size and location specified by the director of parks and recreation or designee to provide for future utility needs of the park. 
(6)  Proper vehicle access shall be provided to enable tractors, trucks, and other similar vehicles to enter the park. 
(7)  Sidewalks shall be constructed adjacent to or on park land to provide contiguous walkways on all sides of the adjoining development, unless this requirement is waived by the town. 
(8)  Signage designating the area as parkland shall be supplied by the developer and/or owner and shall be designed and installed according to the following specifications: 
a.  Sign boards shall be of two-inch-thick Red Cedar, and shall be one foot high by eight feet wide. 
b.  Sign boards shall be supported by two Red Cedar sign posts, eight feet tall and of six-inch by eight-inch dimension. 
c.  The top sign board shall have the name of the park routed in eight-inch-high lettering in Helvetica style type. 
d.  The bottom sign board shall have TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND routed in four-inch-high lettering in Helvetica-style type. 
e.  Letter routing shall be at least three-eighths of an inch in depth, and routed surface shall be painted black prior to installation with an oil-based enamel paint. 
f.  The top sign board shall be four inches from the top of the post, and the bottom sign board shall be six inches from the top sign board. 
(9)  Exceptions to the criteria contained in this section may be waived or modified by the town council after review and recommendation by the parks board. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 4.07(h); Ord. No. 13-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 13-09, § 2, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 66-16 , § 2, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 90-449. - Park credit option. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The town finds that publicly accessible open space is necessary to create a place of recreation and relaxation for its residents. An opportunity exists between the town, property owners, and developers to enhance the residents' quality of life by providing options for privately maintained and publicly accessible open space. This open space will ensure that new residential development augments and complements the town's public parks and facilities. 
(b)  Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained in subpart B of the town's Code of Ordinances, the following definitions shall also apply to development electing to pursue the credit option: 
Credit option means the alternative option of providing privately maintained and publicly accessible open space under this section in lieu of dedicating park land or payment in lieu thereof, in accordance with sections 90-444 and 90-445, hereof. 
Director of planning services means the town's director of planning services or the director's designee. 
Enhanced paving means a paving treatment that consists of stamped concrete, stained concrete, brick or stone paving, or any combination of said treatments. 
Open space associated with and integral to, specific buildings means open space that cannot otherwise be constructed without also constructing an associated building. Examples include courtyards that are integrated into the design of a building or set of buildings, or a square that cannot remain open and accessible, or undamaged during the construction of an adjacent building. 
Open space plan means a detailed, scaled drawing meeting all of the submittal requirements of this section. 
Open space types means courtyards, natural areas, greens or lawns, parks, plazas, squares, detention/retention facilities, and general open space. 
Structured recreation means larger recreational facilities such as playground equipment, sport courts, splash pads, adult and youth fitness stations, natural and interactive playgrounds, and outdoor classrooms. 
Mixed-use development means development that proposes vertical mixed use that combines different uses in the same building. 
Multi-use development means development that proposes a horizontal mix of uses that combines single-use buildings on distinct parcels in a range of land uses within a block. 
(c)  Applicability. The credit option may only be applied to residential uses within the following zoning districts: 
(1)  A PD planned development district that permits residential uses in a mixed-use development or a multi-use development, approved by the town council after April 15, 2019. 
(2)  An MU mixed use district, approved by the town council after April 15, 2019. 
(d)  Required park land dedication options. Applicants eligible for the credit option under this section 90-449 may request that the town council consider accepting privately maintained and publicly accessible open space to fully or partially offset the otherwise required public park land dedication, or fees in lieu thereof. 
(e)  Submittal requirements for the credit option. The following is required for eligible applicants seeking the credit option alternative: 
(1)  Open space plan. Eligible applicants shall submit an open space plan with the zoning application for the subject property. The open space plan shall include all of the following details: 
a.  Conceptual landscaping associated with the applicant's zoning application that complies with the town's concept landscape plan requirements. 
b.  Location, description, open space type, and minimum area of all open spaces. 
c.  Location and description of natural features listed in section 90-449(f) as well as any such features identified in the environmentally sensitive area survey required by the town's SMARTGrowth program. This information may be provided on a separate plan sheet for clarity purposes. 
d.  Location and area of all proposed publicly accessible open spaces within the development. 
e.  Location, dimension, and type of pedestrian connections between open space amenities. 
f.  Location and preliminary design details of all proposed open space amenities. 
g.  A summary of the perpetual maintenance proposed for each open space area, which maintenance must be feasible and appropriate for each open space type. 
h.  Phasing and location of the open space associated with the overall development and the open space associated with, and integral to, specific buildings. 
i.  A checklist of all required information to be depicted on an open space plan shall be maintained by the director of planning services. 
(2)  Open space easement. All publicly accessible open space accepted by the town in lieu of otherwise required park land dedication, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, shall be dedicated to the public as a permanent public access easement, reflected on the face of a plat. All such open space shall be maintained by the property owner(s) or the property owners' association. Changes to a dedicated open space access easement are permitted only after town council approval following a recommendation by the town parks board. Changes to an open space access easement may not reduce the amount of council-approved open space, the amount of land that is publicly accessible, or the accessibility standards outlined in the easement. 
(f)  Open space types and credit calculation. each area of open space that meets the requirements of this section shall be eligible to receive a town council approved reduction in the amount of park land dedication, or fee payment in lieu thereof, otherwise required. The amount of credit that may be granted for eligible open spaces shall be dependent on whether additional or enhanced amenities are provided, as described herein. Each proposed open space shall be subject to the following open space type-specific criteria and maximum credit eligibility limitations. The planning department shall maintain representative examples of each open space type to provide illustrative guidance, the guide to open space types, on the design, development, character, activation, and location for each open space type. 
(1)  Courtyard . A courtyard is an unoccupied space, open to the sky, which is bound on two or more sides by the exterior walls of the building or by two or more exterior walls, lot lines or yards. Courtyards may be totally enclosed on all sides by the exterior walls of a building provided that an open pedestrian connection to a public sidewalk, public street, or platted public access easement is included. 
a.  A courtyard must, at a minimum, incorporate the following amenities: 
1.  Enhanced paving. 
2.  Seating and associated shade. 
3.  A focal point in the form of a fountain, sculpture, art installation, or landscape feature. 
b.  Lighting. Accent lighting is required. 
c.  Signage. None if open to a public street. Alternatively, appropriate directional signage if the courtyard is not open to a public street. 
d.  Landscape design. A coordinated planting scheme shall be installed. 
e.  Credit option. If the development satisfies the standards above, the town council may approve a credit towards the required park land dedication, or fees in lieu thereof, on a per acre basis, at a ratio of one and three-quarter acres of required park land for every one acre of courtyard open space provided. In the event additional or enhanced amenities are provided, the town council may increase the credit to a ratio of no more than two and one-half acres of required park land for every one acre of courtyard open space provided. 
(2)  Natural area . A natural area is open space which consists of areas in the flood plain, upland habitat, creeks, water bodies, topographical slopes, and other environmentally sensitive areas. Amenities within the natural area shall be limited to nature trails, paths, and equestrian trails. The size of a natural area may vary depending upon the environmental element being preserved. Natural areas may also be subject to a conservation easement. 
a.  A natural area must, at a minimum, incorporate the following amenities: 
1.  A natural area must connect to any trail identified on the town's parks and trails master plan, if the planned trail is present within the development (or contiguous with the development) and is located within 300 feet of the natural area. The natural area must also be accessible from the development's planned commercial or residential areas through the installation of an interconnected system of sidewalks or trails. 
2.  Paved and/or natural trails that traverse the natural area must be provided, including a defined entrance and signage. 
3.  Wildlife viewing areas, mountain biking, disc golf, interpretation and education facilities, where conditions permit, are optional but are encouraged. 
b.  Lighting. Exterior lighting is prohibited except in limited circumstances where low voltage accent lighting may be appropriate. 
c.  Signage. A natural area may include interpretive kiosks, as deemed appropriate. 
d.  Landscape design. Natural areas shall incorporate landscaping at entryways or around structures where appropriate. In these situations, sustainable design is preferred. 
e.  Credit option. If the development satisfies the standards above, the town council may approve a credit towards the required park land dedication, or fees in lieu thereof, on a per acre basis, at a ratio of one and one-half acres of required park land for every one acre of natural area open space provided. In the event additional or enhanced amenities are provided, the town council may increase the credit to a ratio of no more than two and one-quarter acres of required park land for every one acre of natural area open space provided. 
(3)  Green or lawn. A green or lawn is an open space available for unstructured recreation and as a gathering place. A green or lawn may be bordered by landscaping rather than buildings and should be adjacent to active uses such as retail and restaurant uses. Its landscape shall consist of land and trees in a coordinated arrangement, requiring minimal maintenance. The size of a green or lawn shall not be less than one-half-acre and shall not exceed two acres in size. 
a.  A green or lawn must, at a minimum, incorporate the following amenities: 
1.  Seating and associated shade. 
b.  Lighting. Street lighting, or ambient accent and bollard lighting, shall be installed, as appropriate. 
c.  Signage. No signage shall be permitted if the green or lawn is open to a public street. Appropriate directional signage shall be installed if not open to a public street. 
d.  Landscape design. A green or lawn shall be predominately turf with a coordinated planting scheme. 
e.  Credit option. If the development satisfies the standards above, the town council may approve a credit towards the required park land dedication, or fees in lieu thereof, on a per acre basis, at a ratio of one and three-quarter acres of required park land for every one acre of green or lawn open space provided. In the event additional or enhanced amenities are provided, the town council may increase the credit to a ratio of no more than two and one-half acres of required park land for every one acre of green or lawn open space provided. 
(4)  Park. A park is intended primarily to provide unstructured recreation, but structured recreation shall also be a component. Any structured recreation within a park shall be limited to less than ten percent of the area. A park is usually independent of surrounding building frontages. Its landscape consists of natural paths, trails, meadows, woodlands, and open shelters. A park must be greater than one acre in size. 
a.  A park must, at a minimum, incorporate the following amenities: 
1.  A park must connect to any trail identified on the town's parks and trails master plan, if the planned trail is present within the development (or contiguous with the development) and is located within 300 feet of the park. The park must also be accessible from the development's planned commercial or residential areas through the installation of an interconnected system of sidewalks or trails. 
2.  Seating and associated shade. 
3.  Structured recreation; playground, splash pad, or other type of recreational use as recommended by the director of parks and recreation. 
b.  Lighting. Exterior lighting is prohibited except in limited circumstances where low voltage accent lighting may be appropriate. 
c.  Signage. Signage shall be placed adjacent to all entrances, as well as appropriate directional signage if the park is not open to a public street. 
d.  Landscape design. A coordinated planting scheme must be implemented. 
e.  Credit option. If the development satisfies the standards above, the town council may approve a credit towards the required park land dedication, or fees in lieu thereof, on a per acre basis, at a ratio of one and one-half acres of required park land for every one acre of park open space provided. In the event additional or enhanced amenities are provided, the town council may increase the credit to a ratio of no more than two and one-quarter acres of required park land for every one acre of park open space provided. 
(5)  Plaza. A plaza is an open space available for civic purposes and limited commercial activities. A plaza is spatially defined by buildings and its landscape shall consist primarily of enhanced pavement with trees being optional. Plazas are to be located in the core or transition areas of the development and shall be no larger than one acre in size. Plazas can be wider sidewalks or extensions of sidewalks for the purpose of providing outdoor seating for restaurants and cafes. 
a.  A plaza must, at a minimum, incorporate the following amenities: 
1.  Enhanced paving that defines the space and includes a change in material or colors. 
2.  Seating and associated shade. Adjacent buildings may satisfy the requirement for necessary shade if the plaza is designed to benefit from building shade during the summer months. 
b.  Lighting. Exterior lighting is prohibited except in limited circumstances where low voltage accent lighting may be appropriate. 
c.  Signage. No signage shall be required if the plaza is open to a public street. Appropriate directional signage shall be required if the plaza is not open to a public street. 
d.  Landscape design. A coordinated planting scheme must be implemented. Planters that incorporate seating are encouraged and appropriate. 
e.  Credit option. If the development satisfies the standards above, the town council may approve a credit towards the required park land dedication, or fees in lieu thereof, on a per acre basis, at a ratio of one and three-quarter acres of required park land for every one acre of plaza open space provided. In the event additional or enhanced amenities are provided, the town council may increase the credit to a ratio of no more than two and one-half acres of required park land for every one acre of plaza open space provided. 
(6)  Square. A square is generally a geometrically symmetrical open space, typically one-half to two acres in size, available for unstructured recreation and civic purposes. A square is spatially defined by streets and buildings on at least three sides. Its landscape consists of paths, lawns, and trees, all formally arranged. 
a.  A square must, at a minimum, incorporate the following amenities: 
1.  Enhanced paving that defines the space and includes a change in materials or colors. 
2.  Seating and associated shade. Adjacent buildings may satisfy the requirement for necessary shade if the square is designed to benefit from building shade during the summer months. 
3.  A primary focal point in the form of a fountain, sculpture, art installation, or landscape feature. 
b.  Lighting. Perimeter lighting and accent lighting shall be permitted, where appropriate. 
c.  Signage. No signage is permitted if the square is open to a public street. Appropriate directional signage shall be installed if the square is not open to a public street. 
d.  Landscape design. Turf, trees, and coordinated planting scheme shall be implemented within the square. Planters that incorporate seating are encouraged, where appropriate. 
e.  Credit option. If the development satisfies the standards above, the town council may approve a credit towards the required park land dedication, or fees in lieu thereof, on a per acre basis, at a ratio of one and three-quarter acres of required park land for every one acre of square open space provided. In the event additional or enhanced amenities are provided, the town council may increase the credit to a ratio of no more than two and one-half acres of required park land for every one acre of square open space provided. 
(7)  Retention/detention facilities. Retention/detention facilities are stormwater management basins designed to collect stormwater and slowly release it at a controlled rate so that downstream areas are not flooded or eroded. These facilities must be designed for multiple uses, and must incorporate low impact design principals in order to qualify for the credit option. 
a.  Retention/detention facilities must, at a minimum, incorporate the following amenities: 
1.  Natural stone or brick veneer complementary to the development is required on headwalls, bridges, culverts, retaining walls, and like structures. 
2.  A minimum eight-foot trail is required around the retention/detention facility except where site conditions such as excessive slopes or outfall structures render construction of the trail infeasible. The trail shall connect to internal trails proposed within the development. The trail shall also connect to any trail identified on the town's parks and trails master plan, if the trail required by [subsection] (f)(7)a.2. of this section is located within 300 feet of the trail identified on the town's parks and trails master plan and the latter is located within the development or is contiguous to the development. 
3.  Seating and associated shade. 
b.  Retention/detention facilities must, at a minimum, incorporate the following facility-specific amenities: 
1.  Detention basins must be designed to achieve a multi-purpose use that provides access to the basin for active and passive recreation activities. 
2.  Retention basins must provide at least one overlook with at least one bench, one trash receptacle, and a minimum of three shade trees. 
c.  Lighting. Perimeter lighting and accent lighting shall be permitted where appropriate. 
d.  Signage. No signage is permitted if the retention/detention facility is open to a public street. Appropriate directional signage shall be installed if the retention/detention facility is not open to a public street. 
e.  Landscape design. Shade trees, planted a minimum of 30 feet on center, staggered on each side of the trail surrounding the retention/detention facility, shall be planted. 
f.  The following engineering standards shall apply to the design of a retention/detention facility: 
1.  The retention/detention facility must comply with the provisions of chapter 32, the town's engineering design criteria and construction standards. 
2.  The slope from the water's edge of a retention pond shall not exceed 25 percent; provided, however, any slope that exceeds three percent shall incorporate stone terracing. Terracing or the cutting of a sloped plane into a series of successively receding flat surfaces or platforms, must have a maximum shelf depth of three feet with a maximum six-inch risers, and shall not negatively impact environmentally sensitive areas regulated by the town's SMARTGrowth program. 
g.  Credit option. If the development satisfies the standards above, the town council may approve a credit towards the required park land dedication, or fees in lieu thereof, on a per acre basis, at a ratio of one acre of required park land for every one acre of retention/detention facility open space provided. In the event additional or enhanced amenities are provided, the town council may increase the credit to a ratio of no more than one and one-half acres of required park land for every one acre of retention/detention facility open space provided. 
(8)  General open space. Open spaces that do not fit into any of the open space types identified above may be considered by the park board for eligibility for the credit option. General open space may be accepted by the town council, following a recommendation by the parks board, if the town council finds that the general open space satisfies the purpose and intent of this section, as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
a.  Credit option. If the development satisfies the standards above, the town council may approve a credit towards the required park land dedication, or fees in lieu thereof, on a per acre basis, at a ratio of one and one-half acres of required park land for every one acre of general open space provided. In the event additional or enhanced amenities are provided, the town council may increase the credit to a ratio of no more than one and three-quarter acres of required park land for every one acre of general open space provided. 
(9)  Calculation. Calculation of the open space eligible for credit shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  Eligible open space shall exclude all rights-of-way or easements for streets or alleys, required street buffers and setbacks, required screening and landscaping for parking, storage and refuse areas, parking, parking lot tree islands, utility yards, town trail extensions as outlined in the town parks and trails master plan, and all area plan requirements as set out in the master plan. 
b.  Floodplain or water impoundments, as identified in section 98-148, shall only be eligible for credit in the natural area open space type. The maximum amount of floodplain or water impoundment that may be counted toward open space credit shall not exceed 50 percent of the allowable natural area open space credit applied to the development. Any amount of floodplain or water impoundment that exceeds this limitation shall be excluded from the credit calculation. 
c.  Areas of proposed natural area and park open space: 1) containing grades subject to section 98-147, governing topographical slope protection, 2) located outside of the floodplain, and 3) which prohibit public access, may be counted toward up to 50 percent of the allowable natural area or park open space credit only. The remaining 50 percent of the proposed natural area or park open space must not be subject to the protections set forth in section 98-147 and must be publicly accessible. 
(g)  Review and approval process for the credit option. 
(1)  The open space plan shall be reviewed by the director of planning services in conjunction with a zoning application for conformance with the standards contained in this section. An open space plan shall be considered a component of the zoning application for the development. The park board shall evaluate the recommendations of the director of planning services on all matters related to this section and shall render a recommendation to the planning and zoning commission and town council regarding the application for the credit option, prior to the planning and zoning commission's consideration of the zoning case. 
(2)  Where open space type requirements and amenities are required based on their appropriateness, the director of planning services, shall make a recommendation to the park board about the appropriateness of the open space type requirements and amenities, based on the plans and details submitted with the application. All questions regarding the appropriateness of amenities and compliance with the requirements for each open space type shall be finally decided by the town council. 
(3)  The open space plan shall be attached to and shall be an integral component of the approved zoning ordinance for the development. 
(4)  All questions regarding the calculation of eligible open space acreage to be considered for park land dedication credit, or credit for fees in lieu thereof, shall be finally decided by the town council. Any otherwise eligible open space acreage omitted from the above calculation by the town council shall be deemed to have been rejected by the town council. Credit for 100 percent of the otherwise required park land dedication, or fees in lieu thereof, shall be reserved only for developments offering open space types and amenities of exceptional character and extraordinary quality. 
(5)  All questions regarding the classification of areas as to open space type, shall be finally decided by the town council. 
(h)  Park development fee. 
(1)  Applicability. Applicants applying for the credit option shall pay park development fees in accordance with section 90-446, except as provided below: 
a.  Credit for amenities constructed within approved open space. Amenities constructed within approved open space shall be eligible for credit towards park development fees in accordance with section 90-446(c). Only structured recreation, internal extensions of the town's required trail system, and pedestrian bridges may be eligible for credit towards park development fees that are otherwise required. 
(i)  Phasing and timing. 
(1)  A phasing plan shall be submitted with the zoning application, as part of the development's development standards. The phasing plan shall include the following: 
a.  Phasing of each open space associated with the overall development. 
b.  Phasing of open space proposed to be associated with, and integral to, specific buildings within the development. 
c.  Phasing of all perimeter landscaping and trails. 
d.  Phasing of trails and sidewalks that provide pedestrian connectivity between open space amenities. 
e.  Proposed compliance with the requirements of section 90-448. 
f.  Any maps or other graphic depictions necessary to illustrate the proposed phasing plan, as required by the director of planning services. 
(2)  A completion schedule for the open spaces proposed by the applicant shall be submitted at the time of site plan application for the development and be consistent with the approved phasing. 
(3)  Detention/retention open space credit types and associated amenities shall be completed prior to the acceptance of the subdivision. If the development requires more than one detention/retention pond, then the ponds associated with the phase under construction must be completed prior to the acceptance of that phase of the subdivision. 
(4)  Construction/installation of open space and enhancements associated with and integral to specific buildings shall be completed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or building final for that building. 
(j)  Amendments to approved plans or regulations associated with developments containing approved open space. 
(1)  The concept plans, open space plan, and development standards establish the regulatory framework of land uses, building location and design, open space type, locations and amenities, access, parking, and trail and sidewalk connectivity, as established by the applicant in conjunction with the zoning application. Any changes to the open space plan that are beyond the range of flexibility provided in the ordinance establishing the zoning district, or as provided in subsection (j)(4) below, shall constitute a major change and shall necessitate a formal amendment of the zoning ordinance governing the development. 
(2)  The director of planning services may approve minor changes to and deviations from the open space plan, based upon the applicant's written justification for such changes. Upon approval, a revised open space plan shall be filed with the town and any associated fee adjustments shall be calculated. The director of planning services may deny a minor change or deviation from the open space plan regardless of the applicant's written justification. In the event of such denial, an applicant may instead seek approval of the change or deviation by filing an application to amend the zoning ordinance governing the development. 
(3)  Any requested minor change or deviation shall be reviewed in the context of prior and pending minor changes. If a pending request for a minor change or deviation, when taken together with the development's prior minor changes, would constitute a major change in the opinion of the director of planning services, the requested minor change or deviation shall be processed as a major change necessitating an amendment to the zoning ordinance governing the development. 
(4)  Major changes to the approved open space plan include any of the following: 
a.  Elimination of trail connectivity shown on the approved plans. 
b.  Any changes to the development standards for open space that were approved with the ordinance establishing the zoning district. 
c.  Any reductions in excess of ten percent in any one of the open space type areas in any phase of the development that was approved as part of the open space plan. 
(Ord. No. 13-19 , § 3, 4-15-2019; Ord. No. 66-19 , § 2(A—J), 12-16-2019)  
Chapter 94 - TREES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 63-08, § 3, adopted Oct. 6, 2008, repealed the former Ch. 94, Art. I, Art. II, Div. 1, Subdiv. I, Subdiv. II, §§ 94-71—94-73, Subdiv. III, §§ 94-91—94-94, Div. 3, §§ 94-121—94-128, Div. 4, Subdiv. I, §§ 94-151—94-156, Subdiv. II, §§ 94-181—94-183, Subdiv. III, §§ 94-201, 94-202, Subdiv. IV, §§ 94-221, 94-222, Subdiv. V, §§ 94-241, 94-242 and enacted a new Ch. 94 as set out herein. The former Ch. 94 pertained to vegetation and derived from Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.03(e)(1)—(e)(8), ch. 12, §§ 5.08(a)—(d), ch. 12, §§ 5.08(e)(1)—(e)(3), ch. 12, § 5.08(f)(1), (f)(2), ch. 12, §§ 5.08(g)(1), (g)(2), ch. 12, §§ 5.08(h)—(k), ch. 12, § 6.15(a)(1), (2), ch. 12, §§ 6.15(b)(1)—(b)(3), ch. 12, § 6.15(c); Ord. No. 12-00, §§ 2, 6, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 101-02, § 1, 12-16-2002. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 94-1. - Purpose. 
The terms and provisions of this chapter are intended to accomplish the following public purposes: 
(1)  Establish rules and regulations for the protection and preservation of native and/or established trees within the town. 
(2)  Encourage the preservation and replacement of the town's tree canopy by establishing a 35 percent canopy goal for the town as outlined in guidelines established by "American Forests," the nation's oldest nonprofit citizens' conservation organization. 
(3)  Encourage the protection of healthy trees and provide for the replacement and/or replanting of trees that are necessarily removed during construction, development or redevelopment. 
(4)  Provide for the preservation and protection of larger native and/or established trees, which provide a valuable amenity to the urban environment and which, once destroyed, can only be replaced after generations, if at all. 
(5)  Provide for shade, windbreaks and the cooling of air; thereby, reducing the requirements for air conditioning and heating and the utilization of scarce energy sources. 
(6)  Provide for open space and more efficient drainage of land; thereby, reducing the effects of soil erosion and the need for additional drainage facilities. 
(7)  Reduce the clear-cutting of land. 
(8)  Preserve the country atmosphere and natural environment that define the community character of the town and make it a unique and desirable community. 
(9)  Mitigate the ill effects of rapid and intense urbanization. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-1), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-2. - Applicability of chapter provisions. 
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to real property within the town's corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction as follows: 
(1)  All real property upon which any protected, specimen, or historic tree is located, excluding property that has already been developed for single-family and two-family residential uses. 
(2)  All vacant and undeveloped real property. 
(3)  All real property to be subdivided or re-subdivided, including record plats and replats. 
(4)  The yard areas of all developed property, excluding property already developed for single-family and two-family residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-2), 10-6-2008)  
Secs. 94-3—94-12. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MEASUREMENT 
 
Sec. 94-13. - Landscape, nursery, or replacement trees. 
Unless specified otherwise, tree caliper (diameter) or circumference shall be measured at a height of 12 inches above ground level. The caliper of multi-trunk trees shall be measured by determining the diameter or circumference of the largest trunk at full caliper added to one-half of the diameter or circumference of each remaining trunk, measured at a height of 12 inches above ground level. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-3), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-14. - Existing, established, and/or native trees. 
The caliper or circumference of existing, established, and/or native trees shall be measured in accordance with the measuring rules and procedures as developed and updated by the Texas Forest Service. A copy of these procedures shall be made available for review in the office of the tree preservation and enforcement officer. The current procedure is outlined below. 
(1)  Caliper width or circumference. 
General rule: Measure the smallest trunk caliper width or circumference between the diameter at breast height ("DBH") point (4.5 feet) and the ground, but below the lowest fork. Also record the height above the ground, in inches, where the measurement was taken. 
(2)  Determining DBH point. 
Tree on slope: Measure up 4.5 feet along the axis of the trunk on both the high and low sides of the trunk; DBH point is midway between these two planes. 
Leaning tree: Measure 4.5 feet along both the top and under sides of the trunk; DBH point is midway between these two planes. 
Low branches: When determining where on the trunk to measure circumference, ignore portions of the tree that do not form part of the tree's crown, such as dead branches or forks, and epicormic sprouts. 
Obstruction at DBH: If there is a bump, burl, branch, or other obstruction at the DBH point, measure the circumference of the trunk above and below the obstruction and record the smaller value. A buttress that forms between the trunk and root system as a natural feature of the species (e.g.—bald cypress, water tupelo) should not be considered an obstruction. 
(3)  Multiple trees. In practice, it must be determined whether a tree has a single trunk, or whether it represents two or more stems growing very close to one another. Trunks that have clear separation or included bark at or near the ground line should be considered separate trees; trunks of different species should also be considered separate stems, no matter how closely aligned. When following the measurement rules above, if the point below the lowest fork places the measurement at the ground line, the stems should be considered and measured as separate. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-4), 10-6-2008)  
Secs. 94-15—94-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRESERVATION 
 
Sec. 94-21. - Tree designations. 
Protected, specimen, and historic trees, except as specified in this section, shall possess the following respective characteristics or criteria: 
(1)  Protected trees. Any tree listed on the small, medium, or large protected tree lists in section 94-22 that measures six inches in caliper width or greater and which is at least ten feet in height and located outside of existing public streets, alleys, rights-of-way, utility easements, drainage easements, fence easements, pedestrian access easements, or other existing public rights-of-way or easements. 
(2)  Specimen tree. Except as specified in this section, any tree listed on the town's small, medium, or large protected tree lists can be considered a specimen tree if it reaches the designated size for that list. For the small tree list, a specimen tree shall be any tree that measures 13 inches or more in caliper width. For the medium tree list, a specimen tree shall be any tree that measures 19 inches or more in caliper width. For the large tree list, a specimen tree shall be any tree that measures 25 inches or more in caliper width. All measurements shall be taken in accordance with the measuring rules and procedures as outlined and maintained by the Texas Forest Service. These procedures are outlined in section 94-14 of this chapter. In addition to the provisions of this subsection, a specimen tree shall be any other tree that has been designated by the town council, upon recommendation by the environmental conservation commission, after public hearing and due notice to the owner of the tree, to be of high value because of its type, size, age or other relevant criteria. Specimen trees shall not be regulated as protected trees. Specific requirements are set forth in this chapter regarding specimen trees. 
Post oak trees shall receive a separate designation and specimen size classification of 22 inches or more in caliper width as listed within section 94-22. 
(3)  Historic tree. Upon recommendation by the environmental conservation commission, a historic tree shall be any tree that has been designated by the town council, after public hearing and due notice to the owner of the tree, as a tree of notable historical interest and value to the town because of its location or historical association with the community. A listing and map of all designated historic trees shall be maintained and updated by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee and made available to the public upon request. Historic trees are not dependant on or determined by diameter or caliper width as are protected and specimen trees. Specific requirements are set forth in this chapter regarding historic trees. 
Subject to the review and approval of the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee, a protected or specimen tree shall not include any living tree that a registered arborist or landscape architect certifies in writing is injured, dying, diseased or infested with harmful insects; that is in danger of falling, interferes with utility service or creates unsafe vision clearance; in any manner creates a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare or safety. Further, a protected tree shall not include any living tree that is identified on approved subdivision construction plans as necessary to be removed to comply with EPA storm water permitting requirements or FHA lot grading plans. 
Subject to review and approval of the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee, a protected, specimen, or historic tree shall not include any tree that a registered arborist or landscape architect certifies in writing is dead. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-5), 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 62-16 , § 2, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 94-22. - Protected tree lists. 
(a)  Generally. The tree species lists contained in this section have been developed and will be periodically updated by the town's environmental conservation commission and shall be maintained and distributed to the public by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee as guides for the identification and selection of tree species that meet the various standards and requirements of this chapter. Trees included on this tree species list were selected on the basis of one or more of the following criteria or factors: hardiness, resistance to disease, suitability relative to local climate and soil conditions, adaptability for transplantation, longevity, adaptability to various landscape conditions, resistance to drought, aesthetic qualities, shade provision, windbreak provision, and screening qualities. 
(b)  Lists of trees that are protected. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, only those tree species found on the following lists shall be subject to the preservation, protection and replanting requirements of this section. 
Small Tree List 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
Carolina buckthorn 	(Rhamnus caroliniana) 
Yaupon holly 	(Ilex vomitoria) 
Possum haw 	(Ilex deciduas) 
Redbud 	(Cercis species) 
Texas buckeye 	(Aesculus glabra variety arguta) 
Chickasaw plum 	(Prunus agustifolia) 
Mexican plum 	(Prunus mexicana) 
 
Medium Tree List 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
Slippery elm 	(Ulmus rubra) 
Cedar elm 	(Ulmus crassifolia) 
Winged elm 	(Ulmus alata) 
Blackjack oak 	(Quercus marilandica) 
Persimmon species 	(Diospyros species) 
Chittamwood 	(Bumelia languinosa) 
Western soapberry 	(Sapindus drummondii) 
Sweetgum 	(Luquidambar styraciflua) 
 
Large Tree List 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
Shumard red oak 	(Quercus shumardi) 
Texas red oak 	(Quercus texana) 
Southern live oak 	(Quercus virginiana) 
Water oak 	(Quercus nigra) 
Bur oak 	(Quercus macrocarpa) 
Chinquapin oak 	(Quercus muehlenbergii) 
American elm 	(Ulmus americana) 
Pecans and hickories 	(Cayra species) 
Magnolia 	(Magnolia grandiflora) 
Bald cypress 	(Taxodium distichum) 
Pine species 	(Pinus species) 
Ash species 	(Fraxinus species) 
Sycamore 	(Plantanus occidentalis) 
Black walnut 	(Juglans nigra) 
 
Post Oak — 22" Specimen Size 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
Post oak 	(Quercus stellata) 
 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-6), 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 62-16 , § 3, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 94-23. - Tree survey; development projects. 
Tree surveys are required to accompany an application for a development plan, site plan, record plat, replat, oil and gas well drilling permit, oil and gas pipeline permit, tree removal permit, or tree transplanting permit. A tree survey may be required to accompany a zoning application or a master plan amendment if it is deemed necessary by the town's tree preservation and enforcement officer. Each tree survey shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information/parts: 
(1)  The location of all specimen trees and historic trees on the subject site. 
(2)  The location of the trunk and the extent of the canopy spread of each specimen tree and historic tree on the subject site. 
(3)  A table containing the following information for each specimen tree and historic tree: 
a.  Tree number; 
b.  Common and scientific name of each tree; 
c.  Diameter (DBH) of each tree measured in accordance with section 94-14 of this chapter; 
d.  General health/condition of each tree; 
e.  Average canopy spread; 
f.  Status (specimen or historic) of each tree; 
g.  Whether each identified tree will remain or be removed; and 
h.  Location coordinates (northings and eastings, State Plane - NAD 1983) for each tree. 
(4)  Each specimen tree and historic tree shall be affixed with a permanent tag bearing the corresponding number on the tree survey. This tag shall be placed on the trunk of the tree, between five and six feet in height on the south face of the tree's trunk. 
(5)  Each tree survey shall contain a count of all protected trees located on the property. 
(6)  Each tree survey shall contain a count of all protected trees that will be removed from the buildable area on the property. The phrase "buildable area" is defined in section 94-32 of this chapter. 
(7)  Protected trees designated for preservation shall be flagged in a distinguishing manner approved by the town for such purpose. In addition, those trees designated for removal shall be flagged in a different distinguishing manner as approved by the town. 
(8)  The tree survey must be signed, and stamped or sealed, by a certified arborist, certified forester, or a registered landscape architect. Each tree survey submitted shall contain one sheet of the tree survey as described above, one sheet with the tree survey data overlain with the site information, and one sheet with the site information overlain on an aerial photo for the site. The tree survey shall be on drawings measuring 24 inches by 36 inches and shall be drawn to a scale of no less than 100 feet to one inch, unless otherwise approved by the tree preservation and enforcement officer. When necessary the tree survey shall be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet, showing the entire area of the survey. Necessary site information includes: 
a.  The location and dimensions of all existing or proposed public streets, alleys, rights-of-way, utility easements, drainage easements, fence easements, pedestrian access easements or other public rights-of-way or easements; 
b.  The location and dimensions of the designated parking area and designated stockpile area required in this subdivision and of any site proposed or anticipated to be proposed for a temporary batching plant permit; and, 
c.  The location of all existing or proposed property lines, lot lines, building lines, setback and yard requirements, any proposed building footprint or floor plan, and other special relationships or significant features of the proposed development plan, record plat or site plan of the development. 
d.  The location of designated upland, riparian habitat, and FEMA floodplain, if identified through an environmentally sensitive area survey and subsequent environmental protection plan, as defined in the town's SMARTGrowth Program and Analysis Manual. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-7), 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 62-16 , § 4, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 94-24. - Tree survey; residential lots. 
Tree surveys are required to accompany an application for a building permit for the construction of homes on undeveloped residential lots. For lots that are one acre in size or larger, the tree survey shall be completed as described in section 94-23 of this chapter. For lots that are less than one acre in size, the tree survey shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information/parts: 
(1)  A site plan showing: The location and configuration of the proposed house/structure, all required setbacks, sidewalks, driveway locations, porches, etc. 
(2)  Further, the site plan shall show the location of all specimen or historic trees located on the site. 
(3)  The survey shall depict the location of the trunk and the extent of the canopy spread of each specimen or historic tree. 
(4)  A table (spreadsheet) shall be supplied containing the common name, caliper width (DBH), and tree number of each specimen tree and historic tree shown on the site plan/tree survey. All measurements shall be in accordance with section 94-14 of this chapter. 
(5)  A count of all protected trees on the site and all protected trees proposed for removal shall be included on the tree survey. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-8), 10-6-2008)  
Secs. 94-25—94-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITS, MITIGATION, PENALTIES, AND INCENTIVES 
 
Sec. 94-31. - Generally. 
No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or effectively destroy through damaging any protected, specimen, or historic tree on any real property within the town without first obtaining a tree removal permit as required in the terms and provisions of this article. Further, the replanting of any protected, specimen, or historic tree requires a tree replanting permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-9), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-32. - Trees located in a buildable area. 
The phrase "buildable area" shall mean and include all of a commercial or residential building lot, oil and gas pad site, development site or other site, excluding the fully developed FEMA floodplain as defined in section 90-403 and required street/landscaping buffer areas. Trees located within TXDOT rights-of-way are exempt from the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-10), 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 62-16 , § 5, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 94-33. - Tree transplanting permit. 
An application for a tree transplanting permit for protected trees located on undeveloped property or developed nonresidential property within the town may be submitted at any time and need not be submitted in conjunction with a development plan or record plat or a building permit. Tree transplanting permits shall be obtained by making application to the town's tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee on forms prescribed by the town when a protected tree is proposed to be transplanted within the town. No fee shall be charged to make application for a tree transplanting permit. The application shall also be accompanied by a written document indicating the reasons for transplanting the protected tree and two copies of a legible tree survey. The tree survey should be prepared in accordance with section 94-24 of this chapter. 
Upon receipt of a proper application for a tree transplanting permit, the town's tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee shall review the application and may conduct field inspections of the site or development and/or refer the permit application to other departments for review and recommendations as deemed necessary and appropriate by the town manager or authorized designee. The application for a tree transplanting permit shall be approved unless the town's tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee determines that the proposed transplanting will unnecessarily damage or jeopardize the health of the trees proposed to be transplanted. A denial of an application for a tree transplanting permit by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee may be appealed to the environmental conservation commission. The decision of the environmental conservation commission regarding the appeal from the denial of such tree transplanting permit application shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-11), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-34. - Tree removal permit. 
Tree removal permits are required for the removal of protected trees located outside the buildable area of a lot or site, and for any specimen trees and historic trees that are intended for removal from a lot or site in conjunction with the development, redevelopment, subdivision and/or re-subdivision of real property within the town. 
An application for a tree removal permit, when required, shall be submitted at the earliest point in the application process where entitlements and/or buildable area are established. The following outlines the process associated with tree removal permit applications. 
(1)  Tree removal permit applications, when required, shall be submitted in conjunction with a zoning planned development (ZPD) or a development plan and shall be considered by the environmental conservation commission prior to the project proceeding to the planning and zoning commission. The application shall be placed on the same town council agenda for action as the ZPD or development plan; or 
(2)  Tree removal permit applications, when required, shall be submitted in conjunction with site plans or record plats for the development of subdivisions of four lots or less where the construction of necessary infrastructure necessitates a tree removal permit, and shall be considered by the environmental conservation commission and acted upon by the town council prior to the site plan or record plat proceeding to the planning and zoning commission for approval; or 
(3)  Tree removal permit applications, when required, shall be submitted in conjunction with the development of individual residential or nonresidential platted lots and shall be considered by the environmental conservation commission and acted upon by the town council prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
No protected trees located outside the buildable area, specimen trees, or historic trees approved for removal in accordance with this chapter shall be removed from any building lot or site until: 
(1)  Proper mitigation or replacement requirements have been determined and approved for the lot or site; and 
(2)  A preconstruction meeting has been held with proper town staff authorizing grading and construction activities to begin on the lot or site; and/or 
(3)  A building permit, where needed, has been issued for the lot or site. 
(a)  Tree removal permits for fewer than ten protected trees or four specimen trees. A tree removal permit shall be obtained by making application to the town's tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee on forms prescribed by the town. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  A written document indicating the reasons for removal of the protected, specimen, or historic trees on the lot or site. 
(2)  Photographs of each tree requested for removal. 
(3)  Photographs of required signage on the site as described below. 
(4)  Two copies of a tree survey for the lot or site prepared as described in section 94-23 of this chapter. 
(b)  Tree removal permits for greater than ten protected tees or four specimen trees. Applicants requesting to remove greater than ten protected trees or greater than four specimen trees, shall have the option of requesting a comprehensive tree removal permit. The fee for this permit will be $1,000.00. All other requirements and incentives remain unchanged. 
(c)  A sign shall be placed on each separate lot or tract for which a tree removal permit is requested to inform the general public that an application for a tree removal permit has been filed relative to a protected, specimen, or historic tree. 
(1)  The size of the signs shall be three feet by four feet. 
(2)  The signs shall be made out of aluminum or corrugated plastic material. 
(3)  The signs shall be mounted on stakes/poles. 
(4)  The signs shall be visible from the street. 
(5)  There shall be one sign for each street frontage. 
(6)  The signs shall have a white background, with letters and borders being green in color. The signs shall state the following: 
TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TX 
A TREE REMOVAL REQUEST 
IS BEING MADE ON THIS PROPERTY 
FOR INFORMATION CALL 
_____ 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-12), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-35. - Tree removal permit on property zoned agricultural district (A) uses. 
No fee shall be charged to make application for a tree removal permit for the removal of protected trees located on real property having an agricultural zoning district classification. However, if within any 12-month period, tree removal permits for the removal of 20 or more protected trees are issued for the same agricultural property or tract, or any of its portions, the agricultural zoning district classification of such property cannot be changed, nor can an application for approval of a development plan, planned development or zoning amendment relative to such property be made, for a period of 60 months following the most recent 12-month period during which 20 or more protected trees were removed from such agricultural zoned property. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-13), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-36. - Special provisions for agricultural district (A) uses. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, for tracts zoned agricultural district (A) uses, the tree survey requirements contained in this article shall be limited in their application to proposed rights-of-way, easements and an area equal to 20 feet on any side of such rights-of-way and easements, provided that the applicant executes a development agreement with the town that all trees on the tract and outside of such areas, for the purposes of such agreement, are protected trees (regardless of their species or caliper width) and that the unauthorized removal of such trees shall result in the revocation of any previously approved development plan and record plat for a period of 60 months from the date of the most recent unauthorized removal of one or more trees from the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-14), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-37. - Review of application. 
(a)  An application for a tree removal permit for a protected tree located outside of the buildable area shall be accompanied by an administrative fee per tree proposed for removal in the amount listed in appendix A of this Code, not to exceed a total per permit application in an amount listed in appendix A of this Code. An application for a tree removal permit for a specimen tree, or historic tree shall be accompanied by an administrative fee per tree proposed for removal in the amount listed in appendix A of this Code. Upon receipt of a properly completed application accompanied by the appropriate fee, the tree preservation and enforcement officer or his authorized designee shall review the application and may conduct field inspections of the development and/or refer the permit application to other departments for review and recommendations as deemed necessary and appropriate by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or his authorized designee. 
(b)  The application for a tree removal permit, if required, shall be considered an integral part of the application for development plan or site plan approval, or the application for an oil and gas well permit. No development plan or site plan for any development, or oil and gas well permit, subject to the terms and provisions of this subdivision, shall be approved without approval of such tree removal permit. It is further provided that if a property owner or developer does not submit a tree removal permit application prior to town approval of a development plan covering a particular site, then if a tree removal permit application for the site is submitted later, approval of the development plan may be revoked. In this event, a revised development plan must be submitted for review by the town. 
(c)  The tree preservation and enforcement officer may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for a tree removal permit for protected trees located outside the buildable area of a lot or site, provided that the requested tree removal permit is for the removal of trees in a development district other than the Cross Timbers Conservation Development District. An appeal of the decision of the tree preservation and enforcement officer may be made to the Environmental Conservation Commission. 
(d)  An application for a tree removal permit for specimen, historic, or protected trees located outside the buildable area of a lot or site within the Cross Timbers Conservation Development District or an application for a tree removal permit for specimen, or historic trees within all other districts shall be submitted to the environmental conservation commission for review and recommendation to the town council that the permit application be approved, approved with conditions or denied. The environmental conservation commission shall not recommend an application for a tree removal permit be approved or approved with conditions, unless the commission finds that the subject development, redevelopment, subdivision or re-subdivision cannot reasonably be developed, based on economic and/or practical considerations, without removal of the trees included in the permit application. 
(e)  The environmental conservation commission's recommendation concerning an application for tree removal permit shall be reviewed by the town council. The town council may then approve the application, approve it with conditions, or deny the application; however, the town council may overturn the denial of an application for tree removal permit by the environmental conservation commission only upon a finding that the subject development, redevelopment, subdivision or re-subdivision cannot reasonably be developed, based on economic and/or practical considerations, without removal of the trees included in the permit application. 
(f)  Approval for removal of a historic tree shall require a three-fourths majority vote of the environmental conservation commission and the town council, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-15), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-38. - Per-caliper-inch cash value; replacement trees; mitigation fee credit. 
(a)  A per-caliper-inch cash value for replacement trees shall be set, and updated as necessary by the town council after review and recommendation by the environmental conservation commission. The per-caliper-inch cash value shall be used to calculate mitigation costs for authorized and unauthorized removals of protected, specimen, and historic trees. The tree preservation and enforcement officer or his authorized designee shall maintain a record of the current per-caliper-inch cash value of replacement trees. 
(b)  Whenever a mitigation fee is imposed in accordance with this chapter, a mitigation fee credit will be given for replacement tree(s), that are at least two inches in diameter at the point on the trunk four and one-half feet above ground, planted on the property for which the tree mitigation fee was assessed or property mutually agreed upon by the town and the person. The calculation for the credit will be done in the same manner as the tree mitigation fee assessed against the person and be: 
(1)  Fifty percent of the amount of the tree mitigation fee assessed against the person if: 
a.  The property is a residential structure or pertains to the development, construction, or renovation of a residential structure; and 
b.  The person is developing, constructing, or renovating the property not for use as the person's residence; or 
(2)  Forty percent of the amount of the tree mitigation fee assessed against the person if: 
a.  The property is not a residential structure; or 
b.  The person is constructing or intends to construct a structure on the property that is not a residential structure. 
(c)  An application for a mitigation fee credit under subsection (b) must be done in conjunction with an application for a tree removal permit as prescribed within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-16), 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 43-17 , § 1, 11-20-2017)  
Sec. 94-39. - Mitigation requirements for authorized tree removal. 
(a)  Replacement trees required for the removal of protected trees located within the buildable area on a lot or site. It shall be the responsibility of any person removing a protected tree located within the buildable area of a lot or site to replace each protected tree removed with one, two and one-half to three-inch caliper tree measured in accordance with section 94-13 of this chapter. Replacement trees shall be of a species listed on the town's approved mitigation and replacement tree planting list. Replacement trees shall have a minimum height of at least six feet, and shall be planted in locations approved by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee. Acceptable locations shall include reforestation sites designated by the town. At the discretion of the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee, money in an amount equal to the per-caliper-inch cash value of the removed tree(s) may be paid to the town instead of providing the replacement trees required by this article. Any such payments shall be deposited in a special account or fund and used by the town to provide and/or support supplemental landscape plantings in public areas of the town and/or to support the administration and enforcement of the town's tree preservation regulations. A per-caliper-inch cash value for replacement trees shall be set by the town council in accordance with section 94-38 of this article. 
(b)  Mitigation of loss of habitat . When any person seeks to develop property, rezone property, or amend the master plan regarding property, so that an application for a development plan, site plan, record plat, re-plat, oil and gas well drilling permit, oil and gas pipeline permit, tree removal permit, or tree transplanting permit is required by this chapter, and such person wishes to remove protected trees from an environmentally sensitive area (ESA), such as upland habitat and/or riparian habitat as defined in the town's SMARTGrowth Program and Analysis Manual, it shall be the responsibility of such person to mitigate the acreage of habitat lost or negatively impacted through either the payment to the town of mitigation fees or the planting of replacement trees included in the required environmental protection plan (EPP) for the development project, or a combination thereof that results in the required mitigation. This required habitat mitigation only applies to impacts to designated upland or riparian habitats. The mitigation for the removal of protected trees located outside of the designated habitats as established in an approved EPP is addressed in section 94-39(a). The monetary value of upland habitat and riparian habitat is set at $15,000.00 per acre. Preservation incentives for upland and/or riparian habitat preserved within a project are established in section 94-40. At the discretion of the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee, money in an amount equal to the value of the removed habitat may be paid to the town instead of providing the replacement trees. Any such payments shall be deposited in a special account or fund and used by the town to provide and/or support supplemental landscape plantings in public areas of the town and/or to support the administration and enforcement of the town's tree preservation regulations. 
(c)  Replacement trees required for the removal of protected trees located outside the buildable area on a lot or site. It shall be the responsibility of any person obtaining a tree removal permit for a protected tree located outside of the buildable area on a lot or site to provide replacement with trees having a total caliper width equivalent to one and one-half times that of the tree(s) to be removed. Total caliper width for replacement trees shall be calculated using measurements taken in accordance with section 94-14 of this chapter. For example, if a ten-inch protected tree is removed, then that tree must be replaced by trees having a total caliper width of 15 inches. This total caliper width could be satisfied by an approved combination of replacement trees to meet the required caliper width replacement. Replacement trees shall be of a species listed on the town's approved mitigation and replacement tree planting list. Such replacement trees shall be container-grown and each replacement tree shall have a minimum caliper width of two and one-half inches to three inches, measured in accordance with section 94-13 of this chapter. Replacement trees shall have a minimum height of at least six feet, and shall be planted in locations approved by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or his authorized designee. Acceptable locations shall include reforestation sites designated by the town. At the discretion of the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee, money in an amount equal to the per-caliper-inch cash value of the removed tree(s) may be paid to the town instead of providing the replacement trees required by this article. Any such payments shall be deposited in a special account or fund and used by the town to provide and/or support supplemental landscape plantings in public areas of the town and/or to support the administration and enforcement of the town's tree preservation regulations. A per-caliper-inch cash value for replacement trees shall be set by the town council in accordance to section 94-38 of this chapter. 
(d)  Replacement trees required for the authorized removal of specimen trees. It shall be the responsibility of any person obtaining a tree removal permit for a specimen tree to provide replacement trees having a total caliper width equivalent to two times that of the tree(s) to be removed. Total caliper width for replacement trees shall be calculated using measurements taken in accordance with section 94-14 of this chapter. Replacement trees shall be of a species listed on the town's approved mitigation and replacement tree planting list. Such replacement trees shall be container-grown and have a minimum caliper width of two and one-half inches to three inches, measured in accordance with section 94-13 of this chapter. Replacement trees shall have a minimum height of at least six feet, and shall be planted in a location approved by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee. Acceptable locations shall include reforestation sites designated by the town. At the discretion of the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee, money in an amount equal to the per-caliper-inch cash value of the removed tree(s) may be paid to the town instead of providing the replacement trees required by this article. Any such payments shall be deposited in a special account or fund and used by the town to provide and/or support supplemental landscape plantings in public areas of the town and/or to support the administration and enforcement of the town's tree preservation regulations. A per-caliper-inch cash value for replacement trees shall be set by the town council in accordance to section 94-38 of this chapter. 
(e)  Replacement trees required for the authorized removal of historic trees. It shall be the responsibility of any person obtaining a tree removal permit for a historic tree to provide replacement trees having a total caliper width equivalent to two and one-half times that of the tree(s) to be removed. Total caliper width for replacement trees shall be calculated using measurements taken in accordance with section 94-14 of this chapter. Replacement trees shall be of a species listed on the town's approved mitigation and replacement tree planting list. Such replacement trees shall be container-grown and have a minimum caliper width of two and one-half inches to three inches, measured in accordance with section 94-13 of this chapter. Replacement trees shall have a minimum height of at least six feet, and shall be planted in locations as approved by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee. Acceptable locations shall include reforestation sites designated by the town. At the discretion of the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee, money in an amount equal to the per-caliper-inch cash value of the removed tree(s) may be paid to the town instead of providing the replacement trees required by this article. Any such payments shall be deposited in a special account or fund and used by the town to provide and/or support supplemental landscape plantings in public areas of the town and/or to support the administration and enforcement of the town's tree preservation regulations. A per-caliper-inch cash value for replacement trees shall be set by the town council in accordance to section 94-38 of this chapter. 
Any fees or payments made to the town to satisfy the mitigation or replacement requirements of this article shall be paid at the time of a preconstruction meeting authorizing grading or construction activities to occur on the lot or site. In cases where a preconstruction meeting is not required, all fees or payments shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit for the lot or site. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-17), 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 62-16 , § 6, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 94-40. - Incentives for preservation of protected, specimen, and historic trees. 
If any protected, specimen, or historic tree is preserved within an area that would otherwise be considered a buildable area, credit for preservation shall be given that will be counted toward the mitigation requirements for the removal of protected trees within the buildable area on a site or project. Such mitigation credits shall be given only for those trees whose critical root zones are left predominately in their natural state. No cutting, filling, or other construction related activities are allowed within the critical root zones of trees eligible for mitigation credit unless otherwise approved in writing and in advance by the town. Existing trees that are preserved within required street yard landscaping areas shall be counted for credit toward the requirements of section 82-241 of this Code, street yard landscaping, provided that they are located within the street yard and/or parking area. Following is a list of credits available for the preservation of protected and specimen trees on a site or project, and a separate credit schedule for the preservation of protected and specimen post oak trees on a site or project. 
(1)  One mitigation tree credit will be given for each protected tree preserved within a buildable area on a site or project. 
(2)  The following schedule outlines tree credits that will be given for each specimen tree preserved within a buildable area on a site or project. 
Buildable Area Mitigation Specimen
Tree Credit Schedule 
Caliper Size 
(Diameter) 	Tree 
Credits 
13—18 inches 	3 
19—24 inches 	4 
25—30 inches 	5 
Greater than 30 inches 	6 
 
(3)  The following schedule outlines tree credits that will be given for each protected or specimen post oak tree preserved on a site or project and located outside of an ESA. 
Post Oak Tree Credit Schedule 
Post Oak Caliper Size (Diameter) 	Tree 
Credits 
6—12 inches 	2 
13—21 inches 	4 
22 inches and greater 	6 
 
(4)  Mitigation credits for preservation of protected trees within designated upland and/or riparian habitat will be given for each acre of habitat protected on a site or project. 
(5)  For purposes of this section, one mitigation tree credit shall be the equivalent of the person developing the property providing one container-grown tree as provided in section 94-39 of a variety selected from the replacement tree list having a minimum caliper width of two and one-half inches to three inches, measured in accordance with section 94-13 of this chapter. In the event the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee approves the payment of money in an amount equal to the per-caliper-inch cash value of the removed tree(s) instead of providing the replacement trees required by this article, one mitigation tree credit shall be the equivalent of the per-caliper-inch cash value for a replacement tree having a minimum caliper width of two and one-half inches to three inches. However, no tree credits shall be allowed or permitted for trees that are dead, dying, diseased or infested with harmful insects (as determined by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee), or for trees which have not been adequately protected using required tree protection measures, as defined in article V of this chapter, or which are otherwise likely to die (as determined by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee); or trees that are not included on the protected tree list. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-18), 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 62-16 , § 7, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 94-41. - Penalties for unauthorized removal of protected, specimen, and historic trees. 
If any protected, specimen, or historic trees are removed from any real property without a tree removal permit, or if a protected, specimen, or historic tree is injured because of failure to follow required tree protection measures such that the tree dies or may reasonably be expected to die, the town shall have the authority to impose one or more of the following administrative and civil penalties on the developer and/or owner of the property: 
(1)  A monetary penalty of $250.00 per-caliper-inch of width of the protected tree(s) removed or damaged, payable to the town. A monetary penalty of $500.00 per-caliper-inch of width of the specimen tree(s) removed or damaged, payable to the town. A monetary penalty of $750.00 per-caliper-inch of width of the historic tree(s) removed or damaged, payable to the town. Funds paid to the town as tree removal penalties shall be deposited in a special account or fund and used by the town to provide and/or support supplemental landscape plantings in public areas of the town, and/or to support the administration and enforcement of the town's tree preservation regulations. 
(2)  For each protected tree that is removed or damaged, replacement with new trees having a total tree caliper width equivalent to five times that of the removed or damaged tree(s). For each specimen tree that is removed or damaged, replacement with new trees having a total tree caliper width equivalent to ten times that of the removed or damaged tree(s). For each historic tree that is removed or damaged, replacement with new trees having a total tree caliper width equivalent to 15 times that of the removed or damaged tree(s). Replacement trees shall be of a species listed on the town's approved mitigation and replacement tree planting list. Such replacement trees shall be container-grown and have a minimum caliper width of two and one-half inches to three inches, measured in accordance with section 94-13 of this chapter. Replacement trees shall have a minimum height of at least six feet, and shall be planted in locations as approved by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee. Acceptable locations shall include reforestation sites designated by the town. At the discretion of the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee, money in an amount equal to the per-caliper-inch cash value of the removed or damaged tree(s) may be paid to the town instead of providing replacement trees required by this article. Any such payments shall be deposited in a special account or fund and used by the town to provide and/or support supplemental landscape plantings in public areas of the town and/or to support the administration and enforcement of the town's tree preservation regulations. A per-caliper-inch cash value for replacement trees shall be set by the town council in accordance with section 94-38 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-19), 10-6-2008)  
Secs. 94-42—94-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TREE PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 94-51. - Enumeration. 
The following tree protection measures shall be required: 
(1)  Prior to any and all construction or land development activity, the developer or property owner shall install four-foot-high plastic (or equivalent) safety fencing around the drip line of protected trees and six-foot-high chain-link fencing around the drip line of specimen and historic trees. 
(2)  Prior to any and all construction or land development activity, the developer or property owner shall establish designated parking areas for the parking and maintenance of all vehicles, trailers, construction equipment and related items, designated stockpile areas for the storage of construction supplies and materials during construction of the subdivision and designated drive areas for vehicles and equipment. The location and dimensions of such designated areas shall be clearly identified on both subdivision construction and site plans and shall be approved by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee prior to any construction or land development activity in, on or about the subdivision. Such designated areas shall be completely fenced with chain-link fencing and gates for safety purposes and to separate protected, specimen, or historic trees from the construction area and related construction activity. With the approval of the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee, the designated parking and stockpile areas may be combined into one fenced area, provided that the preservation of protected trees is not adversely affected or jeopardized. Supplies and pipe and other items that are customarily unloaded where installed shall not be required to be stored within the designated stockpile areas. Sites approved for temporary batching plant permits shall be fenced and gated in the same manner as designated parking and stockpile areas. Temporary batching plant permits shall also be required for the operation of all batching plants, pursuant to the regulations of this chapter. 
(3)  During construction, the developer or property owner shall prohibit the cleaning of equipment or materials and/or the disposal of any waste material, including, but not limited to, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar, etc., under the canopy or drip line of any protected, specimen, or historic tree or group of such trees. 
(4)  No attachments or wires of any kind, other than those of a protective nature, shall be attached to any protected tree(s). 
(5)  With major grade changes of six inches or greater, a retaining wall or tree well of rock, brick, landscape timbers or other approved materials shall be constructed around the tree no closer than the drip line of the tree. The top of the retaining wall or tree well shall be constructed at the new grade. 
(6)  Unless otherwise approved by the town, no construction or construction-related activity shall occur under the canopy or drip line of any protected, specimen, or historic tree or group of such trees. 
(7)  Any tree(s) removed during land development, construction or construction-related activities shall be chipped or hauled off site. Burning of removed trees is prohibited unless prior approval is given by the town's fire marshal. 
(8)  The tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee may require additional protection measures or best management practices as needed on a case by case basis to adequately protect protected, specimen, historic trees, or trees required as part of an approved landscape plan. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-20), 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 62-16 , § 8, 11-21-2016)  
Secs. 94-52—94-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TREE PLANTING REQUIREMENTS AND PLANTING LISTS 
 
Sec. 94-61. - Street yard trees. 
Trees shall be planted or existing trees preserved within the street yard of a nonresidential lot or building tract according to the following provisions: 
(1)  For street yards less than 10,000 square feet in area, one tree shall be provided for each 1,000 square feet, or fraction of such amount, of street yard. 
(2)  For street yards between 10,000 and 110,000 square feet in area, ten trees shall be required for the first 10,000 square feet plus one additional tree shall be required for each 2,500 square feet, or fraction of such amount, of street yard area in excess of 10,000 square feet. 
(3)  For street yards over 110,000 square feet in area, 50 trees shall be required for the first 110,000 square feet plus one additional tree shall be required for each 5,000 square feet, or fraction of such amount, of street yard area in excess of 110,000 square feet. 
(4)  Street yard trees shall be a minimum of three-inch caliper. 
(5)  Trees required to satisfy other provisions of this article and lying within the street yard may be used to satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-21), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-62. - Street buffer trees. 
Trees shall be planted or existing trees preserved within the street buffer landscaping area required by section 82-242 of this Code, street buffer landscaping, according to the following provisions: 
(1)  Street buffer trees shall be provided in a ratio of one tree for every 30 feet of lineal frontage, except that a ratio of one tree for every 25 feet of lineal frontage shall be provided along scenic roadways. 
(2)  Street buffer trees shall be a minimum of three-inch caliper. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-22), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-63. - Parking area trees. 
Trees shall be planted or existing trees preserved within off-street parking areas according to the following provisions: 
(1)  One tree shall be provided for each ten parking spaces provided on the site; provided, however, that churches and/or schools shall be required to provide one tree for each 20 parking spaces provided on the site. 
(2)  Parking area trees shall be minimum of three-inch caliper, except as provided in subsection (4) of this section. 
(3)  All parking spaces shall be located within 50 feet of a tree that is located within the same parking area, measured from the trunk of the tree; provided, however, that for churches and/or schools, all parking spaces shall be located within 100 feet of a tree that is located within the same parking area, measured from the trunk of the tree. 
(4)  A maximum of 30 percent of the trees used to satisfy the requirements of this section may come from subsection 94-66(b), approved median and right-of-way planting list. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-23), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-64. - Median and right-of-way trees. 
Trees may be planted in medians and rights-of-way only with the approval of the town, provided that such trees are selected from subsection 94-66(b), approved median and right-of-way planting list. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-24), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-65. - Residential lots. 
The following tree planting requirements shall be satisfied prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a single-family, duplex or multi-family use: 
(1)  A minimum of three trees, with a minimum caliper width of two and one-half inches to three inches, and at least six feet in height, shall be provided on each 10,000 square foot and greater single-family and duplex lot prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. A minimum of two trees, with a minimum caliper width of two and one-half inches to three inches, and at least six feet in height, shall be provided on each single-family and duplex lot between 5,000 and 10,000 square feet prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. At least one of the required trees shall be located within the front yard area of the lot. 
(2)  A minimum of one tree, with a minimum caliper width of two and one-half inches to three inches, shall be provided for each 3,000 square feet of gross lot area on each multi-family lot prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. At least 50 percent of the required trees shall be located within either the front or side yard area of the lot. 
(3)  From July 1 until September 1 of each year, only container grown trees shall be used to satisfy the requirements of this section; and, the builder/developer shall certify that any such trees are container grown. 
(4)  Homeowners desiring to plant trees of a caliper width in excess of two times the requirements of this article may, from July 1 until September 1 of each year, file a town-approved affidavit with the town manager to this effect. Such trees shall be planted by March 1 of the following year in which the affidavit was filed. Failure to comply with the requirements of this article shall be considered a misdemeanor, punishable as such by a fine in accordance with section 1-13 of this Code. 
(5)  There shall be no more than 50 percent of any tree species, and no more than 75 percent of any tree genus permitted to satisfy the planting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-25), 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 62-16 , § 9, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 94-66. - Approved tree planting lists. 
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, only those tree species included in this section shall satisfy the tree planting requirements of this article. 
Generally. The tree species lists contained in this section have been developed and will be periodically updated by the town's environmental conservation commission and shall be maintained and distributed to the public by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee as guides for the identification and selection of tree species that meet the various standards and requirements of this article. Trees included on these tree species lists were selected on the basis of one or more of the following criteria or factors: hardiness, resistance to disease, suitability relative to local climate and soil conditions, adaptability for transplantation, longevity, adaptability to various landscape conditions, resistance to drought, aesthetic qualities, shade provision, windbreak provision, and screening qualities. To promote biodiversity, there shall be no more than 20 percent of a tree species, and no more than 50 percent of any tree genus permitted to satisfy the planting requirements on all new developments. 
(1)  Approved tree planting list. Only those tree species found on the following approved tree planting list shall satisfy the tree planting standards and requirements of this article. 
Approved Tree Planting List 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
Southern live oak 	(Quercus virginiana) 
Escarpment live oak 	(Quercus fusiformis) 
Shumard oak 	(Quercus shumardi) 
Chinkapin oak 	(Quercus muehlenbergii) 
Monterrey oak 	(Quercus polymorpha) 
Bur oak 	(Quercus macrocarpa) 
Texas red oak 	(Quercus texana) 
Water oak 	(Quercus nigra) 
American elm 	(Ulmus americana) 
Cedar elm 	(Ulmus crassifolia) 
Winged elm 	(Ulmus alata) 
Lacebark elm 	(Ulmus parvifolia) 
Bald cypress 	(Taxodium distichum) 
Pecans and hickories 	(Carya species) 
Juniper tree 	(Juniperus species) 
White ash 	(Fraxinus americana) 
Green ash 	(Fraxinus pennsylvanica) 
Texas ash 	(Fraxinus texensis) 
Western soapberry 	(Sapindus drummondii) 
Sweet gum 	(Liquidambar styraciflua) 
Eastern red cedar 	(Juniperus virginiana) 
Pines 	(Pinus species) 
Leyland cypress 	(Cypressocyparis leylandi) 
Black walnut 	(Juglans nigra) 
Magnolia 	(Magnolia grandiflora) 
 
(2)  Approved median and right-of-way tree planting list. The following tree species shall be allowed to be planted in medians and rights-of-way when approved by the town. Additional tree species with non-aggressive root systems/deep root systems maybe authorized for planting in such areas by the director of recreational services. 
Approved Median and ROW Tree
Planting List 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
Sweet gum 	(Liquidambar styraciflua) 
Crepe myrtle 	(Lagerstroemia indica) 
Wax myrtle 	(Myrica cerifera) 
Plum 	(Prunus species) 
Holly 	(Ilex species) 
Possum haw 	(Ilex decidua) 
Native pecan 	(Carya species) 
Redbuds/whitebuds 	(Cercis species) 
Fruitless crabapples 	(Malus species) 
Southern live oak 	(Quercus virginiana) 
Escarpment live oak 	(Quercus fusiformis) 
Texas red oak 	(Quercus texana) 
Shumard oak 	(Quercus shumardi) 
Chinkapin oak 	(Quercus muehlenbergii) 
Bur oak 	(Quercus macrocarpa) 
Water oak 	(Quercus nigra) 
Winged elm 	(Ulmus alata) 
Cedar elm 	(Ulmus crassifolia) 
Lacebark elm 	(Ulmus parvifolia) 
Slippery elm 	(Ulmus rubra) 
Bald cypress 	(Taxodium distichum) 
Hickories 	(Carya species) 
Pines 	(Pinus species) 
Chinese pistache 	(Pistachia chinensis) 
Juniper tree 	(Juniperus species) 
Texas buckeye 	(Aesculus glabra variety arguta) 
Common persimmon 	(Diospyros virginiana) 
Texas ash 	(Fraxinus texensis) 
White ash 	(Fraxinus Americana) 
Green ash 	(Fraxinus pennsylvanica) 
Western soapberry 	(Sapindus drummondii) 
Black walnut 	(Juglans nigra) 
Magnolia 	(Magnolia grandiflora) 
Yaupon holly 	(Ilex vomitoria) 
Carolina buckthorn 	(Rhamnus caroliniana) 
Thornless honey locust 	(Gleditsia triacanthos variety inermis) 
 
(3)  Approved mitigation and replacement tree planting list. The following list of tree species shall be allowed to be planted to satisfy mitigation and replacement standards for trees removed from the buildable area on sites, trees removed with approved tree removal permits, and/or trees removed without authorization. 
Approved Mitigation and Replacement
Tree Planting List 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
Native pecan 	(Carya species) 
Texas red oak 	(Quercus texana) 
Shumard oak 	(Quercus shumardi) 
Bur oak 	(Quercus macrocarpa) 
Water oak 	(Quercus nigra) 
Winged elm 	(Ulmus alata) 
Slippery elm 	(Ulmus rubra) 
Post oak 	(Quercus stellata) 
Cedar elm 	(Ulmus crassifolia) 
 
(4)  Approved overhead utility easement tree planting list. The following list of tree species shall be allowed to be planted in overhead utility easements where required. These species were selected due to their relatively small mature size and growth characteristics. Trees planted in these areas shall be planted at a ratio of three trees for every one tree required. 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
Yaupon holly 	(Ilex vomitoria) 
Carolina buckthorn 	(Rhamnus caroliniana) 
Possum haw 	(Ilex decidua) 
Plum 	(Prunus species) 
Redbuds/whitebuds 	(Cercis species) 
Wax myrtle 	(Myrica cerifera) 
Crepe myrtle 	(Lagerstroemia indica) 
 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-26), 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 62-16 , § 10, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 94-67. - Limits on credit for preservation of existing or established trees. 
Existing protected trees, which are not being applied toward compliance with landscaping requirements, may be applied as a credit against required buildable area mitigation. Similarly, existing specimen trees, which are not being applied toward compliance with landscaping requirements, may be applied as credit toward required buildable area mitigation. In order for trees to qualify for credit, all standards described in article V of this chapter, shall be met completely. Further, all requirements set forth in section 94-40 shall also be met for credit to apply toward required buildable area mitigation for such trees. If the trees are compromised in any way, credit will not be given. Eligibility for credit will be determined by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee. In no event shall any tree be counted for credit against both the landscaping requirements and the buildable area mitigation requirements. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-28), 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 62-16 , § 11, 11-21-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 62-16 , § 11, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed § 94-67, and renumbered former § 94-68 as new § 94-67 as set out herein. The former § 94-67 pertained to landscape credit for large trees and derived from Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-27), 10-6-2008.  
Secs. 94-68—94-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 94-81. - Exceptions. 
The following exceptions from the terms and provisions of this chapter are hereby authorized and granted: 
(1)  If any protected, specimen, or historic tree shall be determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare or safety, and require immediate removal without delay, authorization for removal may be given by the town manager, upon recommendation of the tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee, and such protected, specimen, or historic tree may then be removed without obtaining a written permit as required in this article. 
(2)  During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, storm, flood or other act of God, the requirements of this article may be waived as may be deemed necessary by the town council. 
(3)  All licensed plant or tree nurseries shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this article only in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises of such licensee that are so planted and growing for the sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of such licensed business. 
(4)  Utility companies, franchised or otherwise, that are authorized to provide utility service within the town may remove protected, specimen, or historic trees that endanger public safety and welfare by interfering with utility service, except that where such trees are on owner-occupied properties developed for single-family or duplex use, removal of such trees shall be at the option of the property owners and require the property owners' consent and approval. 
(5)  For recreational property or uses, such as golf courses and baseball, soccer, football or similar athletic facilities, and public works projects such as water or wastewater treatment plants, pump stations, storage tanks, and public streets and drainage improvements, the buildable area of the property shall include that portion of the property necessary for the construction of such recreational and public works improvements, including sufficient adjacent area, to allow the normal operation of construction equipment. 
(6)  The terms and provisions of this article shall not apply to any development, subdivision or re-subdivision for which a record plat has been approved by the town council and filed in the plat records of the county prior to October 6, 2008. 
(7)  All easements and rights-of-way included on a record plat approved by the town and filed in the plat records of the county. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-29), 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 43-15 , § 2, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 62-16 , § 12, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 94-82. - Penalty upon failure to comply with chapter provisions. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall, without exception, be fined the maximum amount provided in section 1-13 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day or portion of a day during or on which each separate violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur and shall be punishable as such. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation by any person of any provision of this chapter that constitutes an immediate danger or threat to any protected, specimen, or historic tree shall be subject to the administrative penalties set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation by any person of any provision of this chapter that constitutes an immediate danger or threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the town for such purpose. 
(d)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained in this section, the town may enforce the provisions of this chapter pursuant to the applicable provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, which chapter provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(e)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-30), 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 94-83. - Informational assistance. 
(a)  In furtherance of the purposes and provisions of this article, the town's tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee shall develop and distribute to persons making application for either tree removal permits or tree replanting permits and make available to the general public an informational pamphlet identifying appropriate and useful facts, guidelines and how-to information relative to the preservation, protection and replanting of trees. 
(b)  The tree preservation and enforcement officer or authorized designee shall also develop, maintain and make available to applicants for tree removal permits or tree replanting permits and to the general public a tree species reference book to provide more detailed information concerning tree care in general and the characteristics, soil and growth requirements and other traits of specific tree species identified on the town's protected tree list and approved tree planting and replacement list. 
(c)  A current edition of the Texas Association of Nurserymen Grades and Standards, as applicable to the tree species on the town's protected tree list and approved tree planting and replacement list, shall be maintained by the tree preservation and enforcement officer or his authorized designee and made available to applicants for building permits, tree removal permits or tree replanting permits and to the general public, as only those trees meeting and planted or replanted in accordance with the applicable Texas Association of Nurserymen Grades and Standards shall satisfy the tree planting, replanting and/or replacement standards and requirements contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 63-08, § 3(94-31), 10-6-2008)  
Chapter 98 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any land use, development, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(9); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; swimming pool code, § 14-171 et seq.; sexually oriented businesses, § 18-301 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; planning and zoning commission, § 78-51 et seq.; development standards, ch. 82; signs, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; vegetation, ch. 94; zoning fees, app. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 98-1. - Scope and applicability of chapter. 
The regulations of this chapter shall apply to all lands located within the corporate limits of the town and within any areas annexed for the limited purposes of planning and zoning as provided in state law. All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the town that are hereafter occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished or converted shall be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished or converted in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located, as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.01)  
Sec. 98-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory dwelling means a dwelling unit accessory to the primary single-family dwelling use, located in a separate building, but on the same lot as the primary unit. The habitable floor area of an accessory dwelling shall not exceed 50 percent of the habitable floor area of the primary structure. 
Accessory retail and service uses means retail or service uses, such as pharmacy, newsstand, dining room, barber or beauty shop located within an office, high rise apartment or similar building where such retail or service use is incidental to the primary use and designed and arranged to serve the primary use. 
Accessory use, general, means an accessory use not elsewhere listed in the use regulations schedule. 
Airport or landing field means an area improved for the landing or takeoff of aircraft approved by the town for operation as an aircraft landing facility. 
Ambient (background) sound pressure level means the all-encompassing sound associated with given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive sound, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive sound is to be made. 
Amplified sound means music, speech or sound projected or transmitted by artificial means, including but not limited to amplifiers, loud speakers, or any similar devices which emit sound distinctly discernible at a distance of more than 100 feet beyond the property line of the premises where the equipment is located. 
Amusement and recreation (indoors) means an enterprise wholly enclosed in a building offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge or to members and guests of a private association. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, dancehalls, theatrical productions, bowling alleys, billiard and pool establishments, boxing gyms, electronic video game arcades, skating rinks and teen clubs. 
Amusement and recreation (outdoor) means an enterprise offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge or to members and guests of a private association wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, a golf driving range, "paint ball," archery range and miniature golf course. 
Animal control facility means an establishment that is operated, controlled or contracted with by the town for the confinement, safekeeping, control and/or destruction of animals that come into the custody of the town. 
Animal exhibition means a collection of animals for display to the public. An animal exhibition shall not include the sale, breeding or butchering of animals. Any animals classified as wild animals, defined in this section, shall be subject to all federal, state and local licensing requirements. 
Antique shop means an establishment offering for sale, within a building, articles such as glass, china, furniture or similar furnishings and decorations that have value and significance as a result of age, design or sentiment. 
Architectural lighting means exterior lighting used to enhance the architectural characteristics of a building, structure, or landscaping. Architectural lighting may include floodlighting, spotlighting, or any applicable combination of these techniques. 
Asphalt or concrete hatching plant, temporary, means a temporary facility for producing asphalt or concrete products used in construction activities on the same or nearby sites. 
Assembly hall means a building, or part of a building, in which facilities are provided and used for such purposes as a meeting, gathering, or assembly of persons for civic, educational, political, religious, or social events, including weddings and receptions, and may include a banquet hall, private club, or fraternal organization. 
Auto repair garage means a building or place arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for the primary purpose of providing general repair and servicing of motor vehicles. Such repair or servicing may include reconditioning of engines, air conditioning systems and transmissions; wrecker service; replacement or repair of brakes, shock absorbers, tires, batteries, mufflers or upholstery; and other similar services, but excluding body work, painting, undercoating or rustproofing, and tire retreading or recapping. 
Aviary means a facility for rehabilitation and/or display of birds to the public. An aviary shall not include the sale, breeding or butchering of birds. Any birds classified as wild animals, defined in this section, shall be subject to all federal, state and local licensing requirements. 
Boardinghouse or roominghouse means a building, other than a hotel or motel or multifamily dwelling, where lodging and/or meals for three or more persons are provided for compensation. 
Building material yard and construction office means a yard or building for storing or housing building material and building equipment on a temporary basis. 
Building materials sales or storage (indoors) means an establishment engaged in the retail or wholesale sale of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures, as well as the storage of construction equipment or materials on lots other than construction sites, provided that all sales, display and storage activities occur within a fully enclosed building. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, home improvement centers and electrical, plumbing, air conditioning and heating supply stores. 
Building materials sales or storage (outdoors) means an establishment engaged in the retail or wholesale sale of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures, as well as the storage of construction equipment or materials on lots other than construction sites, wherein any sales, display or storage activity occurs outside of a fully enclosed building. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, lumberyards, brick and masonry supply yards, swimming pool and spa sales, and construction and trade contractors' storage yards. 
Car wash, automatic, means a facility designed and used for the primary purpose of washing and cleaning passenger automobiles in which all tasks are performed by mechanical means, and the automobile is typically driven through the facility by the automobile operator. 
Car wash, full service, means a facility designed and used for the primary purpose of washing and cleaning passenger automobiles in which some tasks are performed by car wash personnel. This use may include gasoline sales as an accessory use. 
Car wash, self-service, means a facility designed and used for the primary purpose of washing and cleaning passenger automobiles in which all tasks are performed by the automobile operator. 
Caretaker or guard residence means dwelling facilities located on a premises occupied by a permitted main use for the housing of persons and their families who are employed on the premises as guards, caretakers or in similar custodial capacity. 
Carnival means a temporary event that is characterized by mechanical rides, games of skill or chance, entertainment, or food. 
Church or rectory means a use customarily associated with a building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together with its accessory building and uses, including the on-site housing of ministers, rabbis, priests, nuns and similar staff personnel, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
Circus means a temporary entertainment event that is characterized by the performance of acrobats, trained or exotic animals, or clowns. 
Cleaning/laundry shop with on-site plant means a custom cleaning, laundry or pressing shop with a pickup station not exceeding 4,000 square feet in floor area where work is performed on-site utilizing an approved chemical process for cleaning or laundry. 
Cleaning/laundry shop, pickup station only, means a pickup station for cleaning or laundry where the work is performed other than on the premises. 
Cleaning/laundry shop with pickup station means a custom cleaning, laundry or pressing shop with a pickup station where work is performed on-site utilizing a nonchemical process for cleaning or laundry. 
Cleaning shop or laundry pickup station means a custom laundry cleaning or pressing shop not exceeding 4,000 square feet in floor area or a pickup station for laundry or cleaning where the work is performed other than on the premises. 
College or university means an academic institution of higher learning accredited or recognized by the state and offering a program or series or programs of academic study. 
Communication tower, commercial, means commercial AM/FM radio, television, microwave and cellular telephone transmission towers and accessory equipment and buildings. 
Community center, public, means a building and grounds owned and operated by a governmental body for the social, recreational, health or welfare of the community served. 
Concession means a temporary food establishment where food is offered to the public that operates for a period of no more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single circus, carnival, special event, or celebration. 
Convenience store means a retail establishment, occupying less than 6,000 square feet of floor area, primarily offering for sale meats, fruits, vegetables, bakery products, dairy products, personal care items, cleaning products and similar household items to a localized or neighborhood market, for off-premises consumption. 
Country club, private, means an area containing a golf course and a clubhouse and available only to private specific membership. 
Crop agriculture means the use of land for the primary purpose of raising and harvesting row, field or tree crops on a commercial basis. 
Custom personal service means barber shop, beauty shop, tailor, dressmaker, shoe shop or similar shop offering custom service. 
Dancehall means an establishment open to the public for entertainment primarily dancing, but excluding any entertainment characterized or distinguished by specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities and excluding the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
Day camp for children means a facility arranged and conducted for the organized recreation and instruction of children, including outdoor activities, on a daytime basis only. 
Day care center means an establishment licensed by the state that provides care, protection and supervision for seven or more children or adults for periods of less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for a fee or other compensation, excluding any establishment classified as a day care home. This classification shall not include overnight lodging, medical treatment, counseling, and/or rehabilitative services and does not apply to any school. 
Day care home means an establishment registered with the state that provides care, protection and supervision in the caretaker's single-family detached residence for not more than six children under 14 years of age, including the caretaker's own children, and that provides care after school for not more than three additional elementary school children, provided that the total number of children cared for, including the caretaker's own children, does not exceed nine. This classification shall not include overnight lodging, medical treatment, counseling and/or rehabilitative services and does not apply to any school. 
Dwelling, duplex, means a building located on a single lot and designed and constructed with two dwelling units under a single roof. 
Dwelling, mobile home, means a single mobile home dwelling unit located on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means any building or its portion that is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units on a single lot. 
Dwelling, single-family attached, means a dwelling unit joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall and located on a platted separate lot and served by separate utility connections and meters as a single-family dwelling. 
Dwelling, single-family detached, means a single dwelling unit, other than a mobile home, located on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract. 
Dwelling, single-family detached (medium density), means a special type of single-family dwelling (detached) with unique dimensional regulations permitting greater flexibility of site design as defined by this chapter and permitted solely in planned development districts approved prior to the effective date of this subpart B. 
Electrical energy generating plant means an electrical power generating plant belonging to a privately owned utility company franchised to serve the town or its portion. 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, means those lines and substations used for bulk transmission of electricity and not normally used for serving the end uses. For electric utilities, the term "electrical line/substation, high voltage" includes all lines operated at 60 kv or above, when measured phase-to-phase. 
Exotic animal means any nondomesticated animal, other than livestock, that is native to a foreign country or of foreign origin or character, is not native to the United States, or was introduced from abroad. The term "exotic animal" specifically includes, but is not limited to, animals such as lions, tigers, jackals, dingoes, leopards, elephants, pandas, camels, antelope, anteaters, kangaroos, chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, water buffalo, and species of foreign domestic livestock requiring state or federal permits. 
Extended stay hotel means a type of hotel or motel establishment designed to accommodate extended stays by the business traveler or extended vacation traveler, with financial consideration being calculated on a nightly or weekly basis. 
Farmer's market means a designated location used primarily for the distribution and sale directly to consumers of food by farmers and other producers. 
Field office, temporary, means a structure or shelter used in connection with a development or building project for housing on-site temporary administrative and supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and equipment 
Florist means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of cut flowers and flowering plants. 
Fraternal club or lodge means an establishment providing meeting or social facilities for a private or nonprofit association, primarily for use by members and guests. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, fraternal lodges and meeting halls. 
Garage sale means the sale of personal property on the same lot as a residential dwelling within a residential zoning district. 
Golf course, private, means a golf course, privately owned but open to the public for a fee and operated as a commercial venture. 
Golf course, public, means a golf course owned and operated by the town or leased for operation for the benefit of the general public. 
Greenhouse, wholesale, means an establishment primarily engaged in the production for wholesale of ornamental plants and other nursery products, such as bulbs, florists' greens, shrubbery, flower and vegetable seeds and plants, and sod. 
Hardware store means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of a number of basic hardware lines, such as tools, builder's hardware, paint and glass, housewares and household appliances, and cutlery. 
Health club or athletic club means any recreational facility where all activities are contained within an enclosed building which is open to the general public for a fee or charge. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, aerobic exercise, tennis, swimming or racquet facilities, gymnasium, weight room, sauna or other associated recreational activities. 
Heliport means a landing facility for rotary wing aircraft, subject to regularly scheduled use and may include fueling or servicing facilities for such craft and subject to approval by the town. 
Helistop means a landing pad for occasional and infrequent use by rotary wing aircraft not exceeding a gross weight of 6,000 pounds and not for regularly scheduled stops and subject to approval by the town. 
Home occupation means a business, profession, occupation or trade conducted within a dwelling unit or elsewhere on a lot primarily used for dwelling purposes for compensation or gain by a resident of the dwelling unit. 
Hospital means an institution that: 
(1)  Offers services more intensive than those required for room, board, personal services and general nursing care; 
(2)  Offers facilities and beds for use beyond 24 hours by individuals requiring diagnosis, treatment or care for illness, injury, deformity, infirmity, abnormality, disease or pregnancy; and 
(3)  Regularly makes available at least clinical laboratory services, diagnostic X-ray services, and treatment facilities for surgery or obstetrical care, or other definitive medical treatment of similar extent. 
The term "hospital" may include offices for medical and dental personnel, central service facilities such as pharmacies, medical laboratories, and other related uses. 
Hotel or motel means a building or group of buildings designed and occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals, with the location of accommodations limited to one primary structure. To be classified as a hotel or motel, an establishment shall contain a minimum of 12 individual guestrooms or units and shall furnish customary hotel services, such as linen and housekeeping. 
Institution, drug or psychiatric treatment, means any facility used or intended to be used primarily for the treatment of alcohol or drug dependency or the housing and care of persons with a mental illness that requires them to be confined in an institutional facility. 
Keeping of livestock or poultry means the use of land for the keeping or raising of livestock or poultry, whether as an accessory or principal use or on a commercial or noncommercial basis. 
Kennel means any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether operated separately or in connection with another business or establishment, that keeps, boards and/or trains dogs and/or cats for profit. Veterinary hospitals shall not be considered a kennel, unless such hospitals contain pens or facilities for housing, boarding, breeding, training, harboring, or keeping dogs, cats or other domesticated animals, swine, equine, or other livestock or animals other than, or in addition to, shortterm care incidental to the hospital use. Kennels must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning and land use regulations of the town. 
Laboratory, medical and dental, means an establishment providing support to the medical profession and patients, such as blood banks, oxygen, and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services, nonresearch related. 
Laboratory, scientific and research, means an establishment or other facility for carrying on investigation in the natural, physical or social sciences, which may include engineering and product development. 
Lighted private outdoor recreational activities means the installation of permanent or temporary outdoor luminaires or lighting standards to illuminate amusement and recreation (outdoors) or to illuminate any private outdoor recreational activities. 
Livestock auction means any place or facility where animals are sold to the highest bidder, including barns, pens and sheds for the temporary holding and sale of livestock. The term "livestock auction" does not apply to individual sales of animals by private owners to other private owners. 
Local utility line means the facilities provided by a municipality or a franchised utility company for the distribution or collection of gas, water, surface drainage water, sewage, electric power or telephone service. 
Maintenance services means an establishment primarily engaged in the provision of off-site maintenance and custodial services. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, carpet cleaning, janitorial, landscape maintenance, pest control, septic tank and window cleaning services. 
Manufacturing, general, means an establishment engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials, excluding uses classified as manufacturing, hazardous or objectionable. 
Manufacturing, hazardous or objectionable, means a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes utilizing, hazardous materials as defined by the Uniform Fire Code, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, chemical manufacturing and warehousing, dry ice manufacturing, fat rendering plants, fertilizer manufacturing, fireworks and explosives manufacturing and warehousing, meat packing plants, petroleum refineries, pulp processing and paper products manufacturing, radioactive materials manufacture or use, steel works, slaughterhouses and tanneries. 
Manufacturing, light, means an establishment engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding activities classified in another land use category. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, apparel and garment factories, appliance and computer products assembly, boatbuilding and repair, electrical and electronic equipment, fixtures, jewelry manufacturing, leather products, meat cutting and wholesale storage, monument and grave marker manufacturing, motion picture production lots, musical instrument manufacturing and toy manufacturing. 
Mining and quarrying means the extraction of metallic and nonmetallic minerals, including rock crushing, screening and the accessory storage of explosives. Typical uses include earth borrow pits, sand and gravel pit operations, and rock and stone quarries. 
Miniwarehouse means an enclosed storage facility of a commercial nature containing independent, fully enclosed bays that are leased to persons exclusively for dead storage of their household goods or personal property. 
Mobile home park means a tract of land designed or being used to accommodate two or more mobile home dwelling sites for rental. 
Model home means a single-family or duplex residential structure temporarily used for the display and sale of new residences within the subdivision or development in which the residential structure is located. A model home shall not be used as a construction office. 
Mortuary or funeral home means a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
Motor vehicle fuel service station means a building or place arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for the primary purpose of dispensing gasoline, oil, diesel fuel, liquified petroleum gases, greases, batteries, and other minor automobile accessories at retail direct to the motor vehicle trade and where other services to motor vehicles can be rendered such as the following: sales and servicing of spark plugs and other ignition parts; tire repair and servicing, but no recapping; replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, floor mats, wiper blades and arms for windshields, radiator cleaning and flushing; washing and polishing; greasing and lubrication; air cleaners; adjusting brakes, tuning engines; air conditioner service; wheel balancing and alignment; provided, however, that the above automotive services are considered vehicle maintenance and replacement services and shall never be construed to include any major overhaul; the removal and/or rebuilding of an engine, cylinder head, transmission, differential, radiator, springs, or axles; steam cleaning; body or frame work; painting; upholstering; or replacement of glass. This use may include the incidental sale of meats, fruits, vegetables, bakery products, dairy products, personal care items, cleaning products and similar household items to a localized or neighborhood market, for off-premises consumption, provided that in no case shall the floor area devoted to such sales exceed 2,400 square feet. 
Museum, library or art gallery (public), means an institution for the collection, display and distribution of books and objects of art, or science and sponsored by a public or quasipublic agency and open to the general public. 
Nursing or congregate care facility means a residential land use, whether or not operated for profit, that provides, for a period exceeding 24 hours, housing, food service, and one or more personal services, which may include nursing care, for four or more persons not fully capable of independent living and not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage, excluding establishments classified as group homes. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, convalescent homes, nursing homes, orphanages, foster care facilities, adult congregate and assisted living facilities, and personal care homes for the physically impaired, mentally retarded, developmentally disabled or elderly. 
Office, general business or professional, means an establishment providing administrative, business, executive, management or professional services, but not involving medical or dental services or the sale of merchandise, except as incidental to a permitted use. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, real estate, insurance, property management, investment, employment, facsimile transmission, advertising, secretarial data processing, photocopy and reproduction, telephone answering, telephone marketing, telegraph, cellular telephone and paging and beeper services; music recording studios; professional or consulting services in the fields of law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting and similar professions; interior decorating consulting services; and business offices of private companies, utility companies, public agencies, trade associations, unions, and nonprofit organizations. 
Office, medical or dental, means an office or group of offices for one or more physicians, surgeons, dentists or other health care professionals to treat sick or injured patients who do not remain overnight. 
Office-showroom/warehouse means an establishment with a maximum of 75 percent of its total floor area devoted to storage and warehousing not accessible to the general public. The remaining floor area not used for storage and warehousing shall be devoted to retail and wholesale sales areas, sales office, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas. 
Open space common area means land within or related to a development, typically in control of a homeowner's association and which may be platted as an X lot or public easement, that is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of development residents and their guests and may include such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate. 
Park or playground, public, means an open recreation facility or park owned and operated by a public agency such as the town or school district and available to the general public or operated by an approved homeowners' association for the benefit of a specifically defined area of the town. 
Parking lot, commercial, means a premises providing a paved, ground-level, open space area, used solely for the parking of motor vehicles, and where such parking is allowed with or without payment of a fee, contract or other form of remuneration. 
Parking structure, commercial, means a building or structure consisting of one or more levels, above or below grade, available for the parking of motor vehicles, with or without payment of a fee, contract or other form of remuneration. 
Personal improvement services means an establishment primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement and similar services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, portrait shops, photography studios, artists' studios, art and music schools, driving schools, handicraft or hobby instruction and counseling and referral services. 
Pet store means any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether operated separately or in connection with another business or establishment, that buys and sells dogs, cats, and/or other species of pets for profit. Pet stores or shops must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning and land use regulations of the town. 
Plant nursery or garden shop means an establishment primarily engaged in selling trees, shrubs, other plants, seeds, bulbs, mulches, soil conditioners, fertilizers, pesticides, garden tools and other garden supplies to the general public. These establishments primarily sell products purchased from others, but may sell some plants that they grow themselves. 
Public building, shop or yard means facilities such as office buildings, maintenance yards and shops required by branches of local, state or federal government for service to an area, such as a transportation department yard, town service center or agricultural experiment station. 
Railroad team track means a siding for spotting and unloading or loading boxcars or other railroad cars, and which area is connected to a public street by a drive for access. 
Railroad track means railroad track or track right-of-way, but not including railroad stations, sidings, team tracks, loading facilities, docks, yards or maintenance areas. 
Recreation center means a building or complex of buildings housing community recreation facilities owned, operated or leased for operation by the town or other documented nonprofit agency and may include swimming pools, tennis and other indoor or outdoor athletic facilities. 
Recycling dropoff center means a small collection facility where presorted, nonbiodegradable and nonhazardous recyclable materials are purchased or accepted from the public. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, neighborhood recycling stations and thrift or charitable store collection trucks. 
Refreshment stand means the use of a portable building or other temporary facilities for the retail sale of food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state. This use may be a principal use or an accessory use to a principal use located on the premises. 
Repair services, general, means an establishment engaged in the repair of trucks, buses, agricultural equipment, construction equipment or other heavy equipment. 
Repair services, limited, means an establishment engaged in the repair of personal apparel and household appliances, furniture, and similar items, excluding repair of motor vehicles. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, apparel repair and alterations, small appliance repair, bicycle repair, lawn mower repair, clock and watch repair, and shoe repair shops. 
Restaurant, drive-in, means an establishment where the principal business is the sale of food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state and that provides service exclusively to customers in motor vehicles. 
Restaurant, fast food, means an establishment where the principal business is the sale of food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state and where the design or method of operation includes any service to a customer in a motor vehicle, other than an establishment classified as a drive-in restaurant. 
Restaurant, general, means an establishment where the principal business is the sale of food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state and where the design or principal method of operation includes one or more of the following: 
(1)  A sit-down restaurant where customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are generally served in nondisposable containers by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which such items are consumed. 
(2)  A cafeteria or cafeteria type operation where foods and beverages generally are served in nondisposable containers and consumed within the restaurant building. 
(3)  A small specialty restaurant having floor area exclusively within a shopping center, sharing common parking facilities with other businesses within the center, and having access to a common interior pedestrian accessway within the center. 
This use may include takeout service, but includes any service to a customer in a motor vehicle. 
Retail, general (indoors), means a retail establishment that does not fit the definition of any other land use classification and that does not entail any outdoors sales, service, display, storage or other activity. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, apparel and accessory stores, camera and photographic supply stores, clothing rental stores, consumer electronics stores, gift, novelty and souvenir shops, luggage and leather goods stores, jewelry stores, music stores and video tape rental stores. 
Retail, general (outdoors), means a retail establishment that does not fit the definition of any other land use classification and that entails some outdoors sales, service, display, storage or other activity. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, boat dealers, hot tub dealers, recreational vehicle dealers and monument sales. 
Retail, single tenant, means an establishment primarily occupied by a single tenant retail use that may include secondary accessory uses enclosed in a single building. Primary retail uses may include, but are not limited to, supermarkets, department stores, home improvement centers, discount centers and automotive sales and service. Secondary accessory uses may include, but are not limited to, banks, video rental, restaurant, fast food, garden centers and automotive service uses. 
Sales, temporary or seasonal, means a retail sales operation limited to Christmas tree sales from Thanksgiving Day through the day after Christmas Day and pumpkin sales during the months of October and November. 
Sales trailer, temporary, means a mobile office trailer used while model homes are being constructed. 
School, business, means a business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction and training in a service or art such as a secretarial school, barber college, beauty school or commercial art school, but not including manual trade schools. 
School, commercial trade, means a business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction and training in a trade such as welding, brick laying, machinery operation and similar trades. 
School, elementary or secondary, means a school having a curriculum generally equivalent to public elementary or secondary schools, but not including trade or commercial schools. 
Secondhand store means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of previously owned merchandise. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, consignment shops and pawnshops. 
Sexually oriented business means the establishment of an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center, as such terms are defined in section 98-994, special use conditions, sexually oriented business. 
Special event means an event or gathering open to the public in areas or venues not specifically designated for that purpose and which requires a temporary exception to otherwise applicable rules or requirements specifically including, but not limited to: 
(a)  A carnival; 
(b)  A festival; 
(c)  A circus; 
(d)  A race or rally; 
(e)  A parade; 
(f)  Seasonal sales; 
(g)  A concert; and 
(h)  Any event or gathering that requires: 
1.  The temporary complete or partial closure of a public street; 
2.  The temporary closure or restriction of access to public property; 
3.  The temporary offer of merchandise, food, or beverages on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by the Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy; 
4.  The temporary erection of a tent on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by the Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy; 
5.  The temporary erection of a stage, band shell, portable building, grandstand, or bleachers on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by the Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy; 
6.  The temporary use, for other than storage, of a trailer or van on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by the Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy; 
7.  The temporary use of equipment to amplify and transmit sound, which exceeds ambient (background) sound pressure levels at the property lines; or 
8.  The placement of portable toilets on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by the Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy. 
Stadium or playfield, public, means an athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a public agency for the general public including a baseball field, football field or stadium. 
Supermarket means a retail establishment with 6,000 square feet of floor area or more primarily offering for sale meats, fruits, vegetables, bakery products, dairy products, personal care items, cleaning products and similar household items for off-premises consumption. 
Swimming pool, private, means a swimming pool constructed and maintained for the exclusive use of residents and their nonpaying guests. 
Telephone equipment station means a site used for telephone exchange, switching, relay and transmitting equipment, but not including public business facility, storage or repair facilities. 
Transmission pipeline means the use of land, including easements on property primarily used for other purposes, for the conveyance of hazardous material through transmission pipelines, but specifically excluding the distribution lines of a local natural gas utility. 
Vehicle and equipment sales or rental means an establishment, not classified in any other land use category, engaged in the retail or wholesale sale or rental, from the premises, of motorized vehicles, other than automobiles, or equipment. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, boat and motorcycle dealers, construction equipment rental yards, farm equipment and machinery sales and rental, mobile home sales, moving trailer rental, recreational vehicle and travel trailer sales or rental, and truck or bus sales or rental. 
Veterinary hospital means any establishment that is maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for the diagnosis or treatment of injuries and diseases to animals. 
Veterinary hospital (inside pens) means a veterinary hospital in which all activities are wholly enclosed within a building. 
Veterinary hospital (outside pens) means a veterinary hospital that includes animal boarding facilities that are not wholly enclosed within a building. 
Warehousing and wholesale, general, means an establishment offering wholesaling, storage or warehousing services not classified in any other land use category. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, moving and storage firms, and trucking and shipping operations. 
Wild animal means any animal not normally considered domesticated and which is now or historically has been found in the wild, or in the wild state including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Reptiles: venomous reptiles, any type of crocodile or alligator; 
(2)  Fish: piranha; 
(3)  Birds: condors, eagles, hawks, falcons, owls; 
(4)  Mammals: ocelots, lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, wolves or wolf hybrids, dingoes, coyotes and coyote mixes, jackals, weasels, martens, minks, badgers, skunks, raccoons, pandas, bears, kangaroos, opossums, sloths, anteaters, armadillos, monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, porcupines, antelope, deer, fox, elephant, lynx, camel, squirrels; or 
(5)  Any species of animal illegal to own under federal, state or local law. 
Wine retail establishment means any establishment which derives the majority of its gross revenue from the sale of wine to the general public for off-premises personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
Wrecking or salvage yard means the use of any lot or portion of a lot or tract, building or structure for the storage, salvage, sale, display, demolition, keeping or dismantling of scrap material which may or may not be wholly assembled into useful objects, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 2.03; Ord. No. 75-99, § 1(2.03), 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 14-00, § 1(2.03), 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 40-00, § 1, 6-5-2000; Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 89-02, § 1, 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 25-03, § 1, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 48-03, § 3, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 76-03, § 2, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 101-04, § 5, 12-20-2004; Ord. No. 72-05, § 2, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 53-06, § 2, 8-5-2006; Ord. No. 80-07, § 2, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 05-10, § 2, 1-21-2010; Ord. No. 33-11, § 2, 7-18-2011; Ord. No. 18-16 , § 1, 3-21-2016; Ord. No. 61-19 , § 1, 10-7-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 98-3—98-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SMARTGROWTH PROGRAM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1, adopted July 15, 2002, amended art. II in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. II, titled SMARTGrowth Management Plan, derived from Code 1989, ch. 12, §§ 3.101(a), (b), (c)(1), (c)(2), (d)1—(d)(5)a—f; Ord. No. 10-00, § 2, adopted Feb. 17, 2000; Ord. No. 16-01, § 1, adopted March 5, 2001; and Ord. No. 35-01, § 1, adopted May 21, 2001. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 98-31. - Purposes and objectives. 
The SMARTGrowth program has the following purposes and objectives: 
(1)  Mitigate the ill effects of rapid and intense urbanization in the town; 
(2)  Protect the open lands, natural landforms, agricultural landscapes and scenic vistas that create and define the town's unique community character and quality of life; 
(3)  Protect the natural, scenic and ecological resources that are essential elements of the town's community character and which provide irreplaceable plant and wildlife habitat; 
(4)  Ensure that development is respective of and appropriately integrated with the natural physical geography of the land in Flower Mound by requiring environmentally sensitive development techniques to eliminate "scrape and build" development; 
(5)  Promote a vigorous, diversified and regionally competitive economy; 
(6)  Foster a balanced tax base to ensure Flower Mound's long-term financial ability to respond to the service demands of both new and existing development without placing a disproportionate tax burden on homeowners; 
(7)  Ensure that new development produces positive fiscal impacts to allow Flower Mound to maintain a tax structure conducive to both home ownership and economic development, while providing the highest level of service to residents and businesses; 
(8)  Ensure that adequate facilities exist to provide both existing and future student populations with optimal learning opportunities as an essential element of a quality living environment and a family-friendly community; 
(9)  Ensure that the character and quality of Flower Mound's built environment, relative to commercial development, contribute to desired community character objectives and foster a positive relationship between the taxable value of real property and the corresponding cost of municipal services; 
(10)  Ensure that the character and quality of Flower Mound's built environment, relative to residential development, contribute to desired community character objectives and integrate with surrounding natural landscapes; 
(11)  Provide adequate availability and access to park lands and recreational opportunities for residents of all ages to maintain and nurture a quality living environment and a family-friendly community; 
(12)  Avoid conflicting interaction and/or relationships between new and existing development and a resulting diminution of property values; 
(13)  Protect existing farmland and agricultural operations from conflict with new residential development; 
(14)  Provide adequate public infrastructure, facilities and services to serve the demands created by new development without degrading or diminishing service levels to existing development; 
(15)  Establish a development framework for Flower Mound that is respective [respectful] of private property rights, while encouraging them to be used responsibly for the benefit of the entire community; 
(16)  Implement a long-term strategy of sustainable development that embodies the community's vision and values; achieves both community character and economic development objectives; and considers the social, environmental and fiscal impacts of land development; and 
(17)  Preserve and enhance Flower Mound's distinctive community character and quality of life by ensuring that its natural and built environments are consistent with the community vision and values embodied in the Flower Mound Master Plan. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(a), 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-32. - Definitions and methodologies. 
This section is intended to provide definitions for certain general and technical terms used in the SMARTGrowth program and also to establish the required methods for calculating capacity and demand for those SMARTGrowth criteria that require such calculations. In this regard, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, unless the context in which they are used clearly indicates otherwise. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Agricultural resource management easement means an easement granted to the benefit of adjacent property owners and recorded on the face of a record plat and/or recorded in conjunction with a building permit for the purpose of acknowledging the existence of agricultural operations and uses on adjacent lands and waiving common law rights to object to necessary and customary agricultural management activities legally conducted in association with such agricultural operations and uses. 
Arterial means a thoroughfare as defined and identified on the town's adopted Thoroughfare master plan. 
Background traffic volumes means, for the study year, the set of daily and peak-hour traffic volumes projected to exist in the study area (including projected traffic volumes from the lot inventory in the study area) prior to the addition of project traffic. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means the methods that have been determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing the impact on the environment from a development project or activity. 
Civic uses means land and/or facilities owned and operated by the town, including public-works projects. 
Collector means a thoroughfare as defined and identified on the town's adopted thoroughfare master plan. 
Conservation development means a residential development project in which dwelling units are clustered on smaller lots than would otherwise be allowed within tracts of land zoned A, agricultural district and/or SF-E, single-family estate district, for the purpose of preserving open or natural lands as an integral component of the development. The net density of development on tracts of land zoned A, agricultural district, shall remain one unit per two acres and the net density of development on tracts of land zoned SF-E, single-family estate district, shall remain one unit per acre. Conserved lands shall be placed in a conservation easement. 
Conservation easement means a voluntary and permanent deed restriction which limits the development and/or subdivision of property for the purpose of protecting conservation values in the land. The easement is a recorded restriction, applies to all subsequent owners and may be held by either (1) a nonprofit entity or organization that manages open space, such as a land trust or other qualified entity, pursuant to section 170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or (2) a governmental entity. 
Contributed capacity from elevated water storage means the rate of flow required to drain 75 percent of available elevated water storage in an eight-hour period, with the remaining 25 percent of storage capacity being reserved for fire protection. 
Design storm means a storm equivalent to a five-year recurrence interval and a one-hour-duration rain event. 
Development application or project means any application or project for the development of land that requires the submission of a master plan amendment, zoning amendment, development plan, record plat, replat and/or nonresidential site plan except for a minor plat, amended plat, replat that does not increase density, or an institutional or civic use. 
Developed floodplain means any area defined as a floodplain within the FEMA 100-year floodplain and which has been channelized or the land within these areas has been graded, filled, or otherwise disturbed. 
Ecological integrity. An ecosystem exhibits integrity if, when subjected to disturbances (natural or artificial), it sustains and organizes a self-correcting ability to recover to a normal vegetative growth for that system. 
Environmentally sensitive area ("ESA") means designated areas that include one of the following classifications: upland habitat, riparian habitat, waters of the state, prairie habitat, developed and undeveloped floodplain. 
Existing lot means a lot for which a building permit has been issued, regardless of whether the structure or structures on the lot are occupied. 
Habitat biodiversity refers to the variety and variability among living organisms and the ecological complexes in which they occur. Diversity can be defined as the number of different items and their relative frequencies. 
HCM means the latest edition of the Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) published by the Transportation Research Board. 
Institutional uses means land and/or facilities owned and operated by the federal government, state government, county government, and/or a political subdivision of the state, including public works projects, or land and/or facilities utilized for religious uses. 
Intersection means the juncture of two or more thoroughfares. 
Land use planning districts means the four land use planning districts identified on the town's adopted land use plan map, which include the Lakeside business district, the Long Prairie district, the Cross Timbers conservation development district and the Denton Creek district. 
Level of service (LOS) means the measure of the quality of transportation facilities and expressed as a grade of A, B, C, D, E or F, with the grade being determined by the techniques described in the latest edition of the Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) published by the Transportation Research Board. 
Link means the portion of a thoroughfare between two intersections. 
Lot inventory means all residential lots, which exist by virtue of a development plan, approved by the town and for which a building permit has not been issued. 
Prairie habitat means areas designated as containing onsite predominant distributions of climax or mid-successional native grass species underlain by intact (noneroded) prairie and savannah soil types. 
Priority 1 calls. As defined in the databases maintained by the town's police, fire and emergency medical services. 
Priority 2 calls. As defined in the databases maintained by the town's police and fire departments. 
Priority 3 calls. As defined in the databases maintained by the town's police and fire departments. 
Programmed capacity improvements means capital infrastructure capacity improvements programmed for commencement of construction within the then current or the next fiscal year of the town's adopted five-year capital improvement program. 
Project traffic. For the determination of adequate transportation infrastructure, project traffic is the projected traffic volumes from the proposed development based on trip rates identified in the Trip Generation Manual and is distributed and assigned to the study area based on projected conditions for the build-out year. 
Proposed development means any application or project for the development of land that requires the submission of a master plan amendment, zoning amendment, development plan, record plat and/or nonresidential site plan except for a minor plat, amended plat, replat that does not increase density, or an institutional or civic use. 
Response times means the time that elapses between the time a call for police, fire or emergency service is received and the time the responding unit arrives at the scene or the location from which the call originated. 
Riparian habitat means areas designated within the FEMA 100-year floodplain or interconnected and adjacent to wetland, tree and understory vegetation and including significant stands of predominantly native water-related habitat. These areas include wetlands. 
SMARTGrowth criteria means constitutive development criteria to evaluate the community-wide impacts of proposed development applications and projects for the purpose of ensuring that development occurs in a manner that contributes to the attainment of community character and quality of life objectives. 
Study year. For the determination of adequate transportation infrastructure, the study year is the initial calendar year in which project traffic is expected to occur. 
TNRCC means the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission. 
Topographical slopes means the vertical elevation change in a landform divided by the horizontal distance covered within the slope. (Note: the percentage of slope should not be confused with the angle of the slope related to the horizontal plane.) 
Traffic capacity means the maximum number of vehicles that a given transportation facility is designed to serve at an established level of service (LOS). 
Tree complex means the assemblage of physical environmental factors defining the vegetative conditions and species composition over a uniform area of land type. 
Trip Generation Manual means the latest edition of the Trip Generation Manual published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
Undeveloped floodplain means areas within the FEMA 100-year floodplain, or other floodplain, that is undeveloped and in its natural state. 
Upland habitat means areas, a minimum of ten acres in size, equal to or exceeding 50 trees per acre, which contain a predominant matrix of tree species identified in the town's protected tree list. Any tree species that makes up over 30 percent of the population within a complex is considered to be the predominant species. 
Waters of the state means groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or costal, fresh or salt, navigable or nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state. 
Water quality standards means state-adopted and EPA-approved ambient standards for water bodies. The standards prescribe the use of the water body and establish the water quality criteria that must be met to protect designated uses. 
Wetlands means jurisdictional wetlands as defined by the federal Clean Water Act and the standards and guidelines in use by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, including the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands. 
Wildlife corridors means linear protected areas that serve as biological connecting corridors between larger wildlife habitat areas, which allows native wildlife to move uninterrupted from one area to another. 
Wildlife habitat means the places where a population of wild animal species lives and the constitutive environmental surroundings, both living and non-living. 
(b)  Methodologies. 
Water supply. Total available supply shall be the sum of contracted and available treated water supply from Dallas Water Utilities (DWU), contracted and available treated water supply from the Upper Trinity Regional Water District (UTRWD), and any treated water supply projected to be available from programmed capacity improvements. Net available supply shall be equal to total available supply less five percent to be reserved for economic development, institutional or civic uses. 
Total projected demand shall be the sum of projected maximum day demand (MDD) for all existing lots, and approved but not constructed development, plus the projected MDD for the proposed development. For proposed development to be approved, total projected demand must not exceed net available supply. 
Water pumping capacity. Total available pumping capacity shall be determined on the basis of individual pressure planes and shall be the sum of the rated name plate pumping capacity of each pump station (in MGD) with the largest pump out of service at each station, any pumping capacity projected to be available from programmed capacity improvements, and contributed capacity from elevated storage. Net available pumping capacity shall be equal to total available pumping capacity less five percent to be reserved for economic development, institutional or civic uses. 
Total projected demand shall be the sum of projected peak-hour demand (in MGD) for all existing and approved but not constructed development, plus the projected peak-hour demand for the proposed development. For proposed development to be approved, total projected demand must not exceed net available pumping capacity. 
Wastewater treatment capacity. Total available treatment capacity for the town's wastewater treatment plant shall be the sum of the TNRCC permitted discharge flow (in MGD) from the treatment plant and any treatment capacity projected to be available from programmed capacity improvements. Net available treatment capacity shall be equal to total available treatment capacity less five percent to be reserved for economic development, institutional or civic uses. 
Total projected demand for areas served by the town's wastewater treatment plant shall be the sum of projected wastewater flows for all existing lots and approved but not constructed development, plus the projected wastewater flows for the proposed development. For proposed development to be approved, total projected demand must not exceed net available treatment capacity. 
Total available treatment capacity for the Denton Creek and Prairie Vista districts, as defined in the adopted land use plan, shall be the sum of contracted and available treatment capacity from the Trinity River Authority's Denton Creek regional wastewater system and any treatment capacity projected to be available from programmed capacity improvements. Net available treatment capacity for the Denton Creek and Prairie Vista districts shall be equal to total treatment capacity less five percent to be reserved for economic development, institutional or civic uses. 
Total projected demand for areas within the Denton Creek and Prairie Vista districts shall be the sum of projected wastewater flows for all existing lots and uses within the district and approved but not constructed development within the district, plus the projected wastewater flows for the proposed development. For proposed development to be approved, total projected demand must not exceed net available treatment capacity. 
Wastewater lift station pumping capacity. Total available lift station pumping capacity shall be the sum of the rated name plate pumping capacity of each lift station serving the proposed development with the largest pump out of service and any pumping capacity projected to be available from programmed capacity improvements. Net available lift station pumping capacity shall be equal to total available lift station pumping capacity less five percent to be reserved for economic development, institutional or civic uses. 
Total projected demand shall be determined on the basis of a five-year design storm for peak-hour wet-weather wastewater flows and shall be the sum of projected wastewater flows for all existing lots served by each lift station serving the proposed development, and approved but not constructed development that will be served by each lift station serving the proposed development, plus the projected wastewater flows for the proposed development. For proposed development to be approved, total projected demand must not exceed net available lift station pumping capacity. 
Wastewater interceptor capacity. Total available wastewater interceptor capacity shall be the sum of the maximum capacity of each major interceptor serving the proposed development (as such capacity is defined in the town's adopted wastewater master plan for each interceptor segment) and any interceptor capacity projected to be available from programmed capacity improvements. Net available wastewater interceptor capacity shall be equal to total available wastewater interceptor capacity less five percent to be reserved for economic development, institutional or civic uses. 
Total projected demand shall be determined on the basis of a five-year design storm for peak-hour wet-weather wastewater flow and shall be the sum of projected wastewater flows for all existing lots and approved but not constructed development that will be served by each major interceptor serving the proposed development, plus the projected wastewater flows for the proposed development. For proposed development to be approved, total projected demand must not exceed net available wastewater interceptor capacity. 
Transportation—Town arterial and collector links. Total available traffic capacity on any town arterial or collector link shall be determined by use of the Transcad computer model. Impacted links for a development project will be determined by use of such computer model, with trip generation data based on applicable data contained in the ITE Trip Generation Manual. The model will determine the distribution/assignment of traffic related to each such development project. An impacted link will be any such link for which the projected trip generation from the proposed project exceeds five percent of the link's peak-hour capacity at LOS "C." 
Total projected demand shall be the sum of existing background traffic volumes, projected traffic volumes from all existing lots and approved but not constructed development, and projected traffic volumes from the proposed development. For proposed development to be approved, trip generation from the proposed development must not reduce the level of service on any town arterial or collector link below LOS "C" during peak-hour demand. 
Transportation—Town arterial and collector intersections. Total available traffic capacity on any town arterial or collector intersection shall be determined by use of the Transcad computer model. Impacted intersections for a development project will be determined by use of such computer model, with trip generation data based on applicable data contained in the ITE Trip Generation Manual. The model will determine the distribution/assignment of traffic related to each such development project. An impacted intersection will be (i) any such intersection for which the projected trip generation from the proposed project exceeds five percent then-available of the intersection's peak-hour capacity at LOS "C" and/or (ii) any intersection on either end of an impacted link. 
Total projected demand shall be the sum of existing background traffic volumes, projected traffic volumes from all existing lots and approved but not constructed development, and projected traffic volumes from the proposed development. For proposed development to be approved, trip generation from the proposed development must not reduce the level of service on any town arterial or collector intersection below LOS "C" during peak-hour demand. 
Park land. Total available community and neighborhood park land shall be the sum of all such park land owned by the town at the time of development application and any such park land programmed for acquisition during the then current or the next fiscal year of the town's capital improvement program. 
Total projected demand for community and neighborhood park land shall be the sum of projected existing population at the time of development application, projected population for 100 percent of the lot inventory, and projected population for the proposed development (with all population projections using the North Central Texas Council of Government's population multiplier for Flower Mound). For development to be approved, the total available community and neighborhood park land relative to projected demand for same expressed in acres per 1,000 population must be equal to or greater than the standards established in the Park Land SMARTGrowth criterion. 
Miscellaneous. 
• All costs incurred by the town to perform a transportation analysis to evaluate a proposed development in relation to its compliance with the transportation SMARTGrowth criteria will be paid by the development applicant. Said applicant shall deposit the estimated cost to perform such analyses with the town prior to said analyses being performed. If the actual cost of any analysis is more than the estimated cost for same, the applicant shall pay the additional sum to the town prior to the analysis being considered complete. Should the actual cost of an analysis be less than the anticipated cost for same, the town will reimburse the applicant the difference between the estimated and actual cost of the analysis. 
• All costs incurred by the town to perform a water capacity analysis and/or wastewater capacity analysis, to update the master planning models, and to evaluate a proposed development in relation to its compliance with the SMARTGrowth criteria will be paid by the development applicant. Said applicant shall deposit the cost to perform such analyses with the town prior to said analyses being performed. 
• Any analytical techniques, procedures or methodologies necessary to calculate capacity and demand for the SMARTGrowth criteria that require such calculations and not specifically defined or described herein will be performed in accordance with one or more of the following, as applicable: 
—The analytical techniques, procedures or methodologies utilized in the town's adopted land use plan, water master plan, wastewater master plan, or thoroughfare master plan, as applicable. 
—The analytical techniques, procedures or methodologies established in the town's land development code for the performance of a traffic impact analysis. 
—TNRCC design criteria and standards. 
—SMARTGrowth Implementation Manual. 
—If none of the above is applicable, in accordance with generally accepted engineering practices as determined by the town engineer. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(b), 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 11-10 §§ 3, 4, 2-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-33. - SMARTGrowth Implementation Manual—Amendments. 
From and after the effective date of this section, the town council adopts the amendments to the SMARTGrowth Implementation Manual, which amendments are attached to Ordinance No. 54-02 as exhibit 1 and incorporated herein for all purposes, to assist with the implementation of the SMARTGrowth program, as amended by Ordinance No. 22-03. As shown on exhibit 1, these amendments are to section A, adequate public infrastructure, and subsections 6(B) and 7(B) of the SMARTGrowth Implementation Manual. 
(Ord. No. 54-02, § 2, 8-29-2002; Ord. No. 31-03, § 2, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 11-10 § 5, 2-15-2010; Ord. No. 31-14, §§ 4—6, 6-16-2014)  
Secs. 98-34—98-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SMARTGROWTH COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 98-51. - Creation; organization. 
An advisory board known as the "SMARTGrowth commission" is hereby created. The membership of the commission shall consist of the following: 
(a)  The seven regular members of the town's planning and zoning commission, who shall serve on the SMARTGrowth commission during their term of office on the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  The two alternate members of the town's planning and zoning commission, who shall serve on the SMARTGrowth commission during their term of office on the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  One representative of the real estate industry appointed by a majority vote of the town council to serve a three-year term beginning January 1, 2000. 
(d)  One representative of the development industry appointed by a majority vote of the town council to serve a three-year term beginning January 1, 2000. 
(e)  The town manager, town attorney, executive director of development and environmental services and director of planning services shall serve as ex-officio members of the SMARTGrowth commission. 
(f)  The chairperson and vice-chairperson of the planning and zoning commission shall serve as the chairperson and vice-chairperson, respectively, of the SMARTGrowth commission. 
(g)  A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum to do business and the affirmative vote of the majority of those attending shall be necessary to pass any motion. 
(h)  The commission shall establish rules and procedures to govern its operation. In the event a question over procedures arises, Robert's Rules of Order shall prevail. 
(i)  The chairperson shall preside over meetings and shall have a vote in all matters before the commission. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall assume the duties of the chairperson. 
(j)  The executive director of development and environmental services shall assign a staff member to serve as liaison to the commission, which staff member shall be responsible for the recording of minutes of all commission meetings. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(c)1., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-52. - Powers and duties. 
The SMARTGrowth commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  To conduct a review of the effectiveness of the SMARTGrowth program in achieving its stated objectives. 
(b)  To determine whether compliance with the SMARTGrowth criteria has been maintained by all development applications and projects previously approved. 
(c)  To determine whether compliance with the SMARTGrowth criteria is likely be maintained in the future, based on short-range (one to two years) and mid-range (three to five years) forecasts. 
(d)  To review within a three-year time period whether each SMARTGrowth criterion is appropriate for its stated purpose. 
(e)  To determine within a three-year time period whether any new SMARTGrowth criteria should be considered for adoption. 
(f)  To determine within a three-year time period whether any SMARTGrowth criteria should be deleted or amended in relation to the SMARTGrowth analysis. 
(g)  To conduct public hearings and meetings as necessary to obtain the requisite public comment and input to perform the powers and duties described herein. 
(h)  To perform the duties and responsibilities of the capital improvements advisory committee required by chapter 395 of the Texas Local Government Code pertaining to the assessment and collection of impact fees. 
(i)  To perform all other powers and duties as may be conferred by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(c)2., 7-15-2002)  
Secs. 98-53—98-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SMARTGROWTH ANALYSIS 
 
Sec. 98-71. - Effective date and process. 
The SMARTGrowth analysis required by this division shall apply to and occur in conjunction with all applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and/or site plans, where applicable, filed after the date of passage of this article. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)1., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-72. - General exceptions. 
(a)  The SMARTGrowth analysis referenced herein shall not be applicable to minor plats, amended plats, replats that do not increase density, or for institutional or civic uses. 
(b)  Rough proportionality. In the event that a situation arises that places SMARTGrowth in conflict with state or federal law, the town may recognize that the development exactions (land dedication, payment of fees other than impact fees, and construction of facilities and infrastructure) required to satisfy the town's SMARTGrowth program assuring the provision of adequate public facilities may in certain circumstances be limited by the restrictions of rough proportionality as announced by the Texas Supreme Court, the United States Supreme Court and adopted, in part at least, by the Texas Legislature in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 212.904 and allow for SMARTGrowth approval in those particular circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)2., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 11-10 § 6, 2-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-73. - Criteria; purpose and objectives. 
SMARTGrowth criteria effectuate the community vision and values embodied in the Flower Mound Master Plan by translating them into constitutive development criteria to evaluate the community-wide impacts of development applications and projects for the purpose of ensuring that development occurs in a manner that contributes to the accomplishment of community character and quality of life objectives. There are three general types of SMARTGrowth criteria used in the SMARTGrowth program: 
(a)  Performance-based criteria relative to the adequacy of public service levels. 
(b)  Per unit of population criteria relative to the adequacy of public facilities. 
(c)  Values-based, qualitative criteria relative to community character and quality of life objectives. 
The SMARTGrowth criteria have also been grouped into six general categories, as follows: adequate public infrastructure, adequate public facilities, adequate public services, economic development, environmental quality, and community character. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)3., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-74. - Evaluation. 
(a)  In applying the SMARTGrowth criteria to a specific development application or project, a "pass-fail" evaluation will be utilized to determine compliance with applicable criteria. In other words, for a development application or project to attain compliance with the SMARTGrowth program (ensuring that it contributes to community character and quality of life objectives), it must be evaluated as "passing" or complying with each applicable SMARTGrowth criterion. Otherwise, it will "fail" and be denied until such time as compliance is or can be attained. 
(b)  For analysis of large multi-phase projects over 100 acres in area, the evaluation will include a development agreement that captures the timing of the infrastructure construction and phasing. With this information, up-front modeling and planning for build-out of the entire development can be included in the water and wastewater models, with a check for adequacy of the existing infrastructure. If there exists an inadequacy of the existing infrastructure, the phasing and timing of construction of the additional infrastructure required will be addressed in the development agreement. Modeling updates for the current and next two years of development in accordance with the phasing plan provided by the developer will be included with the initial application. Each subsequent site plan or final plat will include model updates. 
(c)  With 2009 updates to the water master plan and wastewater master plan, and associated town-wide models, a hybrid approach to include model updates will be implemented. This effort will provide a link between SMARTGrowth results and our capital improvement projects planning and may provide a transition to a more streamlined evaluation approach. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)4., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 11-10 § 7, 2-15-2010; Ord. No. 56-13, § 2, 11-4-2013)  
Secs. 98-75—98-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CRITERIA CATEGORIES AND APPLICATIONS  
Subdivision A. - Adequate Public Infrastructure—Water 
 
Sec. 98-100. - Supply. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved if the town has exceeded or is projected to exceed 95 percent of its treated water supply, based upon its then-available treated water supply plus any additional supply programmed for commencement of construction within the then current or the next fiscal year of the town's capital improvement program, with the remaining five percent of supply being reserved for future economic development, institutional or civic uses. The purpose of this criterion is to provide adequate public infrastructure to serve the demands created by new development without degrading or diminishing service levels to existing development, while also fostering a balanced tax base through economic development to ensure Flower Mound's long-term financial ability to respond to the service demands of both new and existing development without placing a disproportionate tax-burden on homeowners. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans and record plats, with capacity being reserved at record plat approval. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and site plans, with capacity being reserved at site plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.a., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 11-10, § 8, 2-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-101. - Pumping capacity. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved if the town has exceeded or is projected to exceed 95 percent of its rated water-pumping capacity in any pressure plane during peak-hour demand with the largest pump at each pump station out of service, based upon the then-available rated pumping capacity and contributed capacity from then-available elevated storage and any additional pumping capacity or contributed elevated storage capacity programmed for commencement of construction within the then-current or the next fiscal year of the town's capital improvement program, with the remaining five percent of rated pumping capacity being reserved for future economic development, institutional or civic uses. The purpose of this criterion is to provide adequate public infrastructure to serve the demands created by new development without degrading or diminishing service levels to existing development, while also fostering a balanced tax base through economic development to ensure Flower Mound's long-term financial ability to respond to the service demands of both new and existing development without placing a disproportionate tax burden on homeowners. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans and record plats, with capacity being reserved at record plat approval. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and site plans, with capacity being reserved at site plan approval.) 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.a., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 11-10, § 8, 2-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-102. - Wastewater treatment capacity. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved if the town has exceeded or is projected to exceed 95 percent of its wastewater treatment capacity, based upon its then-available treatment capacity and any additional treatment capacity programmed for commencement of construction within the then current or the next fiscal year of the town's capital improvement program, with the remaining five percent of wastewater treatment capacity being reserved for future economic development, institutional or civic uses. This criterion is not applicable if a proposed development's wastewater flows will not be treated by the town's wastewater treatment plant or the Trinity River authority's Denton Creek regional wastewater system. The purpose of this criterion is to provide adequate public infrastructure to serve the demands created by new development without degrading or diminishing service levels to existing development, while also fostering a balanced tax base through economic development to ensure Flower Mound's long-term financial ability to respond to the service demands of both new and existing development without placing a disproportionate tax burden on homeowners. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans and record plats, with capacity being reserved at record plat approval. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and site plans, with capacity being reserved at site plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.a., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 11-10, § 8, 2-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-103. - Wastewater lift station pumping capacity. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved if the town has exceeded or is projected to exceed 95 percent of the rated pumping capacity of any lift station serving the development during the maximum wet weather flow event with the largest pump at each lift station out of service and without considering wastewater interceptor capacity, based upon the then-available rated pumping capacity of each lift station and any additional pumping capacity programmed for commencement of construction within the then current or the next fiscal year of the town's capital improvement program, with the remaining five percent of rated pumping capacity of each lift station being reserved for future economic development, institutional or civic uses. The purpose of this criterion is to provide adequate public infrastructure to serve the demands created by new development without degrading or diminishing service levels to existing development, while also fostering a balanced tax base through economic development to ensure Flower Mound's long-term financial ability to respond to the service demands of both new and existing development without placing a disproportionate tax burden on homeowners. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans and record plats, with capacity being reserved at record plat approval. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and site plans, with capacity being reserved at site plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.a., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-104. - Wastewater interceptor capacity. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved if the town has exceeded or is projected to exceed 95 percent of the maximum capacity at any location or point on any major wastewater interceptor serving the development and identified in the town's wastewater master plan during the maximum wet weather flow event, without surcharging any manhole, based upon the then-available maximum capacity of each major interceptor and any additional interceptor capacity programmed for commencement of construction within the then current or the next fiscal year of the town's capital improvement program, with the remaining five percent then-available of wastewater interceptor capacity being reserved for future economic development, institutional or civic uses. The purpose of this criterion is to provide adequate public infrastructure to serve the demands created by new development without degrading or diminishing service levels to existing development, while also fostering a balanced tax base through economic development to ensure Flower Mound's long-term financial ability to respond to the service demands of both new and existing development without placing a disproportionate tax burden on homeowners. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans and record plats, with capacity being reserved at record plat approval. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and site plans, with capacity being reserved at site plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.a., 7-15-2002)  
Secs. 98-105—98-110. - Reserved.  
Subdivision B. - Same—Transportation. 
 
Sec. 98-111. - Town arterial and collector links. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved if the level of service (LOS) on any town arterial or collector link located within the same transportation service area as the proposed development, or within any contiguous transportation service area, is then currently or is projected to be worse than LOS "C" during peak-hour demand, based upon the then available traffic capacity of each such link and any capacity improvements programmed for commencement of construction within the then current or the next fiscal year of the town's capital improvements program. Economic development, institutional, civic uses, and residential replats containing four or fewer lots are to be exempt from this criterion. The purpose of this criterion is to provide adequate public infrastructure to serve the demands created by new development without degrading or diminishing service levels to existing development, while also fostering a balanced tax base through economic development to ensure Flower Mound's long-term financial ability to respond to the service demands of both new and existing development without placing a disproportionate tax burden on homeowners. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans and record plats, with capacity being reserved at record plat approval. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and site plans, with capacity being reserved at site plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.a., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 22-03, § 2, 5-6-2003)  
Sec. 98-112. - Town arterial and collector intersections. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose No development application or project shall be approved if the level of service (LOS) on any town arterial or collector intersection located within the same transportation service area as the proposed development, or within any contiguous transportation service area, is then currently or is projected to be worse than LOS "C" during peak-hour demand, based upon the then available traffic capacity of each such intersection and any capacity improvements programmed for commencement of construction within the then current or the next fiscal year of the town's capital improvements program. Economic development, institutional, civic uses, and residential replats containing four or fewer lots are to be exempt from this criterion. The purpose of this criterion is to provide adequate public infrastructure to serve the demands created by new development without degrading or diminishing service levels to existing development, while also fostering a balanced tax base through economic development to ensure Flower Mound's long-term financial ability to respond to the service demands of both new and existing development without placing a disproportionate tax burden on homeowners. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans and record plats, with capacity being reserved at record plat approval. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and site plans, with capacity being reserved at site plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.a., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 22-03, § 2, 5-6-2003)  
Secs. 98-113—98-119. - Reserved.  
Subdivision C. - Adequate Public Facilities. 
 
Sec. 98-120. - Park land. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. Beginning January 1, 2002, no development application or project shall be approved if the combined amount of community and neighborhood park land available town-wide is less than nine acres per 1,000 population, based upon the then-available community and neighborhood park land and any such park land programmed for acquisition during the then current or the next fiscal year of the town's capital improvement program. Beginning January 1, 2003, no development application or project shall be approved if the combined amount of community and neighborhood park land available town-wide is less than nine and one-half acres per 1,000 population, based upon the then-available community and neighborhood park land and any such park land programmed for acquisition during the then current or the next fiscal year of the town's capital improvement program. Beginning January 1, 2004, no development application or project shall be approved if the combined amount of community and neighborhood park land available town-wide is less than ten acres per 1,000 population, based upon the then-available community and neighborhood park land and any such park land programmed for acquisition during the then current or the next fiscal year of the town's capital improvement program. After January 1, 2005, no development application or project shall be approved if the combined amount of community and neighborhood park land available town-wide is less than ten and one-half acres per 1,000 population, based upon the then-available community and neighborhood park land and any such park land programmed for acquisition during the then current or the next fiscal year of the town's capital improvement program. The purpose of this criterion is to provide adequate availability and access to park lands and recreational opportunities for residents of all ages and to maintain and nurture a quality living environment and a family-friendly community. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans and record plats, with available park land being reserved at record plat approval. This criterion is not applicable to nonresidential projects. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.b., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-121. - Access to trailheads or public recreational areas. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose No development application or project shall be approved that proposes to eliminate existing access to public trailheads or other public recreational areas on public lands. The access provided may be restricted to pedestrian, bicycle and/or equestrian uses. The purpose of this criterion is to provide adequate availability and access to park lands and recreational opportunities for residents of all ages to maintain and nurture a quality living environment and a family-friendly community. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.b., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-122. - Public schools. 
(a)  Purpose. For any residential development application or project, the town shall notify in writing and request confirmation of such notification from the applicable public school district that such residential development application or project has been filed with the town. The town will assist the public school district, if requested, in addressing any program capacity issues relative to any town infrastructure serving any and all public elementary, middle and high schools that will receive student population as a result of the proposed development. The purpose of this criterion is to ensure that adequate town facilities and infrastructure exist to provide both existing and future student populations with optimal learning opportunities as an essential element of a quality living environment and a family-friendly community. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for master plan amendments, zoning amendments, development plans and record plats. This criterion is not applicable to nonresidential projects. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.b., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 68-12, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
Secs. 98-123—98-129. - Reserved.  
Subdivision D. - Adequate Public Services. 
 
Sec. 98-130. - Police services. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved if the town council determines that the department is not maintaining quality police services at a level consistent with town growth, change, and expectations. This analysis will be made by the SMARTGrowth commission on a yearly basis after reviewing the annual report of the police department as outlined in the SMARTGrowth Implementation Manual. The determination may consider any projected improvements to said services due to personnel and/or equipment additions programmed for acquisition within the town's annual operating budget for the then current fiscal year. The purpose of this criterion is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by ensuring the provision of adequate police services to serve the demands created by new development without degrading or diminishing service levels to existing development. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, subsection (a) is applicable to applications for development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, subsection (a) is applicable to applications for site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.c., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 31-14, § 1, 6-16-2014)  
Sec. 98-131. - Fire and emergency services. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved if the town council determines that the department is not maintaining quality fire and emergency services at a level consistent with town growth, change, and expectations. This analysis will be made by the SMARTGrowth commission on a yearly basis after reviewing the annual report of the fire department as outlined in the SMARTGrowth Implementation Manual. The determination may consider any projected improvements to said services due to personnel and/or equipment additions programmed for acquisition within the town's annual operating budget for the then current fiscal year. The purpose of this criterion is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by ensuring the provision of adequate fire and emergency services to serve the demands created by new development without degrading or diminishing service levels to existing development. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, subsection (a) is applicable to applications for development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, subsection (a) applicable to applications for site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.c., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 31-14, § 2, 6-16-2014)  
Sec. 98-132. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 31-14, § 3, adopted June 16, 2014, repealed § 98-132 which pertained to emergency medical services and derived from Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.c., adopted July 15, 2002.  
Secs. 98-133—98-139. - Reserved.  
Subdivision E. - Economic Development. 
 
Sec. 98-140. - Economic development incentive policy. 
(a)  Eligibility; purpose . New private capital investment (exclusive of land values) may be considered for economic development incentives by the town council, pursuant to the town's economic development incentives policy. The purpose of this criterion is to assist in meeting the goals set forth in the town's economic development and marketing plan while promoting a vigorous, diversified and regionally competitive economy, and a balanced tax base to ensure Flower Mound's long-term financial ability to respond to the service demands of both new and existing development without placing a disproportionate tax burden on homeowners. Economic development incentives may be offered for the following projects, in accordance with the town's economic development incentives policy: 
—Campus commercial projects include corporate office, office park development, hospitality and/or resort uses, private medical and health care uses, retail uses, and other business uses related to the telecommunications and bio-tech industries. 
—Campus industrial projects include clean manufacturing uses related to electronic components and/or the telecommunications or bio-tech industries, logistical warehousing and distribution uses related to electronic components or other high-value products, and research and development uses. 
—Retail and mixed use projects include single and multiple retail uses and mixed-use developments consisting of both office and retail uses. 
(b)  Application . For nonresidential projects, depending upon the nature of the project, incentives may be applied at any appropriate step in the development process, as determined by the town. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.d., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 52-07, § 3, 7-16-2007)  
Secs. 98-141—98-144. - Reserved.  
Subdivision F. - Environmental Quality 
 
Sec. 98-145. - Watershed protection. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project with a project area greater than one and one-half acres shall be approved if the projected velocity exceeds predevelopment conditions or runoff exceeds the runoff that would occur for single-family residential development, with any additional runoff projected to be generated by development being retained on site and absorbed, evaporated and/or released from the development at a rate not exceeding single-family residential conditions. Erosion-control and pollution-prevention plans shall be adequate to prevent erosional and depositional features such as gullies and accumulations of silt attributable to site development, with such adequacy being determined by the town. The proposed development site design shall include "best management practices," as defined in the town's engineering standards manual. "Best management practices" may include, but are not limited to, the following types of structural and nonstructural practices: wet ponds, dry extended detention ponds, infiltration basins and trenches, porous pavement, bio-retention, organic filters, buffer zones, open space design, urban forestry, conservation easements, stormwater wetlands, grassed swales and filter strips, green parking, alternative turnarounds and water quality inlets. "Best management practices" will be included in a watershed-protection plan and said watershed-protection plan shall evaluate and minimize potential drainage impacts that could negatively affect, destroy or otherwise compromise on- and off-site surface and subsurface water quality, sensitive environmental features (such as riparian vegetation, trees, soils or grassland and prairie vegetation) and wildlife habitats (including terrestrial and aquatic). The watershed-protection plan shall be prepared by a qualified individual or firm designated by the town and must be approved by the town prior to any site development by an applicant. The purpose of this criterion is to mitigate the ill effects of increases in velocity, volume, and pollution of surface runoff on downstream property owners and to protect the overall water quality of the town as a result of rapid and intense urbanization. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for record plats and site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.e., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 105-07, § 3, 12-17-2007)  
Sec. 98-146. - Wetlands. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved without appropriate professional certification as to the existence of any jurisdictional wetlands and/or waters of the United States, as such jurisdictional areas are defined at the time of development application by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. If such wetlands and/or waters are determined to exist, assurance or proof of compliance acceptable to the town must be provided relative to all federal regulations pertaining to the protection and mitigation of such jurisdictional areas. Field investigation and certification shall be prepared by town personnel or a qualified individual or firm designated by the town and said certification must be approved by the town prior to any site development by an applicant. The town reserves the right to require the protection and preservation of any or all jurisdictional areas determined to exist and to deny proposed mitigation measures. The purpose of this criterion is to protect the natural, scenic and ecological resources that are essential elements of Flower Mound's community character and which provide irreplaceable plant and wildlife habitat. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for record plats and site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.e., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-147. - Topographical slope protection. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved that proposes development on any existing topographical slopes of 12 percent or greater, or that proposes to alter any existing topographical slopes that are less than 12 percent but equal to or greater than five percent then available (other than within five feet of the footprint of the proposed structure or structures). The purpose of this criterion is to ensure that development is respectful of and appropriately integrated with the natural physical geography of the land in Flower Mound by requiring environmentally sensitive development techniques to eliminate "scrape and build." 
(b)  Exception. An exception to this requirement may be approved by the town council by the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths super majority vote of all members of the town council, for any development that keeps the character of the natural topography, and integrates the development into and maintains the overall integrity of the natural topography. Requests for an exception shall be accompanied by the following submissions: 
(1)  Detailed drawings that illustrate the impact of the proposed development on the natural topography and the manner by which the development is integrated into, reflects and maintains the overall integrity of the natural topography. 
(2)  The identification of those specific best management practices (BMPs) that will be used to maintain and responsibly integrate the development into the natural topography together with an explanation regarding their use within the plans for such development. The BMPs to be used shall include, but are not limited to, those BMPs found within the town's engineering design and construction standards. 
(3)  While recognized as a potential BMP, the use of retaining walls should be kept to a minimum. Any retaining wall four-foot or greater in height shall be designed by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Texas. Retaining walls exceeding eight feet in height are discouraged. 
In considering an exception to this criterion, the town shall, in addition to the foregoing, consider the effects of granting an exception on other environmental features such as trees, habitats, floodplains, scenic vistas, ridgelines, and other environmental features as well as adjacency to established developments and neighborhoods. 
(c)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for zoning, planned developments, development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for zoning, planned developments, record plats and site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.e., 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 11-10, § 9, 2-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-148. - Water impoundment protection. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved that proposes to eliminate, or to alter or discontinue recharge flows to, existing impoundments of water with a surface area capacity of one-half acre or more (regardless of whether such impoundments are naturally occurring or constructed). All such impoundments shall be integrated into the proposed development and addressed in the development's environmental protection plan, if applicable, which shall at a minimum include such enhancements and restoration as are necessary to provide or maintain reasonable wildlife habitat, to improve the aesthetic quality in areas of shoreline transition and to stabilize shoreline areas subject to erosion. The purpose of this criterion is to protect the natural, scenic and ecological resources that are essential elements of Flower Mound's community character and that provide irreplaceable plant and wildlife habitat. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for record plats and site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.e., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-149. - Environmental survey. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved until an "environmental survey" ("the survey") has been prepared by the town or a town-approved environmental consultant. The survey shall identify and visually represent all potential environmentally sensitive areas ("ESAs"), which includes upland habitat, riparian habitat, waters of the state, prairie habitat, and developed and undeveloped floodplain. If an ESA is found on the proposed development site, the developer must submit to the town a professionally prepared environmental protection plan ("the plan"). The plan shall be prepared by a qualified individual or firm designated or retained by the town. The purpose of this criterion is to identify important natural, scenic and ecological resources that are essential elements of Flower Mound's community character and which provide irreplaceable plant and wildlife habitat. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for zoning amendments, development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.e., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-150. - Environmental protection plan. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved without the submission of an environmental protection plan ("the plan") prepared by a qualified individual or firm designated or retained by the town if an environmental survey identified any environmentally sensitive area (ESA) within the proposed development site. The plan shall identify principle flora and fauna species present, indicate and evaluate the overall ecological integrity/health of the site, and designate and map existing environmental and wildlife habitat elements. The plan shall also demonstrate best management practices to minimize land disturbance and the modification of natural land forms to protect, conserve and/or restore any designated ESA; demonstrate proposed measures to maintain contiguity of tree stands and other wildlife habitat areas or corridors; demonstrate proposed measures to inform and educate future residents or occupants of the development site about the plan. The town shall evaluate and approve or disapprove the plan on the following criteria; sound environmental science, water quality protection, specific site conditions, cost effectiveness, impact upon the site's development potential, environmental and public health objectives and economic development objectives. The purpose of this criterion is to protect the natural, scenic and ecological resources that are essential elements of Flower Mound's community character and which provide irreplaceable plant and wildlife habitat. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for development plans, record plats and site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.e., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-151. - Waiver of environmental quality criteria. 
It is recognized that certain projects that qualify for economic development incentives, pursuant to the town's economic development incentives policy, due to their size, location, amenities and design, may necessitate waivers from the environmental quality criteria contained in this subdivision. Any requested waiver shall be evaluated during the development process and action taken thereon by the planning and zoning commission and the town council in accordance with the purposes and objectives contained in section 98-31 of the SMARTGrowth program and the town's economic development incentives policy. 
(Ord. No. 52-07, § 4, 7-16-2007)  
Secs. 98-152—98-159. - Reserved.  
Subdivision G. - Community Character 
 
Sec. 98-160. - Design of nonresidential buildings. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose No development application or project shall be approved for nonresidential uses unless the proposed buildings are individually designed and planned to create structures that comply with the town's adopted architectural guidelines or standards, as they exist on the date of development application. The purpose of this criterion is twofold: (1) to ensure that the character and quality of retail, commercial, and industrial development contributes to desired community character objectives and (2) to preclude the design and construction of buildings for which the tenants and/or uses are readily recognizable solely by the buildings' architectural elevations, colors, materials, other architectural elements and/or the arrangement thereof. 
(b)  Application. This criterion is not applicable to residential projects or any institutional or civic projects. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.f., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-161. - On-site utility-distribution facilities. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved unless all on-site utility-distribution facilities are designed to be placed underground, including the landwire distribution facilities of electrical, cable, telephone and telecommunications providers. The purpose of this criterion is to ensure that the character and quality of Flower Mound's built environment contribute to desired community character objectives and to maintain or enhance property values. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for record plats and site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.f., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-162. - Residential density. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No residential application or project shall be approved that increases residential density beyond the density allowed in the master plan. The purpose of this criterion is to ensure that adequate public infrastructure, facilities and services to serve the demands created by new development without degrading or diminishing service levels to existing development. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for zoning amendments, development plans and record plats. This criterion is not applicable to nonresidential projects. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.f., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-163. - Urban design. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved unless it complies with the urban design plan, a component of the master plan. The purpose of this criterion is to provide for design direction for landscaping elements within and visible from public rights of way as well as architectural standards for nonresidential buildings. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for zoning amendments, development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.f., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-164. - Area and specific plans. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved unless it complies with applicable area and/or specific plans, component plans of the master plan. The purpose of this criterion is to preserve the country atmosphere and natural environment that makes Flower Mound a unique and desirable community; mitigate the ill effects of rapid and intense urbanization; create a balanced tax base to ensure the town's long-term economic health and prosperity; and ensure all development is of enduring and exemplary quality. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for zoning amendments, development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.f., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-165. - Agricultural resource management easements. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No residential development application or project that proposes development adjacent to existing agricultural operations or uses shall be approved without the recordation of an agricultural resource management easement acknowledging the existence of such agricultural operations or uses, waiving all common law rights to object to necessary and customary agricultural management activities associated with such agricultural operations or uses legally conducted on adjacent lands, and granting an easement to adjacent property owners to continue such agricultural operations or uses. Said easement shall be recorded on the face of the record plat of the development, and no building permit for a residence on any lot in the development shall be issued until a substantially identical easement has been lawfully recorded by the property owner. The purpose of this criterion is to protect existing agricultural operations and uses (which create and define Flower Mound's unique community character and quality of life) from future conflict with new residential development. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for development plans and record plats. This criterion is not applicable to nonresidential projects. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.f., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-166. - Visual impact. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved unless the proposed development shall occur in patterns that minimize the visual impacts of the development in relation to scenic roads, country roads and scenic corridors as designated in the master plan or any component plan thereof. The purpose of this criterion is to protect the open lands, natural landforms, agricultural landscapes and scenic vistas that create and define Flower Mound's unique community character and quality of life. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for zoning amendments, development plans and record plats. For nonresidential projects, applicable to applications for zoning amendments, development plans, record plats and site plans. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.f., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-167. - Conservation development. 
(a)  No development application or project shall be approved for a conservation development unless it complies with applicable requirements set forth in the land development code for a conservation development within an A, agricultural district and/or SF-E, single-family estate district. Conserved areas must be in conservation easement. Conservation development will be considered for conservation incentives commensurate with the quality and character of the open or natural lands to be placed within a conservation easement or otherwise conserved and the extent to which the conveyed land contributes to the preservation of the country character, including its open, natural, scenic and ecological values. Incentives will be considered on a project-by-project basis and will be approved by the town council only after community input and public hearing. Expedited development review shall be approved administratively. Such incentives may include but are not limited to: expedited development review, permit fee waivers, reduced street infrastructure requirements, reduced park land dedication requirements, and reduction of monetary assessments relative to agricultural rollback taxes. Reduction of parkland dedication to correspond to percentage of conserved area. The purpose of this criterion is to mitigate the ill effects of rapid and intense urbanization in Flower Mound by protecting the open lands, natural land forms, agricultural landscapes and scenic vistas that create and define Flower Mound's unique community character and quality of life. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for zoning amendments, development plans and record plats. This criterion is not applicable to nonresidential projects. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.f., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-168. - Rural development. 
(a)  Restrictions; purpose. No development application or project shall be approved for a "rural development option" for a single-family detached development on lots less than five acres in size. Subdivisions designated for "rural development" that include incentives shall not be subdivided further without approval of the town. Expedited development review shall be approved administratively. The purpose of this criterion is to provide for a "rural development option" on lots of five acres or greater that reflect the country atmosphere and natural environment of Flower Mound. This rural development option may include specialized types of development, such as equestrian-oriented developments. To encourage "rural development," incentives may be considered based on the proposed development and the preservation of open space and natural lands within the development. 
(b)  Application. For residential projects, applicable to applications for zoning amendments, development plans and record plats. This criterion is not applicable to nonresidential projects. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, § 3.01.1(d)5.e., 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-169. - Waiver of community character criteria. 
It is recognized that certain projects that qualify for economic development incentives, pursuant to the town's economic development incentives policy, due to their size, location, amenities and design, may necessitate waivers from the community character criteria contained in this subdivision. Any requested waiver shall be evaluated during the development process and action taken thereon by the planning and zoning commission and the town council in accordance with the purposes and objectives contained in section 98-31 of the SMARTGrowth program and the town's economic development incentives policy. 
(Ord. No. 52-07, § 5, 7-16-2007)  
Secs. 98-170—98-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 98-231. - Districts established. 
In order to implement the comprehensive master plan and the other purposes and provisions of subpart B of this Code, the town is hereby divided into 22 zoning districts. The regulations as set out in this article are uniform throughout each district. The districts established in this article shall be known as: 
Abbreviated 
Designation 	Zoning Districts 
IH 	Interim holding district 
A 	Agricultural district 
SF-E 	Single-family estate district 
SF-30 	Single-family district-30 
SF-15 	Single-family district-15 
SF-10 	Single-family district-10 
SF-A 	Single-family attached district 
2F 	Duplex district 
MF 	Multifamily district 
MH 	Mobile home district 
O 	Office district 
R-1 	Retail district-1 
R-2 	Retail district-2 
C-1 	Commercial district-1 
C-2 	Commercial district-2 
CC 	Campus commercial district 
CI 	Campus industrial district 
I-1 	Industrial district-1 
I-2 	Industrial district-2 
WR 	Water recreation district 
REC 	Recreational district 
PD 	Planned development district 
 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.02; Ord. No. 32-00, § 1, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 98-232. - Zoning map. 
(a)  Adoption. The boundaries of the zoning districts set out in this article are delineated upon the zoning map of the town. Such map is adopted as a part of this article as fully as if the map were set forth in this section in detail. 
(b)  Amendment. No changes or amendments to the district boundaries shown on the official zoning map shall be made except in compliance and conformity with all procedures set forth in article IV of chapter 78 of this Code, comprehensive master plan, zoning map and text amendments. If, in accordance with these procedures, changes or amendments are made to district boundaries, such changes or amendments shall be made promptly after official adoption of the change or amendment as provided for in this article. The town manager shall be responsible for the physical updating and amendment of the official zoning map. 
(c)  Replacement. If the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the town council may adopt a new official zoning map that shall supersede the prior map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting and clerical errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending this chapter or any subsequent amendment thereto without a duly noticed public hearing as provided in this article. Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts of the map remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(d)  Interpretation of district boundaries. The district boundary lines shown on the zoning map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines or extensions. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts, as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerline of such street, highway or alley. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following town limits shall be construed as following town limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the centerline of the right-of-way or, if no centerline is established, the boundary shall be interpreted to be midway between the right-of-way lines. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following the shoreline of lakes shall be construed to follow such shoreline and in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams drainageways or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines, and, in the event of change in the centerlines of the streams, drainageways or other bodies of water, shall be construed as moving with such centerlines. 
(7)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (d)(1)—(d)(6) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the original zoning map shall be determined from the graphic scale on the map. 
(8)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the town council, or whenever street or alley area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or way, and all area so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
(9)  Where physical features of the ground are at variance with information shown on the official zoning map, or when there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned, and such question cannot be resolved by the application of subsections (d)(1) through (d)(8) of this section, the property shall be considered as classified IH interim holding district. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.03)  
Sec. 98-233. - Zoning of annexed territory. 
All territory hereafter annexed to the town shall be classified as IH interim holding district, until different zoning is established by the town council of the town. The procedure for establishing different zoning on annexed territory shall conform to the procedure established by this chapter for zoning amendments. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.04; Ord. No. 71-00, § 1, 10-16-2000)  
Secs. 98-234—98-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IH INTERIM HOLDING DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 98-251. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The IH interim holding district is to be used as a classification for land that is annexed into the town. The town may initiate proceedings on its own motion rezone or reclassify newly annexed territory with a different zoning classification, as appropriate. 
(b)  Land may remain in the IH interim holding district under the conditions of this subsection. In such cases, the use of land shall be permanently restricted to those uses prescribed in this section, until such time as the property is determined to be suitable for development and is zoned to a different zoning classification. 
(1)  This IH district may be used as a reserve area in which future growth of the town might occur. It is suitable for areas where development is premature because of a lack of adequate utilities, capacity or service, or where the ultimate land use has not been determined. 
(2)  This IH district may be used to protect and provide open space buffers around those areas that are unsuitable for development because of physical constraints, such as flooding, that pose potential health, environmental or safety hazards. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.07(a))  
Sec. 98-252. - Permitted uses. 
For the purpose of this section, a tract of record or lot previously existing before annexation into the town and designated as IH interim holding district may be developed in accordance with the provisions of division 3 of article III of this chapter, A agricultural district and conservation development, provided that the tract of record or lot upon which the proposed development is to occur is not required to be subdivided or otherwise altered. 
(Ord. No. 71-00, § 5, 10-16-2000)  
Secs. 98-253—98-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - A, AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT, CONSERVATION DISTRICT, AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 40-02, § 1, adopted July 15, 2002, amended the title of div. 3 to read as set out herein. The former title read "A Agricultural District and Conservation Development". 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6. 
 
Sec. 98-271. - Purpose and intent. 
The A agricultural district is designed primarily for agricultural uses and for single-family detached development on lots of two acres, or greater than two acres if required by on-site sewage facility requirements. It is intended for application in areas designated "rural residential" or "Cross Timbers Conservation Development District" on the land use plan of the comprehensive plan, as amended, and/or any areas zoned A agricultural district. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the A agricultural district shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.08(a); Ord. No. 11-00, § 2, 2-17-2000)  
Sec. 98-272. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the A agricultural district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Carnival or circus, temporary, subject to section 98-976 
Church or rectory 
College or university 
Community center, public 
Convent or monastery 
Country club, private, subject to section 98-978 
Crop agriculture 
Day camp for children 
Day care home 
Dwelling, single-family detached 
Fire station 
Fruit and vegetable stand, subject to section 98-981 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Greenhouse, wholesale 
Home occupation, subject to section 98-984 
Keeping of livestock or poultry, subject to section 98-985 
Local utility line 
Model home 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Small wind energy systems on lots of five acres or more, subject to section 98-1001 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Swimming pool, public 
Telephone equipment station 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.08(b); Ord. No. 11-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 08-01, § 4, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 03-11, § 2, 1-21-2011)  
Sec. 98-273. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the A agricultural district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186 of this Code, specific use permits: 
Accessory dwelling, subject to section 98-983 
Airport or landing field 
Amusement and recreation (outdoors) 
Amusement and recreation (indoors), subject to section 98-973 
Animal control facility 
Animal exhibition 
Aviary 
Boat storage and service 
Caretaker or guard residence, subject to section 98-975 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to section 98-977 
Day care center 
Dude ranch 
Dump or sanitary landfill area 
Electrical energy generating plant 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Exhibition area or fairgrounds 
Farmers' market 
Fraternal club or lodge 
Golf course, private 
Heliport 
Helistop 
Hospital 
Institution, drug or psychiatric treatment 
Kennel (in enclosed building only), subject to section 98-986 
Kennel (in enclosed building only) 
Kennel (with outside runs or pens), subject to section 98-986 
Kennel (with outside runs or pens) 
Livestock auction or feed lot 
Marina 
Mining and quarrying 
Mortuary or funeral home 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Nursing or congregate care facility 
Petroleum storage/collection facility 
Private utility shop, yard or building 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Railroad team track 
Rodeo grounds 
School, commercial trade 
Sewage treatment plan 
Small wind energy systems on lots less than five acres, subject to section 98-1001 
Stable, commercial boarding or rental, subject to section 98-995 
Swimming pool, commercial 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
Veterinary hospital (inside pens), subject to section 98-998 
Veterinary hospital (inside pens) 
Veterinary hospital (outside pens), subject to section 98-999 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.08(c); Ord. No. 11-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 08-01, § 4, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 02-07, § 3, 1-18-2007; Ord. No. 80-07, § 3, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 05-10, § 3, 1-21-2010; Ord. No. 03-11, § 2, 1-21-2011; Ord. No. 33-11, § 3, 7-18-2011)  
Sec. 98-274. - Maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the A agricultural district shall be 25 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(b)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area requirement in the A agricultural district. 
(c)  Maximum height. The maximum height of the buildings and the structures in the A agricultural district shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.08(k)—(m); Ord. No. 11-00, § 2, 2-17-2000)  
Sec. 98-275. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the A agricultural district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-976 
Carnival or circus, temporary, subject to section 98-976 
Field office, temporary 
Sales, temporary or seasonal, subject to section 98-992 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.08(a); Ord. No. 11-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 76-03, § 3, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-276. - Minimum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit for residence uses in the A agricultural district shall be two acres or 87,120 square feet, subject to section 98-1023. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the A agricultural district shall be 200 feet, subject to section 98-1024. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the A agricultural district shall be 1,800 square feet, subject to section 98-1025. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the A agricultural district shall be 40 feet, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard in the A agricultural district shall be 25 feet for residential uses, and 25 feet for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the A agricultural district shall be 20 feet, subject to section 98-1028. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.08(e)—(j); Ord. No. 11-00, § 2, 2-17-2000)  
Sec. 98-277. - Conservation development option and standards. 
(a)  Purpose and definition. The provisions of this section implement the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan concerning residential densities in areas zoned A agricultural district. The following standards, and all conditions necessary to ensure compliance therewith, shall apply to any conservation developments in any areas zoned A agricultural district, and to all uses in that district, when approved pursuant to the conservation development procedures set forth in this section. The term "conservation development" means a residential development project in which dwelling units are clustered on smaller lots than otherwise would be allowed within tracts of land zoned A agricultural district, for the purpose of preserving, open or natural lands as an integral component of the development. The net density of development shall remain one unit per two acres. Conserved lands shall be placed in a conservation easement. A "conservation easement" is defined as a voluntary and permanent deed restriction which limits the development and/or subdivision of property for the purposes of protecting conservation values in the land. The easement is a recorded restriction, applies to and binds all subsequent owners, and may be held by either a nonprofit entity or organization that manages open space, such as a land trust or other qualified entity, pursuant to section 170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, or a governmental entity. 
(b)  Project density. The maximum allowable residential density for a conservation development project, expressed as the number of residential dwelling units permitted per acre of land, is one dwelling unit (du) per acre exclusive of all rights-of-way or easements for streets and alleys; land dedicated for public use; or open space, park land and buffer areas, unless otherwise stated in the regulations of this section. 
(c)  Minimum land area per dwelling unit. Minimum land area per dwelling unit of one acre shall be exclusive of all rights-of-way or easements for streets and alleys; land dedicated for public use; or open space, park land and buffer areas, unless otherwise stated in the regulations of this section. 
(d)  Open space standards. This section describes standards for dedication of land for and improvement of public and private open space for conservation development projects: 
(1)  Preservation of natural features. 
a.  All significant natural features, as defined in the open lands plan and comprehensive plan, shall be preserved and, where necessary, protected by setbacks from development. 
b.  Development shall be designed and sited to preserve and protect the 100-year floodplain, consistent with applicable provisions of this chapter. 
c.  Significant stands of native trees and any other areas of substantial vegetation shall be preserved and protected from alteration or destruction, unless a mitigation plan is approved in conjunction with the concept or development plan for the project, which proposes replacement of the trees or vegetation to be removed with equivalent vegetation or vegetation which is better suited to existing natural conditions. The establishment of new vegetative communities is encouraged. 
d.  Preservation of such areas shall be counted toward fulfillment of open space requirements subject to the following limitations: 
1.  Floodplain areas. Adjacent floodplain land may be included as project open space in conservation developments. 
2.  Other areas. Significant stands of vegetation must be incorporated in areas to be dedicated to common open space, so as to prevent fragmentation, in order to be counted toward project open space. 
(2)  Minimum project open space. Wherever an applicant requesting approval for a conservation development project elects to provide open space in order to satisfy these conservation development standards, a minimum of 50 percent of the gross land area must be preserved as open space for the project. 
(3)  Open space dedication. In meeting requirements for open space, the developer must dedicate land or convey open space to be held in a conservation easement by a qualified nonprofit entity or organization that manages open space, such as a land trust, or other qualified entity, pursuant to section 170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and as may be approved and accepted by the town, or a governmental entity. 
(4)  Open space allocation in phased projects. In a phased conservation development project, all open space shall be conserved in a conservation easement in conjunction with the development of the first phase of the project. 
(5)  Open space design and improvements. The design and improvements of open space shall be in accordance with the following standards. These standards may be supplemented by administrative guidelines. 
a.  Open space areas in a conservation development shall be linked to existing and planned public open space or conserved areas to provide an overall open space system wherever possible. 
b.  Where feasible, and where compatible with and depending upon the values and uses of the conserved land, open space areas shall be arranged so as to maximize access and utilization by residents of the conservation development project. 
(e)  Project design. 
(1)  It is the intent of the regulations of this section to encourage outstanding project design for conservation development projects in order to implement the policies contained in the town's comprehensive plan. The town recognizes that project design is an important and variable element in implementing comprehensive plan policies relating to conservation developments and overall community objectives. It is the town's intent to promulgate administrative guidelines to illustrate preferred design methods. It is acknowledged that other design alternatives may be superior for a particular project. The following standards will be used to evaluate project design: 
a.  The arrangement of all uses and improvements should reflect the natural capabilities and limitations of the site as well as the characteristics and limitations of adjacent property. 
b.  Development must be compatible with the immediate environment of the site and neighborhood relative to existing adjacent residential densities unless otherwise buffered in an acceptable manner; scale, bulk and building height; historical character; and disposition and orientation of buildings on the lot. 
c.  Buildings, roadways, open space and landscaping must be designed and arranged to produce an efficient, functionally organized and cohesive development. 
d.  Buildings, roadways, open space and landscaping must be in favorable relationship to the existing natural topography, water bodies and watercourses, exposure to sunlight and wind, and view corridors and scenic vistas. 
e.  Buildings, roadways, open space and landscaping must be designed and arranged to maximize the opportunity for privacy by the residents of the project and surrounding areas. 
f.  Building sites must be located to minimize their impact on view corridors and scenic vistas. 
(2)  For any conservation development project submitted to the town for approval, a development agreement shall be entered into between the town and the developer of the conservation development project. The development agreement shall set forth specific development standards and other applicable conditions for the conservation development project; however, no development standard or other applicable condition shall be less restrictive than those contained in this section or chapter. Such development agreement shall be subject to town council approval and may be filed in the deed records of the county. 
(f)  Alternative proposals and variation from requirements. The performance standards for conservation development projects contained in this section are considered to be the minimum standards necessary for approval. It is recognized, however, that project size, location and design may necessitate a different arrangement or distribution of open space or buffers than are envisioned in the regulations of this section, and that different amenities than those specified in this section may become valuable options. Consequently, an applicant for a conservation development project may submit an alternative proposal with corresponding variations in the standards applicable to such a development, which alternative shall be evaluated and action taken thereon in accordance with the procedures contained in this chapter; provided, however, that the following limitations apply: 
(1)  No variations will be granted from the allowed residential densities for conservation development projects. 
(2)  The alternative proposal and variations requested shall achieve the same basic objectives as the particular standards which are to be varied. 
(3)  Where the proposal seeks to vary project size limitations, the alternative design shall be evaluated in accordance with standards applicable to larger projects. 
(g)  Conservation development incentives. Conservation development will be considered for conservation incentives commensurate with the quality and character of the open or natural lands to be placed within a conservation easement or otherwise conserved and the extent to which the conserved land contributes to the preservation of the Cross Timbers Conservation Development District's country character, including its open, natural, scenic and ecological values. Incentives will be considered on a project-by-project basis and will be approved by the town council only after community input and public hearing. Such incentives may include, but are not limited to: expedited development review, permit fee waivers, reduced street infrastructure requirements, as reflected in the town's thoroughfare plan, up to and including 50 percent reduction in park land dedication requirements, and reduction of monetary assessments relative to agricultural rollback taxes. The purpose of this criterion is to protect the open lands, natural landscapes and ecological resources that create and define the town's unique community character and which are essential to the accomplishment of community character, quality of life and economic development objectives. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.08(n); Ord. No. 11-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 104-07, § 4, 12-17-2007)  
Sec. 98-278. - Rural development option and standards. 
(1)  Purpose and definition. The purpose of this section is to provide for single-family detached development on lots of five acres or greater, which reflects the country atmosphere and natural environment of Flower Mound, as permitted under the existing agricultural zoning. This may include specialized types of development, such as equestrian-oriented developments. To encourage "rural development," incentives may be considered based on the proposed development and the preservation of open space and natural lands within the development. Subdivisions designated for "rural development" and which receive incentives, shall not be subdivided further without approval by the town. The following standards, and all conditions necessary to ensure compliance therewith, shall apply to any rural developments of one (1) five acre lot or more, in any area zoned A, agricultural district, and to all uses in that district, when approved pursuant to the rural development procedures set forth herein. 
(2)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit for a rural development project shall be five acres exclusive of all rights-of-way or easements for streets and alleys; land dedicated for public use; or park land and buffer areas, unless otherwise stated in these regulations. 
(3)  Fencing. Perimeter fencing shall be in compliance with the town's urban design plan component of the master plan relative to scenic roads, country roads, rural landscape intersections, and scenic corridors and vistas. Wood stockade and masonry perimeter fencing shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Preservation of natural features. 
(a)  All significant natural features, as defined in the open space plan and master plan, shall be preserved within the "rural development," where necessary. 
(b)  Development shall be designed and sited to preserve and protect the 100-year floodplain, consistent with applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  All environmentally sensitive areas as identified by an environmental survey, which areas include upland habitat, riparian habitat, stream buffers, waters of the state, prairie habitat, and developed and undeveloped floodplain, shall be protected by inclusion in an environmental protection plan as required by the land development code. 
(5)  Alternative proposals and variation from requirements. The performance standards for rural development projects contained in this section are considered to be the minimum standards necessary for approval. It is recognized, however, that project size, location and design may necessitate a different arrangement and that different amenities than those specified herein may become valuable options. Consequently, an applicant for a rural development project may submit an alternative proposal with corresponding variations in the standards applicable to such a development, which alternative shall be evaluated and action taken thereon in accordance with the procedures contained in this chapter; provided, however, that the following limitations apply: 
(a)  No variations will be granted from the allowed minimum lot size for rural development projects. 
(b)  The alternative proposal and variations requested shall achieve the same basic objectives as the particular standards. 
(c)  Where the proposal seeks to vary project size dimensional standards, the alternative design shall be evaluated in accordance with standards applicable to larger projects. 
(6)  Rural development incentives. Rural development will be considered for incentives commensurate with the quality and character of the proposed development as it relates to the preservation of open or natural lands, including its open, natural, scenic and ecological values. Incentives will be considered on a project-by-project basis and will be approved by the town council only after community input and public hearing, except that expedited development review shall be approved administratively. Such incentives may include but are not limited to: expedited development review, permit fee waivers, reduced street infrastructure requirements, as reflected in the town's thoroughfare plan, up to and including 50 percent reduction in park land dedication requirements, and reduction of monetary assessments relative to agricultural rollback taxes. The purpose of this criterion is to preserve the open lands, natural landscapes and ecological resources that create and define Flower Mound's unique community character and which are essential to the accomplishment of community character, quality of life and economic development objectives. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, § 2, 7-15-2002)  
Secs. 98-279—98-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SF-E, SINGLE-FAMILY ESTATE DISTRICT AND CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 98-301. - Purpose and intent. 
The SF-E, single-family estate district is designed primarily for single-family detached development on lots of one acre or larger. It is intended for application in areas designated "estate density" on the land use map of the master plan, as amended, and/or any areas zoned SF-E, single-family estate district. In addition to the use and area regulations of this section, development in the SF-E, single-family estate district shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 39-02, § 2(3.09(a)), 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-302. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-E, single-family estate district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter. 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Church or rectory 
Community center, public 
Convent or monastery 
Country club, private, subject to section 98-978 
Crop agriculture 
Day care home 
Dwelling, single-family detached 
Fire station 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Home occupation, subject to section 98-984 
Keeping of livestock or poultry, subject to section 98-995 
Local utility line 
Model home 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Swimming pool, public 
Telephone equipment station 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Ord. No. 39-02, § 2(3.09(b)), 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-303. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-E, single-family estate district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits. 
Accessory dwelling, subject to section 98-983 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
College or university 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to section 98-977 
Day care center 
Day camp for children 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Hospital 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Nursing or congregate care facility 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
(Ord. No. 39-02, § 2(3.09(c)), 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-304. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-E, Single-family Estate District only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 6.14, Temporary use permits. 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Ord. No. 39-02, § 2(3.09(d)), 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 76-04, § 4, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-305. - Minimum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the SF-E, single-family estate district shall be one acre or 43,560 square feet, subject to section 98-1023. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the SF-E, single-family estate district shall be 150 feet, subject to section 98-1024. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the SF-E, single-family estate district shall be 2,400 square feet, subject to section 98-1025. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the SF-E, single-family estate district shall be 40 feet, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard in the SF-E, single-family estate district shall be twenty feet (20') for all uses, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the SF-E, single-family estate district shall be 20 feet, subject to section 98-1027. 
(Ord. No. 39-02, § 2(3.09(e)—(j)), 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-306. - Maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the SF-E, single-family estate district shall be 25 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-129. 
(b)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area requirement in the SF-E, single-family estate district. 
(c)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the SF-E, single-family estate district shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Ord. No. 39-02, § 2(3.09(k)—(m)), 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 98-307. - Conservation development option and standards. 
(1)  Purpose and definition. The provisions of this section implement the goals and policies of the master plan concerning residential densities in areas zoned SF-E, single-family estate district. The following standards, and all conditions necessary to ensure compliance therewith, shall apply to any conservation developments in any areas zoned SF-E, single-family estate district, and to all uses in that district, when approved pursuant to the conservation development procedures set forth herein. "conservation development" means a residential development project in which dwelling units are clustered on smaller lots than otherwise would be allowed within tracts of land zoned SF-E, single-family estate district, for the purpose of preserving open or natural lands as an integral component of the development. Conserved lands shall be placed in a conservation easement. A "conservation easement" is defined as a voluntary and permanent deed restriction that limits the development and/or subdivision of property for the purposes of protecting conservation values in the land. The easement is a recorded restriction, applies to and binds all subsequent owners, and may be held by either (1) a nonprofit entity or organization that manages open space, such as a land trust or other qualified entity, pursuant to section 170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, or (2) a governmental entity. 
(2)  [Minimum requirements.] 
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling 	Minimum Project Open Space 
15,000 square feet 	50 percent of the gross land area 
15,000 square feet with an average 20,000 square feet 	45 percent of the lot area of gross land area 
20,000 square feet 	40 percent of the gross land area 
 
The minimum lot area shall be exclusive of all rights-of-way or easements for streets and alleys; land dedicated for public use; or open space, floodplain, park land and buffer areas, unless otherwise stated in these regulations. 
(3)  Open space standards. This subsection describes standards for dedication of land for and improvement of public and private open space for conservation development projects: 
(a)  Preservation of natural features. 
1.  All significant natural features, as defined in the open space plan and master plan, shall be preserved and, where necessary, protected by setbacks from development. 
2.  Development shall be designed and sited to preserve and protect the 100-year floodplain, consistent with applicable provisions of this chapter. 
3.  Significant stands of native trees and any other areas of substantial vegetation shall be preserved and protected from alteration or destruction, unless a mitigation plan is approved in conjunction with the concept or development plan for the project, which proposes replacement of the trees or vegetation to be removed with equivalent vegetation or vegetation which is better suited to existing natural conditions. The establishment of new vegetative communities is encouraged. 
4.  Preservation of such areas shall be counted toward fulfillment of open space requirements subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Floodplain areas. Adjacent floodplain land may be included as project open space in conservation of developments; however, no credits for open space shall be given for land lying in the floodway. 
b.  Other areas. Significant stands of vegetation must be incorporated in areas to be dedicated to common open space, so as to prevent fragmentation, in order to be counted toward project open space. 
(b)  Open space dedication. In meeting requirements for open space, the developer must dedicate land or convey open space to be held in a conservation easement by (1) a qualified nonprofit entity or organization that manages open space, such as a land trust, or other qualified entity, pursuant to section 170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and as may be approved and accepted by the town or (2) a governmental entity. 
(c)  Open space allocation in phased projects. In a phased conservation development project, all open space shall be conserved in a conservation easement in conjunction with the development of the first phase of the project. 
(d)  Open space design and improvements. The design and improvements of open space shall be in accordance with the following standards. These standards may be supplemented by administrative guidelines. 
1.  Open space areas in a conservation development shall be linked to existing and planned open space or conserved areas to provide an overall open space system wherever possible. 
2.  Where feasible, and where compatible with and depending upon the values and uses of the conserved land, open space areas shall be arranged so as to maximize areas and utilization by residents of the conservation development project. 
(4)  Project design. 
(a)  It is the intent of these regulations to encourage outstanding project design for conservation development projects in order to implement the policies contained in the town's master plan. The town recognizes that project design is an important and variable element in implementing master plan policies relating to conservation developments and overall community objectives. It is the town's intent to promulgate administrative guidelines to illustrate preferred design methods. It is acknowledged that other design alternatives may be superior for a particular project. The following standards will be used to evaluate project design: 
1.  The arrangement of all uses and improvements should reflect the natural capabilities and limitations of the site as well as the characteristics and limitations of adjacent property. 
2.  Development must be compatible with the immediate environment of the site and neighborhood relative to existing adjacent residential densities unless otherwise buffered in an acceptable manner; scale, bulk and building height; historical character; and disposition and orientation of buildings on the lot. 
3.  Buildings, roadways, open space, and landscaping must be designed and arranged to produce an efficient, functionally organized and cohesive development. 
4.  Buildings, roadways, open space and landscaping must be in favorable relationship to the existing natural topography, water bodies and water courses, exposure to sunlight and wind, and view corridors and scenic vistas. 
5.  Buildings, roadways, open space and landscaping must be designed and arranged to maximize the opportunity for privacy by the residents of the project and surrounding areas. 
6.  Building sites must be located to minimize their impact on view corridors and scenic vistas. 
(b)  For any conservation development project submitted to the town for approval, a development agreement shall be entered into between the town and the developer of the conservation development project. The development agreement shall set forth specific development standards and other applicable conditions for the conservation development project; however, no development standard or other applicable condition shall be less restrictive than those contained in this subsection of chapter. Said development agreement shall be subject to town council approval and may be filed in the deed records of Denton County, Texas. 
(5)  Alternative proposals and variation from requirements. The performance standards for conservation development projects contained in this subsection are considered to be the minimum standards necessary for approval. It is recognized, however, that project size, location and design may necessitate a different arrangement or distribution of open space or buffers than are envisioned in these regulations, and that different amenities than those specified herein may become valuable options. Consequently, an applicant for a conservation development project may submit an alternative proposal with corresponding variations in the standards applicable to such a development, which alternative shall be evaluated and action taken thereon in accordance with the procedures contained in this chapter; provided, however, that the following limitations apply: 
(a)  The alternative proposal and variations requested shall achieve the same basic objectives as the particular standards, which are to be varied. 
(b)  Where the proposal seeks to vary project size limitations, the alternative design shall be evaluated in accordance with standards applicable to larger projects. 
(6)  Conservation development incentives. Conservation development will be considered for conservation incentives commensurate with the quality and character of the open or natural lands to be placed within a conservation easement or otherwise conserved and the extent to which the conserved land contributes to the preservation of open or natural lands, significant stands of native trees and any other areas of substantial vegetation, and scenic and ecological values. Incentives will be considered on a project-by-project basis and will be approved by the town council only after community input and public hearing, except that expedited development review shall be approved administratively. Such incentives may include but are not limited to: expedited development review, permit fee waivers, reduced street infrastructure requirements, as reflected in the town's thoroughfare plan, reduction in park land dedication requirements of not more than the percentage of land set aside for a conservation easement, and reduction of monetary assessments relative to agricultural rollback taxes. The purpose of this criterion is to protect the open lands, natural landscapes and ecological resources that create and define Flower Mound's unique community character and which are essential to the accomplishments of community character, quality of life and economic development objectives. 
(7)  No increase in density. No residential application or project shall be approved that increases residential density beyond the density allowed in the master plan. 
(Ord. No. 39-02, § 2(3.09(n)(1)—(7)), 7-15-2002)  
Secs. 98-308—98-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SF-30 SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT-30 
 
Sec. 98-331. - Purpose and intent. 
The SF-30 single-family district-30 is designed primarily for single-family detached development on lots of about one-third acre or larger. It is intended for application in areas designated "low density" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the SF-30 single-family district-30 shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.10(a))  
Sec. 98-332. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-30 single-family district-30, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter. 
Accessory use, general subject to section 98-972 
Church or rectory 
Community center, public 
Day care home 
Dwelling, single-family detached 
Fire station 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Home occupation, subject to section 98-984 
Local utility line 
Model home 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Swimming pool, public 
Telephone equipment station 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.10(b); Ord. No. 08-01, § 6, 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 98-333. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-30 single-family district-30 only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
College or university 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Convent or monastery 
Country club, private, subject to 98-978 
Day care center 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Hospital 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.10(c))  
Sec. 98-334. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-30 single-family district-30 only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.10(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 5, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-335. - Minimum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the SF-30 single-family district-30 shall be 30,000 square feet, subject to section 98-1023. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the SF-30 single-family district-30 shall be 100 feet, subject to section 98-1024. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the SF-30 single-family district-30 shall be 2,100 square feet, subject to section 98-1025. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the SF-30 single-family district-30 shall be 25 feet, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard in the SF-30 single-family district-30 shall be 15 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the SF-30 single-family district-30 shall be 30 feet, subject to section 98-1028. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.10(e)—(j))  
Sec. 98-336. - Maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the SF-30 single-family district-30 shall be 35 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(b)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area requirement in the SF-30 single-family district-30. 
(c)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the SF-30 single-family district-30 shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.10(k)—(m))  
Secs. 98-337—98-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - SF-15 SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT-15 
 
Sec. 98-361. - Purpose and intent. 
The SF-15 single-family district-15 is designed primarily for single-family detached development on lots of about one-third acre or larger. It is intended for application in areas designated "low density" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the SF-15 single-family district-15 shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.11(a))  
Sec. 98-362. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-15 single-family district-15, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Church or rectory 
Community center, public 
Day care home 
Dwelling, single-family detached 
Fire station 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Home occupation, subject to section 98-984 
Local utility line 
Model home 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Swimming pool, public 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Telephone equipment station 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.11(b); Ord. No. 08-01, §7, 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 98-363. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-15 single-family district-15 only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
College or university 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Convent or monastery 
Country club, private, subject to 98-978 
Day care center 
Electrical line substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Hospital 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.11(c))  
Sec. 98-364. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-15 single-family district-15 only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.11(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 6, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-365. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the SF-15 single-family district-15 shall be 15,000 square feet, subject to section 98-1023. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the SF-15 single-family district-15 shall be 80 feet, subject to section 98-1024. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the SF-15 single-family district-15 shall be 1,800 square feet, subject to section 98-1025. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the SF-15 single-family district-15 shall be 25 feet, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard in the SF-15 single-family district-15 shall be 12 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the SF-15 single-family district-15 shall be 30 feet, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the SF-15 single-family district-15 shall be 35 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area requirement in the SF-15 single-family district-15. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the SF-15 single-family district-15 shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.11(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-366—98-390. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - SF-10 SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT-10 
 
Sec. 98-391. - Purpose and intent. 
The SF-10 single-family district-10 is designed primarily for single-family detached development on lots of one-quarter acre or larger. It is intended for application in areas designated "medium density" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the SF-10 single-family district-10 shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.12(a))  
Sec. 98-392. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-10 single-family district-10, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Church or rectory 
Community center, public 
Day care home 
Dwelling, single-family detached 
Fire station 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Home occupation, subject to section 98-984 
Local utility line 
Model home 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Swimming pool, public 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Telephone equipment station 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.12(b); Ord. No. 08-01, § 8, 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 98-393. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-10 single-family district-10 only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
College or university 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Convent or monastery 
Country club, private, subject to 98-978 
Day care center 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Hospital 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.12(c))  
Sec. 98-394. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-10 single-family district-10 only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.12(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 7, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-395. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the SF-10 single-family district-10 shall be 10,000 square feet, subject to section 98-1023. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the SF-10 single-family district-10 shall be 70 feet, subject to section 98-1024. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the SF-10 single-family district-10 shall be 1,800 square feet, subject to section 98-1025. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the SF-10 single-family district-10 shall be 25 feet, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard in the SF-10 single-family district-10 shall be ten feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the SF-10 single-family district-10 shall be 25 feet, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the SF-10 single-family district-10 shall be 40 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area requirement in the SF-10 single-family district-10. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the SF-10 single-family district-10 shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.12(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-396—98-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - SF-A SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 98-421. - Purpose and intent. 
The SF-A single-family attached district is designed primarily for townhouse development at densities of five dwelling units per net acre or greater. It is intended for application in areas designated "high density" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the SF-A single-family attached district shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.13(a))  
Sec. 98-422. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-A single-family attached district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Church or rectory 
Community center, public 
Convent or monastery 
Day care home 
Dwelling, single-family attached 
Fire station 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Local utility line 
Model home 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Swimming pool, public 
Telephone equipment station 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.13(b); Ord. No. 08-01, § 9, 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 98-423. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-A single-family attached district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
College or university 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Country club, private, subject to section 98-978 
Day care center 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Hospital 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.13(c))  
Sec. 98-424. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-A single-family attached district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.13(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 8, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-425. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the SF-A single-family attached district shall be 5,000 square feet, subject to section 98-1023. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the SF-A single-family attached district shall be 20 feet, subject to section 98-1024. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the SF-A single-family attached district shall be 1,100 square feet, subject to section 98-1025. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the SF-A single-family attached district shall be 25 feet, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard in the SF-A single-family attached district shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1027: 
(1)  No side yard shall be required for single-family attached dwellings, provided that no building complex shall exceed 300 feet in length and provided that a minimum side yard of five feet shall be provided at the end of building complexes to maintain a minimum ten-foot separation between buildings. 
(2)  The minimum side yard for all other uses shall be eight feet. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the SF-A single-family attached district shall be ten feet for residential uses and 20 feet for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the SF-A single-family attached district shall be 40 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area requirement in the SF-A single-family attached district. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the SF-A single-family attached district shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.13(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-426—98-430. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8A. - SF-5 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 98-431. - Purpose and intent. 
The SF-5 single family residential district is designed primarily for single family detached development on lots that are a minimum of 5,000 square feet in area. It is intended for areas designated as "high density" on the Denton Creek District land use map of the comprehensive master plan and within specific plan area #6 (SPA 6) and specific plan area #11 (SPA 11). In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the SF-5 single family residential district shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-08, § 2, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 21-11, § 2, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 23-12, § 2, 7-17-12)  
Sec. 98-432. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-5 single family residential district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Church or rectory 
Community center, public 
Day care home 
Dwelling, single-family detached 
Fire station 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Home occupation, subject to section 98-984 
Local utility line 
Model home 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Swimming pool, public 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Telephone equipment station 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Ord. No. 17-08, § 2, 2-18-2008)  
Sec. 98-433. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-5 single family residential district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
College or university 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Convent or monastery 
Country club, private, subject to 98-978 
Day care center 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Hospital 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
(Ord. No. 17-08, § 2, 2-18-2008)  
Sec. 98-434. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the SF-5 single family residential district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Ord. No. 17-08, § 2, 2-18-2008)  
Sec. 98-435. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the SF-5 single family residential district shall be 5,000 square feet, subject to section 98-1023. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the SF-5 single family residential district shall be 50 feet, subject to section 98-1024. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the SF-5 single family residential district shall be 1,500 square feet, subject to section 98-1025. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the SF-5 single family residential district shall be 20 feet, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard for residential uses in the SF-5 single family residential district shall be five feet, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the SF-5 single family residential district shall be 20 feet, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the SF-5 single family residential district shall be 55 percent, subject to section 98-1029, except that the 50 percent limitation set forth in section 98-1029(b) does not apply to single family detached dwellings. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area requirement in the SF-5 single family residential district. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the SF-5 single family residential district shall be three stories or 35 feet, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Ord. No. 17-08, § 2, 2-18-2008)  
Secs. 98-436—98-450. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - 2F DUPLEX DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 98-451. - Purpose and intent. 
The 2F duplex district is designed primarily for duplex development at densities of five dwelling units per net acre or greater. It is intended for application in areas designated "high density" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the 2F duplex district shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.14(a))  
Sec. 98-452. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the 2F duplex district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Church or rectory 
Community center, public 
Convent or monastery 
Day care home 
Dwelling, duplex 
Fire station 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Local utility line 
Model home 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Swimming pool, public 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Telephone equipment station 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.14(b); Ord. No. 08-01, § 10, 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 98-453. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the 2F duplex district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
College or university 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Country club, private, subject to 98-978 
Day care center 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Hospital 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.14(c))  
Sec. 98-454. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the 2F duplex district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.14(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 9, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-455. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the 2F duplex district shall be 5,000 square feet per duplex dwelling unit, subject to section 98-1023. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the 2F duplex district shall be 60 feet, subject to section 98-1024. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the 2F duplex district shall be 1,100 square feet, subject to section 98-1025. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the 2F duplex district shall be 25 feet, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard in the 2F duplex district shall be eight feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the 2F duplex district shall be ten feet for residential uses and 20 feet for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the 2F duplex district shall be 40 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area requirement in the 2F duplex district. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the 2F duplex district shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.14(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-456—98-480. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - MF MULTIFAMILY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 98-481. - Purpose and intent. 
The MF multifamily district is designed primarily to accommodate multifamily housing types at densities of five dwelling units per net acre or greater. It is intended for application in areas designated "high density" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the MF multifamily district shall be in compliance with all other, applicable provisions of this chapter. Rezoning to this classification will not generally be considered unless submitted as a planned development in accordance with section 98-811, et seq. of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.15(a); Ord. No. 99-07, § 2, 12-3-2007)  
Sec. 98-482. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the MF multifamily district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Boardinghouse or roominghouse 
Church or rectory 
Community center, public 
Convent or monastery 
Day care home 
Dwelling, multifamily 
Fire station 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Local utility line 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Swimming pool, public 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Telephone equipment station 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.15(b); Ord. No. 08-01, § 11, 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 98-483. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the MF multifamily district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
College or university 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Country club, private, subject to 98-978 
Day care center 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Hospital 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Nursing or congregate care facility 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.15(c))  
Sec. 98-484. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the MF multifamily district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.15(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 10, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-485. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the MF multifamily district shall be 2,800 square feet, subject to section 98-1023. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the MF multifamily district shall be 60 feet, subject to section 98-1024. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the MF multifamily district shall be 700 square feet, subject to section 98-1025. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the MF multifamily district shall be 25 feet, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard for residential uses in the MF multifamily district shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1027: 
(1)  Ten feet for multifamily dwellings; and 
(2)  Eight feet for all other uses. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the MF multifamily district for residential uses shall comply with the residential compatibility standards set forth on section 82-301 of this Code and shall be 20 feet for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the MF multifamily district shall be 40 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area requirement in the MF multifamily district. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the MF multifamily district shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.15(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-486—98-510. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - MH MOBILE HOME DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 98-511. - Purpose and intent. 
The MH mobile home district is designed primarily to accommodate mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions. It is intended for application in areas designated "high density" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the MH mobile home district shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.16(a))  
Sec. 98-512. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the MH mobile home district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Church or rectory 
Community center, public 
Convent or monastery 
Day care home 
Dwelling mobile home, subject to section 98-987 
Fire station 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Local utility line 
Mobile home park, subject to section 98-987 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Swimming pool, public 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Telephone equipment station 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.16(b); Ord. No. 08-01, § 12, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 49-01, § 2, 7-16-2001)  
Sec. 98-513. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the MH mobile home district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
College or university 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Country club, private, subject to section 98-978 
Day care center 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Hospital 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.16(c); Ord. No. 49-01, § 2, 7-16-2001)  
Sec. 98-514. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the MH mobile home district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.16(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 11, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-515. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the MH mobile home district shall be 7,500 square feet, subject to section 98-1023. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the MH mobile home district shall be 60 feet, subject to section 98-1024. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. There shall be no minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirement in the MH mobile home district. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the MH mobile home district shall be 25 feet, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard in the MH mobile home district shall be ten feet for mobile home dwellings, with no minimum requirement for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the MH mobile home district shall be ten feet for residential uses and 20 feet for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the MH mobile home district shall be 30 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area requirement in the MH mobile home district. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the MH mobile home district shall be two stories for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.16(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-516—98-540. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - O OFFICE DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 98-541. - Purpose and intent. 
The O office district is designed primarily to accommodate office and service uses ranging from garden office developments for small professional practices to larger, multistory facilities for large tenants. It is intended for application in areas designated "office" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the O office district shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.17(a))  
Sec. 98-542. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the O office district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory retail/service uses 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Art supply store 
Bank or savings and loan 
Book or stationary store or newsstand 
Church or rectory 
Cleaning/laundry pickup station only 
College or university 
Community center, public 
Custom personal service 
Fire station 
Florist 
Golf course, public 
Local utility line 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Office, medical or dental 
Office, general business and professional 
Optical sales 
Park or playground, public 
Parking lot, commercial 
Personal improvement services 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Restaurant, general 
School, business 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Swimming pool, commercial 
Swimming pool, public 
Telephone equipment station 
Travel bureau or consultant 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.17(b); Ord. No. 75-99, § 2(3.05), 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 02-07, § 4, 1-18-2007; Ord. No. 06-12, § 25, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 98-543. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the O office district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Amusement and recreation (indoors), subject to section 98-973 
Bus station or terminal 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
Cleaning shop or laundry pickup station 
Cleaning/laundry shop with pickup station 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Dancing, drama, or music school or studio 
Day care center 
Drugstore or pharmacy 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Extended stay hotel 
Fraternal club or lodge 
Health club or athletic club 
Helistop 
Hospital 
Hotel or motel 
Institution, drug or psychiatric treatment 
Laboratory, medical and dental 
Laboratory, scientific and research 
Lithographic or print shop 
Mortuary or funeral home 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Nursing or congregate care facility 
Parking structure, commercial 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Recreation center 
Studio, television or radio 
Theater 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.17(c); Ord. No. 75-99, § 2(3.05), 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 02-07, § 5, 1-18-2007; Ord. No. 80-07, § 4, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 06-12, § 26, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 61-19 , § 4, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 98-544. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the O office district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Building material yard and construction office 
Field office, temporary 
Sales, temporary or seasonal, subject to section 98-992 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.17(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 12, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-545. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. There shall be no minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirement in the O office district. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. There shall be no minimum lot width requirement in the O office district. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. There shall be no minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirement in the O office district. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. There shall be no minimum front yard requirement in the O office district, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. There shall be no minimum side yard requirement in the O office district, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the O office district shall be 15 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the O office district shall be 50 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio for all uses in the O office district shall be 1:1. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the O office district shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.17(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-546—98-570. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - R-1 RETAIL DISTRICT-1[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 98-571. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-1 retail district-1 is designed primarily to accommodate neighborhood oriented business; uses. It is intended for application in areas designated "retail" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the R-1 retail district-1 shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.18(a))  
Sec. 98-572. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 retail district-1, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Accessory retail/service uses 
Antique shop 
Art supply store 
Art gallery or handicraft sales 
Bakery or confectionery shop, retail 
Bank or savings and loan 
Book or stationary store or newsstand 
Church or rectory 
Cleaning shop or laundry pickup station 
Cleaning/laundry shop with pickup station 
Cleaning/laundry pickup station only 
Community center, public 
Custom personal service 
Dancing, drama, or music school or studio 
Dancing, drama, or music school or studio 
Drugstore or pharmacy 
Fire station 
Florist 
Laboratory, medical and dental 
Laundry, self-service 
Local utility line 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Office, general business and professional 
Office, medical or dental 
Optical sales 
Park or playground, public 
Parking lot, commercial 
Personal improvement services 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Restaurant, general 
Retail, single tenant (less than 25,000 square feet) 
Sewage pump station 
Swimming pool, public 
Telephone equipment station 
Travel bureau or consultant 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.18(b); Ord. No. 14-00, § 3, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 75-99, § 2(3.05), 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 02-07, § 6, 1-18-2007)  
Sec. 98-573. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 retail district-1 only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Assembly hall 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
Cleaning/laundry shop with on-site plant 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Day care center 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Health club or athletic club 
Laboratory, medical or dental 
Laboratory, scientific and research 
Mortuary or funeral home 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Parking structure, commercial 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Recreation center 
Retail general (indoors) 
Retail, single tenant (25,000 square feet but less than 50,000 square feet 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.18(c); Ord. No. 14-00, § 3, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 49-01, § 3, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 48-03, § 4, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 75-99, § 2(3.05), 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 02-07, § 7, 1-18-2007; Ord. No. 80-07, § 5, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 06-12, § 27, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 98-574. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 retail district-1 only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Building material yard and construction office 
Carnival or circus, temporary, subject to 98-976 
Field office, temporary 
Refreshment stand, subject to section 98-991 
Sales, temporary or seasonal, subject to section 98-992 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.18(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 13, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-575. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. There shall be no minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirement in the R-1 retail district-1. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. There shall be no minimum lot width requirement in the R-1 retail district-1. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. There shall be no minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirement in the R-1 retail district-1. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. There shall be no minimum front yard requirement in the R-1 retail district-1, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. There shall be no minimum side yard requirement in the R-1 retail district-1, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the R-1 retail district-1 shall be 15 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the R-1 retail district-1 shall be 50 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area ratio requirement in the R-1 retail district-1. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the R-1 retail district-1 shall be two stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.18(e)—(m); Ord. No. 14-00, § 3, 2-17-2000)  
Secs. 98-576—98-600. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - R-2 RETAIL DISTRICT-2[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 98-601. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-2 retail district-2 is designed primarily to accommodate neighborhood and community oriented business uses. It is intended for application in areas designated "retail" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the R-2 retail district-2 shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.19(a))  
Sec. 98-602. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 retail district-2, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory retail/service uses 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Antique shop 
Art gallery or handicraft sales 
Art supply store 
Auto parts and accessory sales (indoors) 
Bait and sporting goods sales 
Bakery or confectionery shop, retail 
Bank or savings and loan 
Book or stationary store or newsstand 
Church or rectory 
Cleaning/laundry pickup station only 
Cleaning/laundry shop with pickup station 
Cleaning shop or laundry pickup station 
Community center, public 
Convenience store 
Custom personal service 
Dancing, drama, or music school or studio 
Drugstore or pharmacy 
Fire station 
Florist 
Fraternal club or lodge 
Hardware store 
Health club or athletic club 
Laboratory, medical and dental 
Laboratory, scientific and research 
Laundry, self-service 
Local utility line 
Mortuary or funeral home 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Office, general business and professional 
Office, medical or dental 
Optical sales 
Park or playground, public 
Parking lot, commercial 
Personal improvement services 
Pet store, subject to section 98-988 
Plant nursery or garden shop 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Repair services, limited 
Restaurant, fast food 
Restaurant, general 
Retail, general (indoors) 
Retail, single tenant (less than 25,000 square feet) 
Sewage pump station 
Supermarket 
Telephone equipment station 
Theater 
Travel bureau or consultant 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.19(b); Ord. No. 14-00, § 4, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 50-00, § 2(3.19(b)), 7-17-2000; Ord. No. 75-99, § 2(3.05), 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 02-07, § 8, 1-18-2007; Ord. No. 06-12, § 28, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 98-603. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 retail district-2 only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Amusement and recreation (indoors), subject to section 98-973 
Animal control facility 
Assembly hall 
Auto repair garage 
Car wash, full-service 
Car wash, self-service 
Car wash, automatic 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
Cleaning/laundry shop with on-site plant 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Convenience store with gasoline sales 
Day care center 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Hospital 
Kennel, subject to 98-986 
Kennel (in enclosed building only) 
Lithographic or print shop 
Motor vehicle fuel service station 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Parking structure, commercial 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Recreation center 
Retail, single tenant (25,000 square feet but less than 50,000 square feet 
Retail, single tenant (50,000 square feet but less than 75,000 square feet) 
Swimming pool, public 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
Veterinary hospital (inside pens) 
Veterinary hospital (inside pens), subject to section 98-998 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.19(c); Ord. No. 27-99, § 1, 4-5-1999; Ord. No. 14-00, § 4, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 50-00, § 2(3.19(c)), 7-17-2000; Ord. No. 48-03, § 5, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 72-05, § 3, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 75-99, § 2(3.05), 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 02-07, § 9, 1-18-2007; Ord. No. 80-07, § 6, 10-1-2007)  
Sec. 98-604. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 retail district-2 only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Building material yard and construction office 
Carnival or circus, temporary, subject to 98-976 
Field office, temporary 
Refreshment stand, subject to section 98-991 
Sales, temporary or seasonal, subject to section 98-992 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.19(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 14, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-605. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. There shall be no minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirement in the R-2 retail district-2. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. There shall be no minimum lot width requirement in the R-2 retail district-2. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. There shall be no minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirement in the R-2 retail district-2. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. There shall be no minimum front yard requirement in the R-2 retail district-2, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. There shall be no minimum side yard requirement in the R-2 retail district-2, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the R-2 retail district-2 shall be 15 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the R-2 retail district-2 shall be 50 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area ratio requirement in the R-2 retail district-2. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the R-2 retail district-2 shall be two stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.19(e)—(m); Ord. No. 14-00, § 4, 2-17-2000)  
Secs. 98-606—98-630. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - C-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT-1[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 98-631. - Purpose and intent. 
The C-1 commercial district-1 is designed primarily to accommodate a wide variety of office and retail uses, as well as some repair/service and light industrial uses, including highway-oriented businesses. It is intended for application in areas designated "retail" and "commercial/industrial" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the C-1 commercial district-1 shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.20(a))  
Sec. 98-632. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-1 commercial district-1, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory retail/service uses 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Animal control facility 
Antique shop 
Art gallery or handicraft sales 
Art supply store 
Auto leasing or rental 
Auto parts and accessory sales (indoors) 
Bait and sporting goods sales 
Bakery or confectionery shop, retail 
Bank or savings and loan 
Book or stationary store or newsstand 
Cabinet and upholstery shop 
Church or rectory 
Cleaning/laundry shop with pickup station 
Cleaning/laundry shop with on-site plant 
Cleaning/laundry pickup station only 
College or university 
Community center, public 
Convenience store 
Custom personal service 
Dancing, drama, or music school or studio 
Drugstore or pharmacy 
Fire station 
Florist 
Fraternal club or lodge 
Golf course, public 
Hardware store 
Health club or athletic club 
Kennel, subject to section 98-986 
Kennel (in enclosed building only) 
Laboratory, medical and dental 
Laboratory, scientific and research 
Laundry, self-service 
Lithographic or print shop 
Local utility line 
Mortuary or funeral home 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Office, medical or dental 
Office, general business and professional 
Optical sales 
Park or playground, public 
Parking lot, commercial 
Parking lot or structure or commercial 
Parking structure, commercial 
Personal improvement services 
Pet store, subject to section 98-988 
Plant nursery or garden shop 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
Repair services, limited 
Restaurant, fast food 
Restaurant, general 
Retail, general (indoors) 
Retail, single tenant (less than 25,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (25,000 square feet but less than 50,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (50,000 square feet but less than 75,000 square feet) 
School, business 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Supermarket 
Swimming pool, public 
Swimming pool, commercial 
Telephone equipment station 
Theater 
Travel bureau or consultant 
Veterinary hospital (inside pens) 
Veterinary hospital (inside pens), subject to section 98-998 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.20(b); Ord. No. 14-00, § 5, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 49-01, § 4, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 27-99, § 1(3.05), 4-5-1999; Ord. No. 75-99, § 2(3.05), 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 02-07, § 10, 1-18-2007)  
Sec. 98-633. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-1 commercial district-1 only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Amusement and recreation (outdoors) 
Amusement and recreation (indoors), subject to section 98-973 
Assembly hall 
Auto repair garage 
Car wash, self-service 
Car wash, automatic 
Car wash, full-service 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to section 98-977 
Convenience store with gasoline sales 
Day camp for children 
Day care center 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Electrical energy generating plant 
Exhibition area or fairgrounds 
Feed store 
Hospital 
Institution, drug or psychiatric treatment 
Miniwarehouse 
Motor vehicle fuel service station 
Nursing or congregate care facility 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Recycling dropoff center, subject to section 98-990 
Restaurant, drive-in 
Retail, single tenant (75,000 square feet but less than 100,000 square feet) 
School, commercial trade 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Studio, television or radio 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.20(c); Ord. No. 14-00, § 5, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 49-01, § 4, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 48-03, § 6, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 72-05, § 4, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 06-12, § 29, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 98-634. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-1 commercial district-1 only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Building material yard and construction office 
Carnival or circus, temporary, subject to 98-976 
Field office, temporary 
Refreshment stand, subject to section 98-991 
Sales, temporary or seasonal, subject to section 98-992 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.20(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 15, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-635. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. There shall be no minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirement in the C-1 commercial district-1. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. There shall be no minimum lot width requirement in the C-1 commercial district-1. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. There shall be no minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirement in the C-1 commercial district-1. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. There shall be no minimum front yard requirement in the C-1 commercial district-1, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. There shall be no minimum side yard requirement in the C-1 commercial district-1, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the C-1 commercial district-1 shall be 15 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the C-1 commercial district-1 shall be 50 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio in the C-1 commercial district-1 shall be 1:1. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the C-1 commercial district-1 shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.20(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-636—98-660. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT-2[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 98-661. - Purpose and intent. 
The C-2 commercial district-2 is designed primarily to accommodate a wide variety of office, retail, repair/service and light industrial uses, including highway-oriented businesses. It is intended for application in areas designated "commercial/industrial" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the C-2 commercial district-2 shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.21(a))  
Sec. 98-662. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-2 commercial district-2, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory retail/service uses 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Amusement and recreation (indoors), subject to section 98-973 
Amusement and recreation (outdoors) 
Animal control facility 
Antique shop 
Art gallery or handicraft sales 
Art supply store 
Auto parts and accessory sales (indoors) 
Auto repair garage 
Auto leasing or rental 
Bait and sporting goods sales 
Bakery or confectionery, wholesale 
Bakery or confectionery shop, retail 
Bank or savings and loan 
Book or stationary store or newsstand 
Building material sales or storage (indoors) 
Bus station or terminal 
Cabinet and upholstery shop 
Car wash, full-service 
Car wash, automatic 
Car sales, new or used 
Church or rectory 
Cleaning, dyeing or laundry plant 
Cleaning/laundry shop with pickup station 
Cleaning/laundry shop with on-site plant 
Cleaning/laundry pickup station only 
Cleaning shop or laundry pickup station 
College or university 
Community center, public 
Convenience store 
Convent or monastery 
Custom personal service 
Dancehall 
Dancing, drama, or music school or studio 
Drugstore or pharmacy 
Feed store 
Fire station 
Florist 
Food processing 
Fraternal club or lodge 
Golf course, public 
Greenhouse, wholesale 
Hardware store 
Health club or athletic club 
Hotel or motel 
Kennel, subject to section 98-986 
Kennel (in enclosed building only) 
Laboratory, medical and dental 
Laboratory, scientific and research 
Laundry, self-service 
Lithographic or print shop 
Local utility line 
Maintenance service 
Mortuary or funeral home 
Motor vehicle fuel service station 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Office, medical or dental 
Office, general business and professional 
Optical sales 
Park or playground, public 
Parking lot, commercial 
Parking lot or structure, commercial 
Parking structure, commercial 
Personal improvement services 
Pet store, subject to section 98-988 
Plant nursery or garden shop 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
Repair services, limited 
Restaurant, general 
Restaurant, fast food 
Retail, general (indoors) 
Retail, single tenant (less than 25,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (25,000 square feet but less than 50,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (50,000 square feet but less than 75,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (75,000 square feet but less than 100,000 square feet) 
School, business 
School, elementary or secondary 
Secondhand store 
Sewage pump station 
Supermarket 
Swimming pool, commercial 
Swimming pool, public 
Telephone equipment station 
Theater 
Tool rental (domestic equipment) 
Travel bureau or consultant 
Vehicle and equipment sales or rental 
Veterinary hospital (inside pens) 
Veterinary hospital (inside pens), subject to section 98-998 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.21(b); Ord. No. 27-99, § 1, 4-5-1999; Ord. No. 14-00, § 6, 2-17-2001; Ord. No. 49-01, § 5, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 75-99, § 2(3.05), 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 02-07, § 11, 1-18-2007)  
Sec. 98-663. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-2 commercial district-2 only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Animal control facility 
Assembly hall 
Bottling works 
Car wash, self-service 
Caretaker or guard residence, subject to section 98-975 
Caretaker or guard residence (mobile home), subject to section 98-975 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Convenience store with gasoline sales 
Day camp for children 
Day care center 
Electrical energy generating plant 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Exhibition area or fairgrounds 
Extended stay hotel 
Helistop 
Hospital 
Institution, drug or psychiatric treatment 
Miniwarehouse 
Nursing or congregate care facility 
Office-showroom/warehouse 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Recycling dropoff center, subject to section 98-990 
Restaurant drive-in 
Retail, general (outdoors) 
Retail, single tenant (100,000 square feet or more) 
School, commercial trade 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Studio, television or radio 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.21(c); Ord. No. 14-00, § 6, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 49-01, § 5, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 48-03, § 7, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 72-05, § 5, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 80-07, § 8, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 06-12, § 30, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 61-19 , § 4, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 98-664. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-2 commercial district-2 only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Building material yard and construction office 
Carnival or circus, temporary, subject to 98-976 
Field office, temporary 
Refreshment stand, subject to section 98-991 
Sales, temporary or seasonal, subject to section 98-992 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.21(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 16, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-665. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. There shall be no minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirement in the C-2 commercial district-2. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. There shall be no minimum lot width requirement in the C-2 commercial district-2. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. There shall be no minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirement in the C-2 commercial district-2. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. There shall be no minimum front yard requirement in the C-2 commercial district-2, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. There shall be no minimum side yard requirement in the C-2 commercial district-2, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the C-2 commercial district-2 shall be 15 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the C-2 commercial district-2 shall be 50 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio in the C-2 commercial district-2 shall be 1:1. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the C-2 commercial district-2 shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.21(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-666—98-690. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 17. - I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT-1[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 98-691. - Purpose and intent. 
The I-1 industrial district-1 is designed primarily to accommodate a wide variety of repair/service and light industrial uses. It is intended for application in areas designated "commercial/industrial" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the I-1 industrial district-1 shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.22(a))  
Sec. 98-692. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1 industrial district-1, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Amusement and recreation (outdoors) 
Amusement and recreation (indoors), subject to section 98-973 
Animal control facility 
Auto repair garage 
Auto painting or body shop 
Auto parts and sales (outdoor display) 
Auto leasing or rental 
Auto storage or auction 
Auto parts and accessory sales (indoors) 
Bait and sporting goods sales 
Bakery or confectionery, wholesale 
Bank or savings and loan 
Boat storage and service 
Bottling works 
Building material sales or storage (indoors) 
Bus station or terminal 
Cabinet and upholstery shop 
Car wash, full-service 
Car sales, new or used 
Car wash, automatic 
Church or rectory 
Cleaning, dyeing or laundry plant 
Cleaning/laundry shop with on-site plant 
Cleaning/laundry pickup station only 
College or university 
Community center, public 
Convent or monastery 
Country club, private, subject to 98-978 
Dancehall 
Feed store 
Fire station 
Florist 
Food processing 
Fraternal club or lodge 
Golf course, public 
Greenhouse, wholesale 
Hardware store 
Hospital 
Hotel or motel 
Kennel (in enclosed building only) 
Kennel, subject to section 98-986 
Kennel (with outside runs or pens) 
Laboratory, medical and dental 
Laboratory, scientific and research 
Lithographic or print shop 
Local utility line 
Maintenance service 
Manufacturing, light 
Motor vehicle fuel service station 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Office, general business and professional 
Office-showroom/warehouse 
Park or playground, public 
Parking lot, commercial 
Parking lot or structure, commercial 
Parking structure, commercial 
Personal improvement services 
Plant nursery or garden shop 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad team track 
Railroad track 
Railroad freight or passenger station 
Recreation center, public 
Repair services, limited 
Restaurant, general 
Restaurant, drive-in 
Restaurant, fast food 
Retail, single tenant (less than 25,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (25,000 square feet but less than 50,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (50,000 square feet but less than 75,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (75,000 square feet but less than 100,000 square feet) 
School, business 
School, elementary or secondary 
Sewage pump station 
Supermarket 
Swimming pool, commercial 
Swimming pool, public 
Telephone equipment station 
Theater 
Tool rental (domestic equipment) 
Vehicle and equipment sales or rental 
Veterinary hospital (outside pens), subject to section 98-999 
Warehousing and wholesale, general 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.22(b); Ord. No. 75-99, § 2(3.05), 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 14-00, § 7, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 09-01, § 3, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 49-01, § 6, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 02-07, § 12, 1-18-2007)  
Sec. 98-693. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1 industrial district-1 only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Building material sales or storage (outdoors) 
Car wash, self-service 
Caretaker or guard residence (mobile home), subject to section 98-975 
Caretaker or guard residence, subject to section 98-975 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Day camp for children 
Day care center 
Electrical energy generating plant 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Exhibition area or fairgrounds 
Extended stay hotel 
Golf course, private 
Heliport 
Helistop 
Institution, drug or psychiatric treatment 
Laboratory, manufacturing 
Marina 
Miniwarehouse 
Nursing or congregate care facility 
Parking lot, trucks or trailers (transport) 
Private utility shop, yard or building 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Recycling dropoff center, subject to section 98-990 
Repair services, general 
Retail, single tenant (100,000 square feet or more) 
Rodeo grounds 
School, commercial trade 
Sewage treatment plant 
Sexually oriented business, subject to section 98-994 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Studio, television or radio 
Theater, drive-in 
Tire retreading or capping 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.22(c); Ord. No. 14-00, § 7, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 49-01, § 6, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 72-05, § 6, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 80-07, § 9, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 06-12, § 31, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 61-19 , § 4, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 98-694. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1 industrial district-1 only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Building material yard and construction office 
Carnival or circus, temporary, subject to 98-976 
Field office, temporary 
Sales, temporary or seasonal, subject to section 98-992 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.22(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 17, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-695. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. There shall be no minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirement in the I-1 industrial district-1. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. There shall be no minimum lot width requirement in the I-1 industrial district-1. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. There shall be no minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirement in the I-1 industrial district-1. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. There shall be no minimum front yard requirement in the I-1 industrial district-1, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. There shall be no minimum side yard requirement in the I-1 industrial district-1, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the I-1 industrial district-1 shall be 15 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the I-1 industrial district-1 shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1029: 
(1)  The maximum lot coverage in the I-1 industrial district-1, for lots containing up to five acres in area shall be 55 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(2)  The maximum lot coverage in the I-1 industrial district-1, for lots containing five acres or more in area shall be 50 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio in the I-1 industrial district-1 shall be 1:1. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the I-1 industrial district-1 shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.22(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-696—98-720. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 18. - I-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT-2[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 98-721. - Purpose and intent. 
The I-2 industrial district-2 is designed primarily to accommodate a wide variety of repair/service and light industrial uses. It is intended for application in areas designated "commercial/industrial" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the I-2 industrial district-2 shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.23(a))  
Sec. 98-722. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the I-2 industrial district-2, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Airport or landing field 
Animal control facility 
Auto repair garage 
Auto storage or auction 
Auto painting or body shop 
Bakery or confectionery, wholesale 
Boat storage and service 
Bottling works 
Building material sales or storage (indoors) 
Building material sales or storage (outdoors) 
Bus station or terminal 
Cabinet and upholstery shop 
Car wash, automatic 
Car wash, full-service 
Church or rectory 
Cleaning/laundry shop with on-site plant 
Cleaning/laundry pickup station only 
College or university 
Convent or monastery 
Country club, private, subject to 98-978 
Exhibition area or fairgrounds 
Feed store 
Fire station 
Florist 
Food processing 
Fraternal club or lodge 
Golf course, public 
Greenhouse, wholesale 
Hospital 
Hotel or motel 
Kennel (in enclosed building only) 
Kennel, subject to section 98-986 
Kennel (with outside runs or pens) 
Laboratory, medical and dental 
Laboratory, scientific and research 
Lithographic or print shop 
Local utility line 
Maintenance service 
Manufacturing, general 
Manufacturing, light 
Mini warehouse 
Motor vehicle fuel service station 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Office, general business and professional 
Office-showroom/warehouse 
Park or playground, public 
Parking lot, commercial 
Parking lot or structure, commercial 
Parking lot, trucks or trailers (transport) 
Parking structure, commercial 
Personal improvement services 
Private utility shop, yard or building 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Railroad freight or passenger station 
Railroad team track 
Repair services, general 
Retail, single tenant (less than 25,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (25,000 square feet but less than 50,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (50,000 square feet but less than 75,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (75,000 square feet but less than 100,000 square feet) 
Restaurant, general 
School, commercial trade 
Sewage pump station 
Sewage treatment plant 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Supermarket 
Swimming pool, public 
Telephone equipment station 
Theater, drive-in 
Tire retreading or capping 
Vehicle and equipment sales or rental 
Veterinary hospital (outside pens), subject to section 98-999 
Warehousing and wholesale, general 
Welding or machine shop 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.23(b); Ord. No. 14-00, § 8, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 09-01, § 4, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 49-01, § 7, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 75-99, § 2(3.05), 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 02-07, § 13, 1-18-2007)  
Sec. 98-723. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the I-2 industrial district-2 only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batching plant (permanent) 
Car wash, self-service 
Caretaker or guard residence (mobile home), subject to section 98-975 
Caretaker or guard residence, subject to section 98-975 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Day camp for children 
Day care center 
Drag strip or commercial racing 
Dump or sanitary landfill area 
Electrical energy generating plant 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Extended stay hotel 
Golf course, private 
Heliport 
Helistop 
Laboratory, manufacturing 
Livestock auction or feed lot 
Manufacturing, hazardous/objectionable 
Marina 
Mining and quarrying 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Petroleum storage/collection facilities 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Recycling dropoff center, subject to section 98-990 
Retail, single tenant (100,000 square feet or more) 
Rodeo grounds 
Sexually oriented business, subject to section 98-994 
Shooting range, commercial 
Studio, television or radio 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
Water well, storage or pump station 
Wrecking or salvage yard 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.23(c); Ord. No. 14-00, § 8, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 49-01, § 7, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 80-07, § 10, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 06-12, § 32, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 61-19 , § 4, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 98-724. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the I-2 industrial district-2 only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Building material yard and construction office 
Carnival or circus, temporary, subject to 98-976 
Field office, temporary 
Sales, temporary or seasonal, subject to section 98-992 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.23(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 18, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-725. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. There shall be no minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirement in the I-2 industrial district-2. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. There shall be no minimum lot width requirement in the I-2 industrial district-2. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. There shall be no minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirement in the I-2 industrial district-2. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. There shall be no minimum front yard requirement in the I-2 industrial district-2, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. There shall be no minimum side yard requirement in the I-2 industrial district-2, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the I-2 industrial district-2 shall be 15 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the I-2 industrial district-2 shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1029: 
(1)  The maximum lot coverage in the I-2 industrial district-2, for lots containing up to five acres in area, shall be 55 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(2)  The maximum lot coverage in the I-2 industrial district-2, for lots containing five acres or more in area, shall be 50 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio in the I-2 industrial district-2 shall be 1:1. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the I-2 industrial district-2 shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.23(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-726—98-750. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 19. - WR WATER RECREATION DISTRICT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 54. 
 
Sec. 98-751. - Purpose and intent. 
The WR water recreation district is designed primarily to accommodate uses related to the water recreational opportunities along the shore of Lake Grapevine. It is intended for application in areas designated "Corps of Engineers" on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the WR water recreation district shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.24(a))  
Sec. 98-752. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the WR water recreation district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Bait and sporting goods sales 
Boat storage and service 
Book or stationary store or newsstand 
Bus station or terminal 
Car wash, automatic 
Car wash, full-service 
Church or rectory 
Community center, public 
Convenience store 
Country club, private, subject to 98-978 
Crop agriculture 
Custom personal service 
Day camp for children 
Day care home 
Drugstore or pharmacy 
Dwelling, single-family detached 
Fire station 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Home occupation, subject to section 98-984 
Hospital 
Hotel or motel 
Local utility line 
Marina 
Motor vehicle fuel service station 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Nursing or congregate care facility 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Personal improvement services 
Public building, shop or yard 
Recreation center, public 
Restaurant, general 
Sewage pump station 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Swimming pool, public 
Telephone equipment station 
Theater 
Travel bureau or consultant 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.24(b); Ord. No. 08-01, § 13, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 02-07, § 14, 1-18-2007)  
Sec. 98-753. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the WR water recreation district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Amusement and recreation (indoors), subject to section 98-973 
Car wash, self-service 
Caretaker or guard residence, subject to section 98-975 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Convenience store with gasoline sales 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Exhibition area or fairgrounds 
Extended stay hotel 
Fraternal club or lodge 
Golf course, private 
Helistop 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Sewage treatment plant 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Supermarket 
Swimming pool, commercial 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.24(c) ; Ord. No. 80-07, § 11, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 61-19 , § 4, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 98-754. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the WR water recreation district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Refreshment stand, subject to section 98-991 
Sales, temporary or seasonal, subject to section 98-992 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.24(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 19, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-755. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the WR water recreation district shall be 7,500 square feet per dwelling unit, subject to section 98-1023. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the WR water recreation district shall be 65 feet, subject to section 98-1024. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the WR water recreation district shall be 1,450 square feet, subject to section 98-1025. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for residential uses in the WR water recreation district shall be 30 feet, with no requirement for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard for residential uses in the WR water recreation district shall be eight feet, with no minimum requirement for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the WR water recreation district shall be ten feet for residential uses and 15 feet for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the WR water recreation district shall be 40 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area ratio requirement in the WR water recreation district. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the WR water recreation district shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.24(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-756—98-780. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 20. - REC RECREATIONAL DISTRICT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 54. 
 
Sec. 98-781. - Purpose and intent. 
The REC recreational district is designed primarily to accommodate public and private recreational uses. It is intended for application in areas designated for nonresidential use on the land use map of the comprehensive master plan. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the REC recreational district shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.25(a))  
Sec. 98-782. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the REC recreational district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Airport or landing field 
Hospital 
Local utility line 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Private utility shop, yard or building 
Public building, shop or yard 
Recreation center 
Sewage pump station 
Sewage treatment plant 
Swimming pool, public 
Water well storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.25(b))  
Sec. 98-783. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the REC recreational district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Amusement and recreation (indoors), subject to section 98-973 
Amusement and recreation (outdoors) 
Bait and sporting goods sales 
Boat storage and service 
Caretaker or guard residence, subject to section 98-975 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Country club, private, subject to 98-978 
Dude ranch 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Electrical energy generating plant 
Exhibition area or fairgrounds 
Extended stay hotel 
Golf course, public 
Heliport 
Hotel or motel 
Marina 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Personal improvement services 
Petroleum storage/collection facilities 
Railroad team track 
Restaurant, general 
Rodeo grounds 
Shooting range, commercial 
Stable, commercial boarding or rental, subject to section 98-995 
Theater, drive-in 
Theater 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.25(c) ; Ord. No. 80-07, § 12, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 61-19 , § 4, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 98-784. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the REC recreational district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Refreshment stand, subject to section 98-991 
Sales, temporary or seasonal, subject to section 98-992 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.25(d); Ord. No. 76-03, § 20, 111-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-785. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. There shall be no minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirement in the REC recreational district. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. There shall be no minimum lot width requirement in the REC recreational district. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. There shall be no minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirement in the REC recreational district. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. There shall be no minimum front yard requirement in the REC recreational district, subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. There shall be no minimum side yard requirement in the REC recreational district, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the REC recreational district shall be 15 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the REC recreational district shall be 50 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area ratio requirement in the REC recreational district. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the REC recreational district shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.25(e)—(m))  
Secs. 98-786—98-810. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 21. - PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 65-13, § 2, adopted Dec. 16, 2013, amended Div. 21 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said division to read as set out herein. The former Div. 21, §§ 98-811—98-821, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from ch. 12, § 3.26(a)—(k) of the 1989 Code; Ord. No. 27-99, § 1, adopted April 5, 1999; Ord. No. 75-99, § 2(3.05), adopted Dec. 6, 1999; Ord. No. 14-00, § 9, adopted Feb. 17, 2000; Ord. No. 08-01, § 14, adopted Feb. 5, 2001; Ord. No. 09-01, § 5, adopted Feb. 5, 2001; Ord. No. 48-03, § 8, adopted Aug. 18, 2003; Ord. No. 49-01, § 8, adopted July 16, 2001; Ord. No. 48-03, § 8, adopted Aug. 18, 2003; Ord. No. 76-03, § 21, adopted Nov. 3, 2003; Ord. No. 62-04, § 9, adopted July 19, 2004; Ord. No. 72-05, § 7, adopted Sept. 6, 2005; Ord. No. 02-07, § 15, adopted Jan. 18, 2007; Ord. No. 80-07, § 13, adopted Oct. 1, 2007; Ord. No. 06-12, § 33, adopted Feb. 20, 2012; and Ord. No. 15-13, § 4, adopted April 1, 2013. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 98-811. - Purpose and intent. 
The PD planned development district (PD) is designed to permit flexibility and encourage a more creative, efficient and aesthetically desirable design and placement of buildings, open spaces and circulation patterns by allowing a mixture or combination of uses and to best utilize special site features such as topography, size and shape. A planned development district may be used to permit new or innovative concepts in land utilization not permitted by other zoning districts in this Code. While greater flexibility is given to allow special conditions or restrictions that would not otherwise allow the development to occur, the requirements established herein ensure against the misuse of such increased flexibility. It is intended for application in all land use designations on the land use map of the master plan, provided that the uses and development standards proposed are consistent with the stated goals of the town's master plan. 
(Ord. No. 65-13, § 2, 12-16-2013)  
Sec. 98-812. - Approval process. 
Every planned development district approved under the provisions of this chapter shall follow the procedure for, and be considered, an amendment to the zoning map. The application for a planned development district shall comply with the zoning amendment procedure for a change in zoning district classification. An applicant for a planned development district shall specify the base zoning district to be applied, the proposed use or combination of uses, proposed development regulations including all requested deviations from the base zoning district and any other requirements of this Code, and be accompanied by a concept plan(s). The concept plan(s) shall be attached to and made a part of the ordinance establishing the planned development district. 
(Ord. No. 65-13, § 2, 12-16-2013)  
Sec. 98-813. - Criteria for approval. 
In approving the planned development district, the town council may impose conditions relative to the quality and standards of development. Based upon the concept plan, the planning and zoning commission and town council shall determine whether the PD district should be established, taking into account the following criteria: 
(1)  The proposed planned development district is consistent with the town's, vision, goals, objectives, and policies adopted in the master plan; 
(2)  Proposed uses and project design are compatible with existing and planned adjoining uses and the character of the neighborhood in which the project is located; 
(3)  Adequate public facilities required to be installed by the developer will be provided in a timely manner to support each phase of the development in accordance with the SMARTGrowth program; 
(4)  Proposed uses and development standards are consistent with the purposes of the base zoning district, where applicable; and 
(5)  The proposed phasing of development is consistent with the overall growth and development of the town. 
(Ord. No. 65-13, § 2, 12-16-2013)  
Sec. 98-814. - Submittal requirements. 
(a)  Overview of requirements. In establishing a planned development district in accordance with this division, the town shall require a zoning exhibit of the development, plans, drawings, standards, and any other appropriate supportive information requested by the town manager or his designee that demonstrates compliance with the criteria for approval listed above. 
(b)  Application required. In submitting an application for the PD, the applicable submittal requirements are contained in the development application for a PD as may be updated from time to time. The town's development review committee (DRC) shall review the application for completeness and compliance with the town's master plan and all applicable ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 65-13, § 2, 12-16-2013)  
Sec. 98-815. - Park dedication and park development fees. 
The park land dedication and park development fee requirements set forth in division VIII of article 6, chapter 90 shall apply and exclusively govern PD planned development zoning districts. This division 21 of article III, chapter 98 does not authorize park land dedication or park development fee standards that deviate from the requirements of division VIII of article 6, chapter 90. 
(Ord. No. 13-19 , § 6, 4-15-2019)  
Secs. 98-816—98-840. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 22. - CC CAMPUS COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 98-841. - Purpose and intent. 
The CC campus commercial district is designed primarily to accommodate a variety of large scale campus commercial developments such as corporate offices, office parks, hotels, resorts and similar uses in a planned campus setting. Retail, restaurant, hotel and similar uses serving the campus commercial uses could be appropriate if they are planned as integral elements of the developments. In addition to the use and area regulations of this division, development in the CC campus commercial district shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.27; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.27(a)), 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 98-842. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the CC campus commercial district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory retail/service uses 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Amusement and recreation (indoors), subject to section 98-973 
Art gallery or handicraft sales 
Art supply store 
Bakery or confectionery shop, retail 
Bank or savings and loan 
Book or stationary store or newsstand 
Cleaning/laundry pickup station only 
Cleaning/laundry shop with pickup station 
College or university 
Community center, public 
Custom personal service 
Dancing, drama, or music school or studio 
Fire station 
Florist 
Heliport 
Helistop 
Hotel or motel 
Laboratory, medical and dental 
Laboratory, scientific and research 
Lithographic or print shop 
Local utility line 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Office, medical or dental 
Office, general business and professional 
Optical sales 
Park or playground, public 
Parking lot, commercial 
Parking structure, commercial 
Personal improvement services 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
Restaurant, general 
Retail, general (indoors) 
Retail, single tenant (less than 25,000 square feet) 
School, business 
Sewage pump station 
Studio, television or radio 
Swimming pool, commercial 
Telephone equipment station 
Theater 
Travel bureau or consultant 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.27; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.27(b)), 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 98-843. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the CC campus commercial district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Amusement and recreation (outdoors) 
Car wash, automatic 
Car wash, full-service 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Convenience store 
Convenience store with gasoline sales 
Day care center 
Drugstore or pharmacy 
Electrical energy generating plant 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Extended stay hotel 
Health club or athletic club 
Hospital 
Institution, drug or psychiatric treatment 
Office-showroom/warehouse 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Recycling dropoff center, subject to section 98-990 
Restaurant, fast food 
Retail, single tenant (25,000 square feet, but less than 50,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (50,000 square feet, but less than 75,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (75,000 square feet, but less than 100,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (100,000 square feet or more) 
School, commercial trade 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.27; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.27(c)), 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 80-07, § 14, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 61-19 , § 4, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 98-844. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the CC campus commercial district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Building material yard and construction office 
Field office, temporary 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.27; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.27(d)), 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 48-03, § 7, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 76-03, § 22, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-845. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area. There shall be no minimum lot area requirement in the CC campus commercial district. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. There shall be no minimum lot width requirement in the CC campus commercial district. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. There shall be no minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirement in the CC campus commercial district. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard along major thoroughfares in the CC campus commercial district shall be 60 feet for all uses with no parking allowed within the front yard. The minimum front yard requirement along all other roadways in the CC campus commercial district shall be subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. There shall be no minimum side yard requirement in the CC campus commercial district, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the CC campus commercial district shall be 15 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum building lot coverage in the CC campus commercial district shall be 50 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio in the CC campus commercial district shall be 1:1. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the CC campus commercial district shall be ten stories above grade or 120 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031 and meet compatibility setback requirements subject to section 82-303 of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.27; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.27(e)—(m)), 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 98-846. - Landscaping standards. 
Landscaping standards along major thoroughfares in the CC campus commercial district shall be as described in this section. All other landscaping standards shall be subject to article V of chapter 82 of this Code, landscaping and screening, as amended. 
(1)  Street yard landscaping. All undeveloped areas of the street yard shall be landscaped a minimum of 50 percent. 
(2)  Street buffer landscaping. The area of the lot adjacent to the street right-of-way line and extending into the lot a minimum width of 60 feet shall be landscaped, except for necessary driveway. Street buffer landscaped area shall be counted toward the street yard landscaping requirement. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.27; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.27(n)), 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 98-847. - Tree planting standards. 
(a)  Generally. Tree planting standards along major thoroughfares in the CC campus commercial district shall be as described in this section. All other tree planting standards shall be subject to article V of chapter 82 of this Code, landscaping and screening, as amended. 
(b)  Street buffer trees. Trees shall be planted or existing trees preserved within the street buffer area by a ratio of one tree per every 500 square feet of buffer area. Trees shall be a minimum of three inches in caliper and shall consist of evergreen and deciduous trees as selected from the town's approved tree planting list. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.27; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.27(o)), 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 98-848. - Compliance with area plan components. 
All development in the CC campus commercial district shall be in compliance with the components outlined in the area plans for the Lakeside Business District or the Denton Creek district. For development within the Lakeside Business District Area Plan, campus commercial means a mixture of uses which includes corporate offices, office parks, hotels, commercial, similar uses, and may include limited residential development. To ensure the appropriate mixture of uses is provided within the campus commercial district, residential development will only be allowed as part of a planned development meeting the criteria outlined below. 
(1)  Residential development criteria. Residential development shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Residential uses shall be limited to 25 percent of the overall building square footage in any new planned development in the campus commercial district. The remaining 75 percent of building square footage shall pertain to non-residential uses. For the purposes of this section, a residential use shall include any building area used primarily for the purpose of leasing or selling residential dwelling units within the planned development as well as any building area not open to the general public and intended for the exclusive use of residents of the residential space and their guests, such as a gym or other indoor recreational area. 
b.  A phasing plan outlining the percentage mix of residential and non-residential development that will be built in each phase must be submitted with the zoning application, noting the restriction that only the final phase can be comprised of exclusively residential development. 
c.  Buildings used for residential development are limited to a maximum of four stories in height to ensure that residential buildings do not dominate the skyline in an area intended primarily for non-residential use. 
d.  Central core or "wrapped" parking structures surrounded on two or more sides with residential units, are required for multi-family uses. No more than 20 percent of the required parking for multi-family uses shall be provided as surface parking. 
(2)  Parking structures for non-residential uses. Parking structures designated to meet non-residential parking requirements may count toward the percentage of non-residential building square footage, provided they meet the following standards: 
a.  Utilize a unified design theme tying the parking structure to other nearby structures within the development. 
b.  Incorporate architectural screens or other techniques to mitigate any adverse visual effects of the parking garage to pedestrians and adjacent properties. 
c.  Provide space to satisfy at least 80 percent of the required parking of the use(s) identified on the proposed concept plan. 
d.  Are greater than two stories. 
(3)  Open space. The provision of adequate and appropriate open space areas shall be integral to all planned developments in the campus commercial district incorporating residential uses. To ensure this is provided, open space shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The minimum requirement for open space in these types of projects is five percent of the gross area of the site, which shall be dedicated open space and shall be included in the zoning change/development plan application. 
b.  The identified open space can also be used to meet parkland dedication requirements, as outlined in chapter 90. However, if payment of cash in lieu of dedication is selected, the five percent open space requirement would remain, as the open space requirement stands on its own and should not be considered a substitution for, nor a requirement in addition to, the language already noted in chapter 90. 
c.  Any open space provided in excess of five percent may be eligible for density bonus provisions as outlined below. Required landscaping, buffers, and detention/retention areas are not counted toward the open space requirement. 
(4)  Bonus provisions. 
a.  An applicant may apply for a residential density bonus of up to ten percent to equal a maximum of 35 percent of the overall building square footage. In order to be considered for bonus provisions, the applicant shall provide a list and conceptual design of amenities/design elements on the required concept plan, proposed residential and non-residential (if known) uses and/or tenants for identified buildings, and elevations highlighting proposed building designs. 
b.  The planning and zoning commission shall make a recommendation to the town council on the requested bonus package. The town council shall make the final decision on the appropriateness of the amenity/design package for the bonus requested, and may grant all, some, or none of the allowable bonus based on the amenity/design package. 
(5)  Considerations toward achieving a residential density bonus: 
a.  Focus and design based on placemaking that incorporates the following elements: 
1.  Use of pedestrian scale design elements including sidewalks/walkways/trails with appropriately scaled shade, planters, and seating along streets and building facades. 
2.  Use of pedestrian linkages throughout the development. 
3.  Incorporation of public spaces and art. 
b.  The quality of open space provided, as determined by the following: 
1.  The percent increase in open space over the base requirement. 
2.  The extent to which access has been provided to and emphasis has been placed on preservation of existing wooded areas, view sheds, water bodies, topography, and stream corridors in a natural and continuous state. 
3.  The extent to which a range of open spaces have been provided to be contiguous with existing open spaces and to invite passive recreation uses from plazas and squares to playgrounds, parks, and environmental preserves. 
c.  The percentage of the ground floor building area occupied as nonresidential use only. 
d.  Use of parking structures to meet parking requirements, with particular emphasis placed on those that: 
1.  Incorporate pedestrian-oriented uses at street level. 
2.  Minimize street frontage. 
e.  The seamless blending of residential and non-residential spaces, such as restaurants and retail, while incorporating appropriate transitions between uses of varying intensity. 
f.  The type, design, and desirability of non-residential uses/tenants and buildings. 
g.  Impact of site specific conditions such as grades, vegetation, and automobile and pedestrian access. 
(6)  Effective date. The regulations contained within this section 98-848 only affect development applications filed after April 15, 2019. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.27; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.27(p), 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 14-19 , § 1, 4-15-2019)  
Secs. 98-849—98-870. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 23. - CI CAMPUS INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 98-871. - Purpose and intent. 
The CI campus industrial district is designed primarily to accommodate a variety of light industrial developments such as industrial parks, clean manufacturing, office/showrooms and similar uses in a planned campus setting. Retail, restaurant, hotel and similar uses serving the commercial/industrial uses could be appropriate, if they are planned as integral elements of the developments. In addition to the use and area regulations of this section, development in the CI campus industrial district shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.28; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.28(a)), 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 98-872. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the CI campus industrial district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Amusement and recreation (indoors), subject to section 98-973 
Amusement and recreation (outdoors) 
Bakery or confectionery, wholesale 
Bank or savings and loan 
Bottling works 
Building material sales or storage (indoors) 
Bus station or terminal 
Cabinet and upholstery shop 
Cleaning, dyeing or laundry plant 
Cleaning/laundry pick-up station only 
College or university 
Community center, public 
Fire station 
Florist 
Food processing 
Heliport 
Helistop 
Hospital 
Hotel or motel 
Laboratory, medical and dental 
Laboratory, scientific and research 
Lithographic or print shop 
Local utility line 
Maintenance service 
Manufacturing, light 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Office, general business and professional 
Office-showroom/warehouse 
Park or playground, public 
Parking lot, commercial 
Parking structure, commercial 
Personal improvement services 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad freight or passenger station 
Railroad team track 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
Restaurant, general 
Retail, single tenant (less than 25,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (25,000 square feet but less than 50,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (50,000 square feet but less than 75,000 square feet) 
School, business 
School, commercial trade 
Sewage pump station 
Studio, television or radio 
Swimming pool, commercial 
Telephone equipment station 
Theater 
Tool rental (domestic equipment) 
Warehousing and wholesale, general 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.28; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.28(b)), 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 98-873. - Specific uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the CI campus industrial district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Car wash, automatic 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to 98-977 
Day care center 
Electrical energy generating plant 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Extended stay hotel 
Health club or athletic club 
Institution, drug or psychiatric treatment 
Parking lot, trucks or trailers (transport) 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Private utility shop, yard or building 
Recycling dropoff center, subject to section 98-990 
Repair services, general 
Restaurant, fast food 
Retail, single tenant (75,000 square feet, but less than 100,000 square feet) 
Retail, single tenant (over 100,000 square feet) 
Sewage treatment plant 
Transmission pipeline, subject to section 98-997 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.28; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.28(c)), 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 75-03, § 2, 1-3-2003; Ord. No. 80-07, § 15, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 06-12, § 34, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 61-19 , § 4, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 98-874. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the CI campus industrial district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Building material yard and construction office 
Field office, temporary 
Temporary special event, subject to section 98-976 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.28; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.28(d)), 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 76-03, § 23, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-875. - Minimum and maximum dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum lot area. There shall be no minimum lot area requirement in the CI campus industrial district. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. There shall be no minimum lot width requirement in the CI campus industrial district. 
(c)  Minimum floor area per unit. There shall be no minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirement in the CI campus industrial district. 
(d)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard along major thoroughfares in the CI campus industrial district shall be 60 feet for all uses with no parking allowed within the front yard. The minimum front yard requirement along all other roadways in the CI campus industrial district shall be subject to section 98-1026. 
(e)  Minimum side yard. There shall be no minimum side yard requirement in the CI campus industrial district, subject to section 98-1027. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the CI campus industrial district shall be 15 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(g)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum building lot coverage in the CI campus industrial district shall be 50 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(h)  Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio in the CI campus industrial district shall be 1:1. 
(i)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the CI campus industrial district shall be three stories or 45 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.28; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.28(e)—(m)), 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 98-876. - Landscaping standards. 
Landscaping standards along major thoroughfares in the CI campus industrial district shall be as described in this section. All other landscaping standards shall be subject to article V of chapter 82 of this Code, landscaping and screening, as amended. 
(1)  Street yard landscaping. All undeveloped areas of the street yard shall be landscaped a minimum of 50 percent. 
(2)  Street buffer landscaping. The area of the lot adjacent to the street right-of-way line and extending into the lot a minimum width of 60 feet shall be landscaped, except for the necessary driveway. Street buffer landscaped area shall be counted toward the street yard landscaping requirement. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.28; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.28(n)), 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 98-877. - Tree planting standards. 
(a)  Generally. Tree planting standards along major thoroughfares in the CI campus industrial district shall be as described in this section. All other tree planting standards shall be subject to article V of chapter 82 of this Code, landscaping and screening, as amended. 
(b)  Street buffer trees. Trees shall be planted or existing trees preserved within the street buffer area by a ratio of one tree per every 500 square feet of buffer area. Trees shall be a minimum of three inches in caliper and shall consist of evergreen and deciduous trees as selected from the town's approved tree planting list. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.28; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.28(o)), 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 98-878. - Compliance with area plan components. 
All development in the CI campus industrial district shall be in compliance with the components outlined in the area plans for the Lakeside Business District or the Denton Creek district. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.28; Ord. No. 32-00, § 4(3.28(p)), 4-3-2000)  
Secs. 98-879—98-889. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 24. - CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 98-890. - General description and purpose. 
The CBD central business district is designed primarily to permit the implementation of new or innovative concepts in land use through highly coordinated and integrated development projects that can not be achieved under conventional zoning approaches. Procedures are established herein to insure appropriate use of CBD zoning. The CBD designation shall be used only to carry out specific goals of the Master Plan 2001, and more specifically to create a downtown district that contains the following elements in such quantities, intensities, mixes and relation one to the other as determined appropriate by the town council, after public hearing upon proper notice thereof and recommendation from the planning and zoning commission: 
(1)  A mixture of commercial, residential, civic and institutional uses in close proximity; 
(2)  Neighborhoods with a mixture of uses, including retail and residential uses, and a variety of housing types; 
(3)  An interconnected network of streets and sidewalks that are safe, designed for pedestrians and which encourage walking and provide a variety of routes for local vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(4)  High quality public space (open space, parks, plazas, streets and sidewalks) that organize the district and function as gathering places for the neighborhoods and the town; 
(5)  Integrated parks and trails; 
(6)  Vertical mixing of uses within the same building or group of buildings; 
(7)  Regulations focused on size, scale and location of buildings, rather than on uses, and conceptual guidelines for the design of buildings, so that buildings integrate well with the neighborhoods and the district develops cohesively; 
(8)  Sensitivity to existing adjacent uses. 
(Ord. No. 45-08, § 2, 8-4-2008)  
Sec. 98-891. - District requirements. 
The zoning ordinance establishing a CBD on a particular land area shall contain the development standards applicable to the development and such development standards shall conform to and with subpart B, Land Development Regulations, and Master Plan 2001, both as amended. Any development standards not in conformance with subpart B, Land Development Regulations, shall be specifically referenced in the zoning ordinance establishing the CBD and shall be subject to the approval or disapproval of the town council. 
In establishing zoning in accordance with this division, the town council shall require conceptual plans and development standards for the development, which shall be approved and filed as part of the ordinance establishing the CBD prior to the issuance of any building permit in the zoning district. Such required conceptual plans and development standards shall, at a minimum, address applicable comprehensive master plan features and shall comply with the requirements enumerated in article IV of chapter 78 of this Code, comprehensive master plan, zoning map and text amendments. Additional requirements may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
(1)  Purpose of intent. A statement of purpose and intent describing how the proposed development will be in compliance with the CBD requirements contained within this division. 
(2)  Phasing plan. A conceptual phasing plan for the development setting out a preliminary estimate of the timing of development within the CBD. 
(3)  Uses and units. The permitted use(s), including, for residential uses, the total number of dwelling units proposed. 
(4)  Specific use permit information. Designation of the uses, if any, that will require an SUP. 
(5)  Access points. Proposed access to the development from existing streets and the number of access points requested. 
(6)  Street plan. A conceptual plan for the location of all streets (public or private) existing in, or to be constructed or relocated for, the development and conceptual street sections. 
(7)  Topography. A scaled drawing of the property showing major geographical features such as creeks, ditches, wetlands, lakes and other prominent topographic features (USGS or regional planning council maps and tax maps may be used). 
(8)  Tree information. General location of major tree stands and large trees and an estimated calculation of the tree canopy coverage immediately before and immediately after development. 
(9)  Landscape plan. Conceptual landscape plan, including buffers, transitions and screenings and the phasing of tree canopy replacement. 
(10)  Buildings. A conceptual plan for the location, size, scale and number of stories of proposed building(s) and a conceptual plan for the location of residential uses. 
(11)  Building plan. Conceptual design standards for structures within the development. 
(12)  Parking. A conceptual parking plan (including self-parking structures, automated parking structures, surface lots and onstreet parking) with approximate number of spaces, basic traffic flow and proposed circulation patterns including proposed pedestrian and trail network connections. 
(13)  Loading. Proposed standards for and location of loading zones. 
(14)  Refuse areas. Proposed standards for screening refuse collection areas. 
(15)  Signage. Conceptual plan for signage. 
(16)  Flood plain. If the topography of the development includes floodplain that will be reshaped or changed from its natural state in strict compliance to all applicable local, state and federal regulations, rules, laws, statutes and ordinances, a conceptual plan for same, including a statement identifying the existence and general location and elevation of the floodplain. 
(17)  Drainage. Plan for drainage, including any anticipated temporary drainage facilities and the proposed final storm water management facilities. 
(18)  Survey. A survey, certified by a registered professional land surveyor, showing property boundary lines, location and dimensions of all proposed and existing easements, indicating volume and page numbers, both onsite and offsite, roadways, rail lines and public rights-of-way crossing and adjacent to the subject property; ownership of adjacent property; and the boundaries of subdistricts within the CBD, if any. 
(19)  Other. The town council may require other development standards considered necessary for the development, including but not limited to standards to create a reasonable transition to and protection of adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 45-08, § 2, 8-4-2008)  
Sec. 98-892. - Approval and conditions. 
Every central business district approved under the provisions of this chapter shall follow the procedure for and be considered an amendment to the zoning map. In approving the central business district, the town council may impose conditions relative to the standards of development, and such conditions shall be complied with before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use of the land or any structure that is part of the central business district, and such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the approval of the zoning amendment, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a certificate of occupancy. All central business districts approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be referenced on the zoning map, and a list of such category of uses permitted therein shall be maintained by the executive director of development services. 
(Ord. No. 45-08, § 2, 8-4-2008)  
Sec. 98-893. - SMARTGrowth analysis. 
The SMARTGrowth analysis required by the SMARTGrowth program, sections 98-31, et seq., of this chapter, shall not be applicable to the CBD central business district or any application for or approval of zoning for a central business district development. 
(Ord. No. 45-08, § 2, 8-4-2008)  
Secs. 98-894, 98-895. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 25 - MU MIXED USE DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 98-896. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the mixed use zoning district (MU) is to implement the mixed use land use category guidelines established in the town's master plan. the MU is intended to: 
(1)  Allow a mixture of complementary land uses that include housing, retail, offices, commercial services, and civic uses to create economic vitality; 
(2)  Emphasize vehicular and pedestrian connectivity to adjacent opportunities land uses that balances neighborhood integrity with the transportation benefits of connectivity, market demand for development and regional access; 
(3)  Establish a high level of development standards to create development of exemplary and enduring quality and design; 
(4)  Encourage the development of vertical and horizontal mixed-use areas that are safe, comfortable and attractive to pedestrians while protecting significant environmentally sensitive areas; 
(5)  Provide flexibility in the siting and design of new developments and redevelopment to anticipate changes in the marketplace while establishing human-scaled residential and nonresidential buildings; 
(6)  Leverage any significant environmental features on the site and treat them as "features" and not constraints; 
(7)  Create a variety of connected community gathering places and entertainment opportunities of differing scales and character to make walking easy from one place to another; 
(8)  Include a range of residential options that reflect changing lifestyles while balancing market demand and community preferences; 
(9)  Provide appropriate transitions to protect any existing adjacent neighborhoods and to promote sustained value; and 
(10)  Encourage efficient uses of land by facilitating compact development and minimizing the amount of land that is needed for surface parking. 
(Ord. No. 62-08, § 2, 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 98-897. - Relationship to the town's master plan. 
The MU implements the following goals of the town's master plan: 
Allow for mixed use development in selected areas as an option. 
Residential land uses within a "village" mixed use setting should be allowed in this district to accompany campus commercial. All development must be of exemplary and enduring quality and design. All development should promote Lakeside and other similar areas as unique and highly desirable destinations. 
(Ord. No. 62-08, § 2, 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 98-898. - Applicability and location. 
The MU shall be applicable to all properties that are designated as "mixed use" in the Town of Flower Mound's Land Use Plan. 
(Ord. No. 62-08, § 2, 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 98-899. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to uses and category of uses listed in the MU schedule of uses and to other terms used in this section only. For terms not specifically defined under this section, shall apply. 
Buffer areas along creeks and flood plains. These are areas of land parallel to each side of existing creeks and flood plains, set aside to protect riparian vegetation and filter waterborne pollutants. 
Building step-back. Building step-back is the setting back of the front building facade away from the street at a specific floor or height in order to maintain a consistent street wall. 
 
Business associations and professional membership organizations. These establishments promote the business interests of their members, or of their profession as a whole, including chambers of commerce. They may conduct research on new products and services, develop market statistics, sponsor quality and certification standards, lobby public officials, or publish newsletters, books, or periodicals for distribution to their members. 
Business, professional, and technical uses. Establishments in this category perform professional, scientific, and technical services for others. Such services require a high degree of expertise and training. Uses in this category include offices for health care, administrative, professional consulting, professional services, and business support services. 
Cafeteria or limited service restaurant. These establishments provide food services where patrons order or select items and pay before eating. Food and drink may be consumed on premises, taken out, or delivered to customers' location. Some establishments in this subcategory may provide food services in combination with selling alcoholic beverages. This subcategory includes cafeterias, which use cafeteria-style serving equipment, a refrigerated area, and self-service beverage dispensing equipment, and which display food and drink items in a continuous cafeteria line. 
Civic uses. These are uses that are related to nonprofit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, and government functions. 
Concept plan. A concept plan is a plan that is intended to illustrate the general development pattern proposed and meets the requirements of subsection 98-904(b)(2) of this chapter. 
Conservation easement. A conservation easement is a voluntary and permanent, legally binding, conveyance of a surface easement on, about and across the property with deed restrictions that limit development of the property for the purpose of protecting and preserving a portion of the town's environmentally sensitive and natural resources, including agricultural and ranching areas. The landowner retains title to the property and the easement applies to all subsequent owners. The easement must be held by a qualifying party approved by the town. 
Continuous planters. Continuous planters are tree wells between the vehicle lane/parking lane and the sidewalk. These planters run parallel along the sidewalk with a few breaks for pedestrian access from the parking lane to the sidewalk. The planters may be used for street trees and other landscaping including shrubs and ground cover to soften the edge of the pavement. 
 
Courtyard. A courtyard is an unoccupied space, open to the sky, which is bounded on two or more sides by the exterior walls of the building or by two or more exterior walls, lot lines or yards. Courtyards may be totally enclosed on all sides by the exterior walls of a building. 
 
Environmental preserve. An environmental preserve is natural open space reserved for land that is under permanent conservation. It consists of areas in the flood plain, woodlands to be preserved, creeks, water bodies, steep grades, and other environmentally sensitive lands. Activities in the environmental preserve shall be limited to nature trails, paths, and equestrian trails. If significant lake access is available, canoe put-ins or other passive water recreation activities may be permitted. The size of an environmental preserve may vary depending upon the environmental element being preserved. Environmental preserves may also be in or part of conservation easements. 
 
Facade. Facade(s) is the exterior face of the building fronting or oriented toward a street or roadway, excluding alleyways. 
Full-service hotels. Full-service hotel establishments are buildings with habitable rooms or suites which are reserved for temporary lodging for guests who rent rooms or suites on a daily basis, and with: 
(1)  A minimum area of 250 square feet in each guest room; 
(2)  Either (a) a full service restaurant with full kitchen facilities providing service to the general public or (b) a kitchen on the premises in which meals are prepared by the management or a concessionaire of the management for room service delivery; 
(3)  On-site staff required seven days a week, 24 hours per day; and 
(4)  A minimum of 1,000 square feet of meeting or conference room space. 
Full-service restaurant. Full-service restaurants provide food services to patrons who order and are served (i.e. waiter/waitress service) while seated indoors or outdoors and pay after eating. They may provide this service in combination with selling alcoholic beverages, providing takeout services, or presenting live non-theatrical entertainment. 
Green. A green is an open space available for unstructured recreation. A green may be defined by landscaping rather than buildings. Its landscape consists of land and trees in a natural arrangement, requiring minimal maintenance. The size of a green shall range from one acre to ten acres. 
 
Horizontal mixed use. Horizontal mixed use is the location of different land uses, including commercial, retail, office, residential, public, and other uses in proximity to one another in separate buildings but in the same development or block. 
Human scale or pedestrian scale. Human scale is the proportional relationship of a particular building structure, or streetscape element to the human form and function. Human scale relates the size and/or height of a structure to the height and mass of a pedestrian traveling along the sidewalk or street adjacent to that structure. 
Landscape concept plan. A landscape concept plan is a series of drawings that includes design direction and general schematics for all proposed public and private landscaping. Drawings do not have to detail every element but provide images that convey the important landscape design themes. 
Land use plan. The land use plan is a component element of the town's master plan. The land use plan, as amended, serves as the community's blueprint for future development by providing guidelines for the appropriate location, concentration, and intensity of future development by land use categories. 
Live-work unit. A live-work unit is a dwelling unit that is also used for work purposes, provided that the 'work' component is restricted to the uses of professional office, artist's workshop, studio, or other similar uses and is located on the street level. The 'live' component may be located on the street level (behind the work component) or any other level of the building. 
Master plan. The Town of Flower Mound Master Plan, as amended, consisting of multiple elements, as adopted by the town council. 
Mixed use development. Mixed use development is any development that proposes either vertical mixed use or horizontal mixed use in the same development of one or multiple buildings. 
Mixed use core. Mixed use core is a component area of a MU and is intended to be the area of highest intensity of land uses and buildings within the overall mixed use development. The mixed use core may include retail, entertainment, office, institutional, arts, and other uses. Residential uses may be included if they are located in upper floors of mixed use buildings. 
Mixed use transition. Mixed use transition is a component area of a MU and is intended to be an area of transition from the mixed use core or neighborhood to any adjoining conditions and uses. Based on site-specific adjacency conditions, a mixed use transition zone may be classified as one of the following: 
(1)  Neighborhood transition zone. The area between an existing residential neighborhood and a mixed use core or neighborhood. 
(2)  Major roadway transition zone. The area between the mixed use core or neighborhood and a major roadway corridor. 
(3)  Environmental transition zone. The area between the mixed use core or neighborhood and a major environmental feature. 
Mixed use neighborhood. A mixed use neighborhood is a component area of a MU with predominantly residential uses and open spaces. A mixed use neighborhood may also contain small-scaled civic uses and nonresidential uses at key locations. 
Park. A park is a natural preserve available mainly for unstructured recreation. Any structured recreation shall be limited to less than ten percent of the park. A park is usually independent of surrounding building frontages. Its landscape consists of natural paths, trails, meadows, woodlands, and open shelters. Its size shall range from five to ten acres. 
 
Parks and trails plan. The parks and trails plan is a component element of the town's master plan that establishes a comprehensive parks and trail system for the community. 
Personal services. This is a category for limited personal service establishments which offer a range of personal services that include clothing alterations, shoe repair, dry cleaners, laundry, health and beauty spas, tanning and nail salons, hair care, etc., and related personal services. This category shall not include tattoo parlors or pawnshops. 
Plaza. A plaza is an open space available for civic purposes and limited commercial activities. A plaza is spatially defined by buildings and its landscape shall consist primarily of pavement with trees being optional. Plazas are to be located in the mixed use core or transition areas and shall be under a one-fourth acre in size. Plazas can be wider sidewalks or extensions of sidewalks for the purpose of providing outdoor seating for restaurants and cafes. 
 
Primary or principal building. The primary building on a lot is also known as the principal building and is the largest building on any lot that has more than one building. 
Primary entrance. The primary entrance is the main or principal pedestrian entrance of all buildings (except outbuildings). The primary entrance is the entrance designed for access by pedestrians from the sidewalk, or street if a sidewalk is not present. This is the principle principal architectural entrance even though day-to-day residential access may be via a secondary entrance associated with a garage, driveway or other vehicular use area. 
Primary street. A primary street is a street that provides the main point(s) of access from an arterial or collector roadway to the mixed use district's interior street network. 
Public buildings. Public buildings are buildings used for active government or related functions, including public administration (executive and judicial), courts, libraries, community centers, and public safety functions. 
Public realm. The public realm is the area from building facade to building facade. This includes the street, sidewalks and pedestrian amenities, any landscaping strips or medians, parks, common yards, etc. 
Public street, type A. Type A public streets are the primary pedestrian-oriented streets and require a higher quality design environment and minimal accommodation of auto-oriented ancillary uses (driveways and parking) with respect to streetscape and building design. 
Public street, type B. Type B public streets form the secondary street network providing access to pedestrian oriented streets (type A streets) and may accommodate automobile access to properties and uses. 
Regulating plan. A plan for adoption of zoning and a conceptual plan that establishes the location of streets, blocks, lots, component districts, streetscape standards, and other development standards, subject to changes within such plan pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
Residential loft. Residential loft is typically a residential unit designed to commercial standards (with high ceilings, open plans, and large windows) located above street level commercial space. 
Retail sales or service. Retail establishments form the final step in the distribution of merchandise. They are organized to sell in small quantities to many customers. Establishments in stores operate as fixed point-of-sale locations, which are designed to attract walk-in customers. Retail establishments often have displays of merchandise and sell to the general public for personal or household consumption, though they may also serve businesses and institutions. Some establishments may further provide after-sales services, such as repair and installation. Included in this category are durable consumer goods sales and service, consumer goods, other grocery, food, specialty food, beverage, dairy, etc, and health and personal services. 
Single-family residential, detached dwelling unit. A single-family detached residential unit is a freestanding building on an individual lot or tract of land intended for occupancy by one family. 
Single-family residential, attached dwelling unit. A single-family attached residential unit is a building on an individual lot or tract of land intended for occupancy by one family that shares one or more common walls with similar adjacent units, also on individual lots such as townhomes, condominiums or brownstones. 
Square. A square is generally a geometrically symmetrical open space of andhalf; to two acres, available for unstructured recreation and civic purposes. A square is spatially defined by streets and buildings, at least on three sides. Its landscape consists of paths, lawns, and trees, all formally arranged. 
 
Snack or nonalcoholic bar. These establishments prepare and serve specialty snacks, such as ice cream, frozen yogurt, cookies, or popcorn, or serve nonalcoholic beverages, such as coffee, juices, or sodas for consumption on or near the premises. These establishments may carry and sell a combination of snack, nonalcoholic beverage, and other related products (e.g., coffee beans, mugs, and coffee makers) but generally promote and sell a unique food or beverage item. 
Street tree. A street tree is a tree or group of trees that line the edge of a street or roadway and includes trees inside and outside the street right-of-way. 
Streetscape treatments. Streetscape treatments include all improvements in a right-of-way and adjacent to it that create an attractive and safe pedestrian environment. Treatments shall include street trees, street light standards, street furniture, and trash receptacles. Streetscape treatments may also include a range of provisions features such as paving materials, street/pedestrian/wayfinding signs, media boxes, parking meters, utility boxes, seating, public art/water features, bike racks, bollards, information kiosks, etc., and similar features. 
Thoroughfare plan. The thoroughfare plan is a component of the town's master plan. The thoroughfare plan, as amended, serves as the community's blueprint for the town's future transportation network based on the future land use allocation and intensity. 
Vertical mixed use. Vertical mixed use is a building or structure in which at least one of the upper floors of a commercial building has residential uses (live-work units or lofts) with a mixture of retail or office uses at the other levels of the building or structure, or office uses above ground floor retail uses. 
(Ord. No. 62-08, § 2, 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 98-900. - General district standards. 
(a)  Generally. A mixed use zoning district shall consist of a minimum of two of the following three distinct components designated in the ordinance creating the district: a mixed use core, mixed use neighborhood, and mixed use transition. Land uses in the district shall be established based upon the overall character and design of the district. All MU's shall contain appropriately designed and scaled open spaces to preserve existing wooded areas, stream corridors and views, and invite passive recreational activities. All MU's shall contain appropriate transitions to adjacent land uses. 
(b)  Mixed use core area. The mixed use core area shall be the primary location of the highest intensity commercial uses including retail uses and offices for business, professional and technical uses. Residential uses in the mixed use core area shall be limited to upper floors of any building and as specified under [section 98-901], table 1, Schedule of Uses. 
(c)  Mixed use neighborhood. The mixed use neighborhood is a component area of the MU that is predominantly residential in nature. Limited retail and civic uses may be located at key points within the neighborhood. The location of the mixed use neighborhood shall be determined based upon the overall character and design of the proposed district and the following criteria: 
(1)  The mixed use neighborhood component, if incorporated into the MU, is to be located between the mixed use core and any mixed use transitions; 
(2)  The mixed use neighborhood shall be well integrated with proposed open space and other civic uses to create a sense of place; 
(3)  The mixed use neighborhood shall also be integrated with proposed mixed use core and mixed use transitions in a manner that provides internal automobile and pedestrian access; and 
(4)  Uses in the mixed use neighborhood shall be to the density and scale that is appropriate based on the context and character of the proposed district. 
(d)  Mixed use transition. The mixed use transition component is the area that forms the transition between the mixed use core or mixed use neighborhood to adjoining conditions. Based on site-specific adjacency conditions, a mixed use transition zone may be one or more of the following: 
(1)  Neighborhood transition zone. The neighborhood transition zone shall include residential uses that are of compatible scale and density to the immediately adjacent existing neighborhoods. 
(2)  Major roadway transition zone. A major roadway corridor is either an arterial roadway or state highway. This transition area shall be the only appropriate location for more automobile- oriented commercial uses due to the adjacency and access along the roadway while transitioning to a pedestrian-oriented development towards the interior of the site. A major roadway transition may include transitions from a rail road right-of way or corridor. 
(3)  Environmental transition zone. The environmental feature may be a creek, water body, significant grades, or tree stands. In particular, the environmental transition zone shall consider appropriate buffers and edge conditions to the specific environmental resource in order to maximize its intrinsic value to the overall mixed use development as a focal point. 
(e)  Open space. The open space component shall be integrated into the overall design of the mixed use zoning district. 
(1)  The type, scale, location, and design of the open space component shall depend on the context and location of the other components of the MU. 
(2)  Squares, parks, greens, and environmental preserves are encouraged in all components. Plazas may serve as open spaces and shall only be appropriate in the mixed use core. 
(Ord. No. 62-08, § 2, 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 98-901. - Schedule of uses. 
(a)  Uses within the MU shall be in accordance with the following schedule of uses. 
P = Permitted (All development standards in [section 98-902] apply) 
P/C = Permitted only where identified in the MU concept plan approved by town council and based on specific criteria under [subsection 98-901(d)]. 
NP = Not Permitted 
SUP = Permitted with a Specific Use Permit (Standards in section 90-186 shall apply) 
A = Permitted as an accessory use (Standards in section 98-1032 shall apply unless the applicant proposes alternative standards for accessory uses and structures subject to town council approval.) 
NA = Not Applicable 
MU-C = Mixed Use Core 
N = Mixed Use Neighborhood 
MU-T = Mixed Use Transition 
MU-T: NG = Mixed Use Transition—Neighborhood 
MU-T: EN = Mixed Use Transition—Environmental 
MU-T: MR = Mixed Use Transition—Major Roadway 
Table 1 	Use Status 
Land Use Category 	MU- C 	N 	MU-T 
			NG 	en 	MR 
Commercial Uses (Office, Retail, and Service Uses) 					
 Retail sales or service (excluded from this category are retail sales and services establishments geared towards the automobile, including gasoline service stations.) 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
 Retail sales or service including establishments geared towards the automobile (including gas stations) 	NP 	NP 	NP 	NP 	P/C 
 Finance, insurance, and real estate establishments including banks, credit unions, real estate, and property management services. 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
 Offices for business, professional, and technical uses such as accountants, architects, lawyers, doctors, etc. 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
 Food service uses such as full-service restaurants, cafeterias, and snack bars 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation Uses 					
 Fitness, recreational sports, gym, or athletic club 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
 Games arcade establishments 	P 	NP 	NP 	P/C 	P 
 Theater, cinema, dance, or music establishment 	P 	NP 	NP 	P/C 	P 
 Museums and other special purpose recreational institutions 	P 	NP 	NP 	P/C 	P 
 Parks, greens, plazas, squares, environmental preserves, and playgrounds 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
 Art, antique, furniture or electronic studio (retail, repair, or fabrication) 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
Educational, Public Administration, Health Care and Other Institutional Uses 					
 Business associations and professional membership organizations 	P 	NP 	NP 	P/C 	P 
 Child day care and preschools 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P/C 	P 
 Schools, libraries, and community halls 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
 Universities and colleges 	P/C 	NP 	NP 	P/C 	P 
 Hospitals 	P 	NP 	NP 	NP 	P 
 Civic uses 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
 Social and fraternal organizations 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
 Public safety facilities 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
 Religious institutions 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
Residential Uses 					
 Home occupations 	NA 	A 	A 	NA 	NA 
 Live/work units 	P/C 	P 1 	P/C 	P 	NP 
 Residential lofts 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
 Apartments/condos (stacked residential) 	P/C 	P 	NP 	P/C 	NP 
 Single-family residential attached dwelling unit 	NP 	P 	P 	P/C 	NP 
 Single-family residential detached dwelling unit 	NP 	P/C 	P 	P/C 	NP 
Other Uses 					
 Model homes for sales and promotion** 	P/C 	P 	P 	P/C 	P/C 
 Full-service hotels 	P 	NP 	NP 	P 	P 
 Outdoor temporary removable displays and sales for fairs, festivals and other special events held in outdoor spaces 	SUP 	NP 	NP 	SUP 	SUP 
 Outdoor vendor sales 	P 	NP 	NP 	P 	NP 
 Parking, surface 	P/C 	P/C/A 	A 	P/C 	P/C 
 Parking, structured 	P/C 	P/C 	NP 	P/C 	P/C 
 Sales from kiosks 	P 	NP 	NP 	P/C 	P/C 
 Any permitted use with a drive through facility 	NP 	NP 	NP 	NP 	P/C 
 Veterinary clinic (no outdoor facilities for overnight storage of animals) 	SUP 	NP 	NP 	NP 	SUP 
 Information centers 	P 	P/C 	NP 	P 	P 
 
(b)  The percentages allocated to each land use as recommended in the paragraph entitled "land use mix," as set forth in the mixed use land use category in the master plan, are guidelines for the applicant and the town to determine the appropriate percentage of acreage devoted to each land use. The town council may vary percentages within the limits indicated based upon site specific conditions in the ordinance establishing the district. 
(c)  Any use not specifically listed in table 1 is prohibited. 
(d)  Use criteria. All uses listed as P/C in table 1 shall be specifically designated in the concept plan for the mixed use zoning district and shall also meet the following standards in table 2: 
TABLE 2—Use Criteria 
Use 	Component Zone 	Location and Design Criteria 
Nonresidential Uses 		
Retail sales and service (excluded from this category are retail sales and services establishments geared towards the automobile, including gasoline service stations.) 	N 	• Shall be limited to ground floor uses on corner lots in the Neighborhood (N). 
• Commercial uses shall be limited to a total of 6,000 square feet per corner lot. 
Finance, insurance, and real estate establishments including banks, credit unions, real estate, and property management services. 		
Offices for business, professional, and technical uses such as accountants, architects, lawyers, doctors, etc. 		
Food service uses such as full-service restaurants, cafeterias, and snack bars 		
Fitness, recreational sports, gym, or athletic club 		
Offices for business, professional, and technical uses such as accountants, architects, lawyers, doctors, etc. 	N 	• Shall be permitted as the ground floor use in a live-work unit only (except for corner lots) 
Art, antique, furniture or electronic studio (retail, repair, or fabrication) 		
Universities and colleges 	MU-C and MU-T (EN) 	• Shall be required to provide structured parking as part of the build-out for the university/college campus 
Civic uses 	N 	• Shall be limited to ground floor uses on corner lots in the neighborhood (N) [zone]. 
• Uses shall be limited to 10,000 square feet. 
Social and fraternal organizations 		
Public safety facilities 		
Religious institutions 		
Retail sales or service including establishments geared towards the automobile (including gas stations) 	MU-T (MR) 	• Shall have the auto-oriented sales and services oriented towards the major roadway. 
• In no case shall gas pumps, canopies, or services bays along the major roadway exceed 50 percent of that lot's street frontage. 
Residential Uses 		
Residential lofts 	N 	• Shall be permitted only in conjunction with a ground floor nonresidential use as permitted above. 
Single-family residential detached dwelling unit 	N 	• Shall be permitted if located adjacent to the same use in a neighborhood transition (NG) zone. 
Apartments/condos (stacked residential) 	MU-C 	• Shall be limited to a one-block area immediately adjacent to the neighborhood (N) zone. 
• Ground floors shall be built to commercial standards including floor to floor heights and floors at-grade to the sidewalk. 
Apartments/condos (stacked residential) 	MU-T (EN) 	• Shall be permitted if located adjacent to the same use in a neighborhood (N) zone. 
Single-family residential attached dwelling unit 	MU-T (EN) 	• Shall be permitted if located adjacent to the same use in a neighborhood (N) zone. 
Other Uses 		
Parking, surface 	All 	• Section 7 (f) shall apply. 
Parking, structured 	All 	• All structured parking shall be lined by active uses along the entire ground floor frontage of all type A streets. 
• All structured parking shall be lined by active uses along a minimum of 50 percent of all type B streets (with the exception of arterials, highways, and alleys). 
• Driveways into the garages shall be from alleys or type B streets as established in the development plan. 
Any use with a drive through facility 	MU-T (MR) 	• All drive through access (driveways) shall be from arterial, type B, or alleys. 
• Drive through lanes and/or canopies shall not front on or be located along any type A street. 
 
(Ord. No. 62-08, § 2, 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 98-902. - Development standards. 
(a)  Standards in the MU are intended to facilitate the development of unique and pedestrian-friendly environments. To this end, design and development standards are intended to be tailored to create such an environment. In order to provide flexibility in use with prescription of the building form, all applicable development standards for each development project in the MU, including listing any applicable sections of Subpart B, Land Development Regulations that the particular development project may be exempt from, shall be established via the ordinance rezoning the property. If there are any conflicts between standards in table 3 below and any other standards in Subpart B, Land Development Regulations, then the standards in table 3 below shall prevail. 
(b)  Accessory uses—Sec. 98-1032. Accessory buildings shall apply unless other standards are proposed by the applicant and approved by town council. 
(c)  The following standards shall apply to development in the mixed use zoning district. Most standards have a numerical range and few have a specific numerical value. Due to the inapplicability of one development standard across all mixed use districts and to encourage a diversity of development proposals, the developer shall propose the standards indicated as "flexible" or "permitted/flexible" on the following table for the proposed development at the time of concept plan application submittal (see [subsection 98-904(b)(2)]) for concept plan submittal requirements in the MU district). 
TABLE 3 
Standard 	MU-C 	N 	MU-T 
			NG 	en 	MR 
1.0 Street Design Standards (This standard applies only to new streets located in the Mixed Use Zoning District) 
Street design standards in the MU shall be based upon creating a safe and inviting walking environment through an interconnected network of roads with sidewalks, street trees, street furniture, and amenities. Cul-de-sacs are prohibited unless natural features such as topography or stream corridors prevent a street connection. The right-of-way widths for streets in the MU shall depend on the street typology and streetscape standards proposed and approved in the ordinance creating the district. Applicant shall establish a network of both Type A and Type B Public Streets. Appendix A shall be used as a guide for street design standards within the MU. The ITE Manual for Context Sensitive Solutions in Designing Major Thoroughfares (referenced as ITE Manual) may be used in lieu of Appendix A to develop alternative street design standards within the MU, subject to the approval of the Town. 
a. Design speed 	= 25 mph (except new collector or arterial streets) 	= 25 mph 	= 25 mph (except new collector or arterial streets) 
b. Street types allowed (see Appendix A for recommended R-O-W and cross sections or ITE Manual) 	 i. Boulevards: 4-lane divided) 
 ii. Avenues: 3-lane divided 
 iii. Main streets 
 iv. Residential streets: 2-lane undivided 	 i. Avenues: 3-lane divided 
 ii. Residential streets: 2-lane undivided 
 iii. Alleys 	 i. Boulevards: 4-lane divided) 
 ii. Avenues: 3-lane divided 

 iii. Main streets 
 iv. Residential streets: 2-lane undivided 
 v. Alleys 
c. Travel lane widths 	Appendix A or ITE Manual standards shall apply 
d. Turning radii 	
e. On-street Parking (along all streets except arterials and alleys) 
• Parallel 
• Angled (only if vehicles per day are projected to be less than 8,000) 	Permitted 
Permitted 	Permitted 
Not permitted 	Permitted 
Not permitted 	Permitted 
Permitted 	Permitted 
Permitted 
f. Parking lane width 
Parallel Angled 	8 feet 
18 feet 	7 - 8 feet 
N/A 	8 feet 
18 feet 
g. Alleys 2 	Permitted/Flexible 	Permitted/Flexible 	Permitted/Flexible 
2.0 Streetscape Standards 
a. Sidewalks/Trails/ Walkways 	6 feet (minimum) 	5 feet (minimum) 	5 feet (minimum) 	6 feet (minimum) 	6 feet (minimum) 
b. Planter/Planting Strip Type 3 	Tree wells or continuous planters 	Continuous planters 	Continuous planters 	Tree wells or continuous planters 	Tree wells or continuous planters 
c. Planter/Planting Strip width 	6' X 6' tree well or 6 feet - 8 feet wide planting strip 	6 feet - 8 feet wide planting strip 	6 feet - 8 feet wide planting strip 	6' X 6' tree well or 6 feet - 8 feet wide planting strip 	6' X 6' tree well or 6 feet - 8 feet wide planting strip 
d. Street trees 	Required/Flexible 	Required/Flexible 	Required/Flexible 	Require/Flexible 	Required/Flexible 
The applicant shall submit a proposed street tree planting plan, including a tree palette and spacing as a part of the Landscape Concept Plan, which shall be reviewed by the Town's Urban Forester and must be approved by the Town Council at the time of Concept Plan and zoning change. The requirements for the landscape concept plan are outlined in section 7 (h) of this chapter. 
3.0 Open/Civic Space Standards 
a. Open/Civic Space 	Required/Flexible Squares and plazas are appropriate 	Required/Flexible Squares and greens are appropriate 	Required/Flexible Squares and greens are appropriate 	Required/Flexible Squares, plazas, and greens are appropriate 	Required/Flexible Squares, plazas, and greens are appropriate 
* Overall open/civic space allocations in the MU District shall be a minimum of five percent of the gross area of the entire site included in the MU concept plan and shall be distributed appropriately between the MU components. Higher open space allocations may be eligible for height bonuses outlined in section 7(i). The location and design of appropriate open spaces shall be based on section 7(g) of this chapter. 
4.0 Block and Lot Standards 
a. Block Type 	Regular (square or rectangular). Irregular blocks may be permitted only if natural topography and/or vegetation prevents a rectilinear grid 	Regular or irregular (square, rectangular, or curvilinear based on topography and vegetation) 	Regular or irregular (square, rectangular, or curvilinear based on topography and vegetation) 	Regular or irregular (square, rectangular, or curvilinear based on topography and vegetation) 	Regular (square or rectangular) 
b. Block Face Dimensions 	Between 400 feet - 600 feet 	Less than 1,200 feet (unless limited by unique site conditions such as topography and vegetation) 	Less than 1,200 feet (unless limited by unique site conditions such as topography and vegetation) 	Between 500 feet and 1000 feet 	Between 500 feet and 1000 feet 
c. Lot Area 	Flexible 	Flexible 	Flexible 	Flexible 	Flexible 
d. Lot Width and Depth 	Flexible 	Flexible 	Flexible 	Flexible 	Flexible 
e. Maximum Lot Coverage 	Flexible 	Flexible 	Flexible 	Flexible 	Flexible 
f. Maximum Impervious Cover 	Flexible 	Flexible 	Flexible 	Flexible 	Flexible 
5.0 Building Standards 
a. Principal Building Height* 	2 stories (minimum)5 stories (maximum)+ bonus floors (see section 7(i)) 	2 stories (minimum) 4 stories (maximum) 	1 story (minimum) 3 stories (maximum) 	1 stories (minimum) 5 stories (maximum) + bonus floors (see section 7(i)) 	1 story (minimum) 3 stories (maximum) 
* Building height shall be measured in number of stories. Attics and mezzanines shall be excluded from the height calculation as long as they do not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of a typical floor in the same building. See section 7(i) for bonus floor provisions. 
b. Setbacks** 
Front 
Side 
Rear 	15 feet (maximum) 
Flexible 
Flexible 	Flexible 
Flexible 
Flexible 	Flexible 
Flexible 
Flexible 	25 feet 
(maximum) 
Flexible 
Flexible 	Flexible 
Flexible 
Flexible 
**Minimum and/or maximum setback standards are to be proposed by the applicant for each component area. 
c. Accessory buildings 	Permitted/ Flexible 	Permitted/Flexible 	Permitted/Flexible 	PermittedFlexible 	Permitted/Flexible 
Standards for accessory uses and structures shall be provided by the applicant. The standards shall result in accessory buildings being subordinate in size and scale to the principal building. section 98-1032, Accessory Buildings shall apply if the applicant does not specifically provide regulations for accessory uses and structures. 
d. Principal building orientation 	Buildings shall be oriented to a Type A street or toward another focal point such as a park, plaza, square, other open space or environmental feature. See subsections 7(b) for additional requirements. 
e. Building facade and architectural design standards 	The applicant shall propose appropriate building facade and architectural design standards for all the MU components in the development with the application for zoning change/concept plan. They shall be based on the criteria established in subsections 7(d) of this chapter. 
6.0 Site Design Standards 
a. Off-street parking 	The applicant shall propose off-street parking standards appropriate to serve the proposed uses in the MU. § 82-74 shall be used as a guide to establish parking standards but parking standards shall be established in the ordinance creating the MU. However, section 7(f) shall regulate the location and design of all proposed off-street parking including any structured parking proposed. 
Parking standards in the MU are intended to be flexible due to the mixed use nature, shared parking opportunities, and availability of on-street parking. 
b. Off-street loading 	Section 82-74 applies unless alternative standards are provided. 	Section 82-74 applies for nonresidential uses only unless alternative standards are provided. 	N/A 	Section 82-74 applies for nonresidential uses only unless alternative standards are provided. 	Section 82-74 applies for nonresidential uses only unless alternative standards are provided. 
c. Screening 
• Trash/recycling receptacles 	Required/Flexible 	Required for nonresidential uses. Flexible for residential uses (along alleys if alleys are provided) 	Required/Flexible 	Flexible 	
• Other utility equipment 	See subsection 82-273 
• Loading spaces 	Required for nonresidential uses. section 82-74 applies for nonresidential uses only unless alternative standards are provided. 
• Surface parking areas 	Required/Flexible (Surface parking located along any public street with the exception of alleys shall be screened from adjoining properties and/or streets. The applicant shall propose the appropriate screening mechanism at the time of concept plan). 
d. Landscaping # 
• Landscape buffer between surface parking and sidewalks/trails and streets (except alleys) 	Required/Flexible 	Required only for nonresidential uses 	N/A 	Required/Flexible 
• Parking lot minimum interior landscaping 	Flexible 	Flexible 	N/A 	Flexible 
# The applicant shall provide a landscape concept plan with the concept plan application that identifies landscape themes and general design approach addressing street tree planting, streetscape treatments, any required screening, parking lot landscaping, and landscaping proposed in all the identified open space areas. Information provided at the concept plan phase may be schematic meeting the design intent of the proposed development. Detailed landscaping plans shall be required at the site plan stage for all nonresidential development. 
e. Lighting 
• Building entrances 

Parking areas, trails, and streets 	Required/Flexible (As a part of the concept plan application, the applicant shall propose lighting standards that includes street light standards and other amenities as a part of the streetscape treatment plan. The landscape concept plan may be combined with a concept plan for lighting.) 
f. Signs 	Flexible (Flexible signage in the Mixed Use Zoning District may be proposed by the applicant to Town Council. Signage in the MU shall integrate the streetscape and architectural design of the district through a palette of signs that enhance the pedestrian environment and create a unique identity.) 
 
(Ord. No. 62-08, § 2, 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 13-19 , § 4, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 98-903. - Performance and design standards. 
(a)  General layout standards. 
(1)  The proposed district shall contain a network of connected streets and walkways that provide a variety of transportation routes and disperse traffic. Streets shall be designed to create a pleasant walking environment with on-street parking and streetscape treatments. 
(2)  The proposed district shall contain designated sites for civic, institutional, or religious buildings. Buildings such as schools, libraries, meeting halls, places of worship, and day care facilities shall occupy prominent places in the MU and be planned in coordination with open spaces. 
(3)  The proposed district shall contain many separate and human-scaled buildings: 
a.  The lots and a variety of buildings shall generate a cohesive pattern that allows streets to be civic places. 
b.  Building heights shall vary, with two to four story structures typical in the neighborhood and one to two story structures in neighborhood transition area. Buildings in the mixed use core and environmental transition areas shall help define the sidewalk. 
c.  Driveway sizes and locations shall minimize the impact of the automobile on the public realm and shall be located along type B streets. 
(b)  Building orientation. 
(1)  Primary building facades for all nonresidential and mixed use buildings shall be oriented to a type A street or shall be oriented toward a focal point such as a landscaped street, plaza, similar formal open space or an environmental feature. 
(2)  Primary buildings shall have a minimum of 50 percent of their building facade oriented along a type B street, arterial, highway frontage, or collector streets and a minimum of 75 percent of their building facade oriented along type A streets (with the exception of alleyways) (see illustration below). 
 
(c)  Building entrances. 
(1)  Primary facades along type A streets shall contain the main entrance of any principal building. 
(2)  All principal buildings in the MU located on a type A street serving the development shall also have doors, windows, and other architectural features facing that street. Nonresidential or mixed use corner buildings shall have at least one customer entrance facing each street or a corner entrance instead of two entrances. 
(d)  Building facade standards. 
(1)  The minimum ground floor height as measured from the finished sidewalk to the second floor for all vertical mixed use, commercial, and live-work buildings shall be 15 feet. The minimum finished floor height for all upper floors of vertical mixed use, commercial, and live-work buildings shall be ten feet. The minimum floor to floor height for all other buildings shall be ten feet. 
(2)  The ground floor elevation of all residential buildings (attached, detached, and stacked) shall be raised a minimum of two feet above the finished level of the public sidewalk/trail in front of the residential structures. 
(3)  All development shall provide ground floor windows on the building facade facing and adjacent to a street (with the exception of alleys) or facing onto a park, plaza, or other civic space. The required area of windows and doors on each street facade fronting a type A street, park, square, green, plaza, or other civic space as a percentage of that facade shall be established in table 4. The required area of windows and doors on all other street facades (type B streets with the exception of alleys) may be reduced by 25 percent of the corresponding requirement along a type A street facade. The facade area shall be measured between three feet and nine feet above each finished floor. 
TABLE 4 
Building and Facade 	MU-C 	N 	MU-T 
			NG 	en 	MR 
Vertical Mixed Use Building 
Ground floor 
facade 	Minimum 	60 percent 	60 percent 	NA 	60 percent 	60 percent 
	Maximum 	75 percent 	75 percent 	NA 	75 percent 	75 percent 
Upper floor 
facade 	Minimum 	30 percent 	30 percent 	NA 	30 percent 	30 percent 
	Maximum 	60 percent 	60 percent 	NA 	60 percent 	60 percent 
All Other Buildings 
Ground floor 
facade 	Minimum 	60 percent 	40 percent 	30 percent 	40 percent 	40 percent 
	Maximum 	75 percent 	60 percent 	60 percent 	60 percent 	60 percent 
Upper floor 
facade 	Minimum 	30 percent 	30 percent 	30 percent 	30 percent 	30 percent 
	Maximum 	60 percent 	60 percent 	60 percent 	60 percent 	60 percent 
 
(4)  Darkly tinted windows and mirrored windows that block two-way visibility shall not be permitted. 
(5)  All vertical mixed use and nonresidential buildings shall have door openings spaced at no greater than 50 feet on the ground floor along all type A streets, plazas, squares, or other civic spaces within the mixed use core zone. 
(e)  Architectural design standards. 
(1)  To ensure compatibility of building types and to relate new buildings to the building traditions of the region, architectural design shall be regulated, governed, and enforced through architectural design standards proposed by the applicant. The applicant shall submit the proposed standards as a part of the concept plan application for all development in the MU. The planning and zoning commission shall make a recommendation and is subject to the approval of the town council at the time of concept plan. 
(2)  Architectural design standards for a proposed MU shall: 
a.  Provide standards to ensure that the development is of enduring and exemplary quality and design; 
b.  Specify the materials and configurations permitted for walls, roofs, openings, street furniture, and other elements; 
c.  Be based on traditional building precedents from the region; 
d.  Include the following: 
1.  Architectural compatibility among structures within the neighborhood; 
2.  Human scale design; 
3.  Pedestrian use of the entire district; 
4.  Relationship to the street, to surrounding buildings, and to adjoining land uses; and 
5.  Special architectural treatment of gateways/civic buildings. 
(3)  All building frontages along public and private streets (with the exception of alleys) shall break any flat, monolithic facades by including architectural elements such as bay windows, recessed entrances, or other articulations so as to provide pedestrian interest along the street level facade including discernible and architecturally appropriate features such as, but not limited to, porches, cornices, bases, fenestration, fluted masonry, bays, recesses, arcades, display windows, unique entry areas, plazas, courts, or other treatments to create visual interest, community character, and promote a sense of pedestrian scale. Expanses of blank walls exceeding 25 continuous feet are prohibited along all type A streets and 40 continuous feet along all other streets except alleys. 
(4)  All buildings in the MU zoning district shall be constructed with exterior building materials and finishes of a quality to convey an impression of permanence and durability. Materials such as masonry, stucco, stone, terra cotta, ceramic tiles, and similar durable architectural materials are allowed and shall be approved with the concept plan for the district. 
(5)  Nonresidential buildings and sites shall be organized to group the utilitarian functions away from the public view of any street (with the exception of alleys). Delivery and loading operations, HVAC equipment, trash compacting and collection, and other utility and service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the buildings and landscaping. The visual and acoustic impacts of all mechanical, electrical, and communications equipments (ground and roof-mounted) shall not be visible from adjacent properties and public streets, and screening materials and landscape screens shall be architecturally compatible with and similar to the building materials of the principal structures on the lot. 
(f)  Location and design of off-street parking. 
(1)  The applicant shall provide standards for the quantity of off-street parking proposed in the district based on an analysis of the parking demand for the mix of uses proposed and availability of on-street parking in the district. section 82-74 shall be used as a guide to establish the amount of parking required for uses proposed in the MU if the applicant does not specifically provide alternative standards. The town council may establish the alternative parking standards proposed by the applicant in the ordinance establishing the district. 
(2)  Off-street parking for all uses located along type A streets shall be limited to 25 percent or less of the block frontage and 50 percent or less on type B streets, arterial, collector, and highway frontage streets (see corresponding building frontage requirement). 
(3)  Any off-street surface parking area located adjacent to a street or a residential use shall be screened in the form of a landscape fence which is at least four feet in height. 
(4)  A surface parking lot may not be adjacent to a street intersection or square, or occupy a lot that terminates a street vista. 
(5)  Shared parking facilities are encouraged for nonresidential uses in the MU. 
(6)  Bicycle parking shall be provided for nonresidential uses, especially for schools, parks, trails, and other recreational facilities. Bicycle parking shall be provided at a rate of five percent of all off-street automobile parking spaces provided for nonresidential and mixed uses in the district. Bicycle parking may be shared between uses and shall be centrally located, easily accessible, and visible from streets or parking lots. They may be located between the roadway and the building facades as long as their location does not impede pedestrian walkways. 
(7)  Any offstreet parking provided for residential uses shall be located in such a manner as to minimize the impact of garages and driveways along the residential street. All residential lots that are less than 60 feet in width shall have off-street parking and/or garages accessed from alleys. All lots 60 feet and wider may have front loaded garages (pull-through garages), but in no case shall the width of the garage exceed 30 percent of the front facade width of the entire building. In addition, the garage shall be set back at least three feet from the front facade of the home. 
(g)  Civic/open space standards. 
(1)  The provision of adequate and appropriate civic/open space areas shall be integral to all development in the district. The minimum requirement for civic/open space in the district is five percent of the gross area of the site which shall be dedicated open space and shall be included in the zoning change/development plan application for a proposed MU. Any open space provided in excess of five percent may be eligible for bonus provisions as outlined in subsection (h). 
(2)  The civic/open space provided shall be appropriately designed and scaled in each of the district components. 
(3)  The following criteria shall be used to evaluate the merits of proposed civic/open spaces in the MU: 
a.  The extent to which environmental elements preserved are considered as "features" or "focal points" and integrated into and prominently located as "front yards" in the development; adding value to the development; 
b.  The extent to which emphasis has been placed on preservation of existing wooded areas, view sheds, water bodies, topography, and stream corridors in a natural and contiguous state; 
c.  The extent to which pedestrian connectivity in the form of sidewalks, natural walking paths along stream and creek corridors has been addressed; and 
d.  The extent to which a range of open spaces have been provided to be contiguous with existing open spaces and to invite passive recreational uses from plazas and squares to playgrounds, parks and environmental preserves, appropriately organized within the respective MU component. 
(4)  Open spaces may be in the form of pocket parks, children's play areas, squares, linear greens, and environmental preserves. Active sports fields and structured recreational activities shall be limited to less than ten percent of any parks located in the district. 
(h)  Landscaping standards. 
(1)  The purpose of landscaping in the MU is to enhance pedestrian and open space areas, to help delineate active areas from passive areas, to provide a screening buffer between pedestrians and vehicular circulation, utility functions, and incompatible adjacent developments. 
(2)  The applicant shall submit a landscape concept plan in conjunction with the zoning change and concept plan application. The landscape concept plan establishes the design direction and general schematics for all proposed landscaping including all aspects of the public realm such as street trees, plant/tree palette, streetscape treatments, pavement details, front yards, and medians; proposals for required parking lot landscaping, screening, design concepts for all open spaces, and lighting. 
(3)  Proposed landscaping shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Be pedestrian oriented. 
b.  Designed in such a way to not create a security or physical hazard to pedestrians, bicyclists or motorists. 
c.  Enhance or complement the architectural design of the mixed-use development. 
d.  Provide visual interest year-round. Utilize water conservation methods and drought tolerant planting where possible. 
e.  Shall be provided between parking lots and all adjacent sidewalks. 
f.  Meet the standards for maintenance in section 82-245. 
g.  Propose a plant/tree palette that mostly includes native species. 
(i)  Bonus provisions. 
(1)  Development in the MU core and environmental transition zones shall be eligible for specific height and density bonuses as provided in this section. 
(2)  The applicant shall provide a list and conceptual design of amenities/design elements with minimum performance standards in conjunction with specific blocks or building sites for increased heights and intensities on the required concept plan for the MU. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission shall make a recommendation to the town council on the proposed bonus package and the town council shall make the final decision on the appropriateness of the amenity/design package for the bonuses requested. 
(4)  Criteria for evaluating height bonuses in the mixed use core and environmental transition zones: 
a.  The following minimum standards shall apply to all buildings that exceed the height limitations within the core and environmental transition zones: 
1.  Distance requirement of 1,200 feet from any existing adjacent neighborhood as measured from the closest property line of any platted residential subdivision not entitled under the MU; 
2.  A minimum increase in open space of three percent over the base requirement; 
3.  A minimum 12-foot building step back from the front facade at the 6th story, provided that the front facade faces and is located on a public street, and 
4.  A minimum of 50 percent of the ground floor building area built and occupied as a nonresidential use only. In the event the building that exceeds permitted height limitations is part of a functionally related complex of buildings, the ground floor nonresidential use requirement may be transferred to a different building or floor within the complex. 
b.  In addition to the above standards, the planning and zoning commission and town council shall take into consideration the following criteria in evaluating height bonuses in the MU: 
1.  Visual impacts of the buildings on adjacent neighborhoods and roadways; 
2.  Impact of site specific conditions such as grades, vegetation, automobile and pedestrian access; 
3.  Design considerations such as: 
i.  The extent to which the architectural design of the mid-to high rise buildings are appropriately integrated with the overall context of the mixed use zoning district including terminating important vistas and creating community landmarks; 
ii.  The extent to which transitions have been considered to adjoining buildings and neighborhoods; and 
iii.  The extent to which amenities such as plazas, square, and other civic spaces are integrated with the building design. 
(Ord. No. 62-08, § 2, 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 98-904. - Applications and development review process. 
(a)  Applications for rezoning. 
(1)  An applicant requesting a rezoning to the MU shall submit a concept plan that meets the requirements of this chapter and includes the informational requirements for a zoning change and development plan. 
(2)  All mixed use developments will be reviewed for compliance with the town's regulations. The analysis will be prepared by a planning firm designated by the town to be included as part of submittals for approval of a comprehensive plan amendment, zoning amendment, development plan, and/or site plan. 
(3)  The applicants of the proposed development shall pay to the town a fee to cover the expense of the mixed use development analysis. The fee determination will be made by the town after review of the complexity, size and location of the proposed development. 
(4)  The town's development review committee (DRC) shall review the application for completeness and compliance with the town master plan and all applicable ordinances and forward the application to the planning and zoning commission. 
(5)  The planning and zoning commission shall make a recommendation on the rezoning request and the town council may approve any such proposal, together with any conditions, requirements or limitations thereon which the planning and zoning commission or town council deems appropriate. The concept plan shall be approved as part of the ordinance establishing the mixed use zoning district. 
(b)  Plan review process. 
(1)  Overview of review process. Development of land in the MU includes two steps and plat approval. The first step is the rezoning and concept plan review and approval phase. The second step is site plan review and approval required by the planning and zoning commission for all nonresidential and mixed use development. A building permit for a single-family detached dwelling unit may be obtained after approval of the record plat provided that the proposed structure meets the standards as established by the council approved concept plan. 
(2)  The concept plan. The concept plan is intended to illustrate the general development pattern of the district consistent with the purpose and intent of the district. 
a.  The applicant shall submit a concept plan for the entire property for which the rezoning is sought. A concept plan in the district is not intended to be a detailed proposal; rather, it shall illustrate the general location of land uses, street layout, treatment of transition areas to adjacent uses and any other appropriate information required by decision makers. The concept plan in the district shall illustrate the proposed general design direction of the site with dimensional guidelines that provide adequate information about the design intent, intensity, and phasing of the proposed district. 
b.  The application shall: 
1.  Demonstrate compliance with the district's purpose and standards and the town's master plan, as amended; 
2.  Include a map(s) meeting all the informational requirements for a zoning change in section 78-201, and a regulating plan meeting the standards of this section including: 
i.  Delineation of the MU components proposed in the development; 
ii.  The layout of proposed mandatory blocks and streets and conceptual bikeways and pedestrian paths; 
iii.  The location and acreage of civic/open space areas and whether each will be privately owned, a common area for residents only or dedicated to public use; 
iv.  The location, area, and percentages of nonresidential (retail, office), residential, civic, and civic/open space uses with flexibility factors; 
v.  The approximate scale and placement of buildings; and 
vi.  The general parking location and standards (surface and structured); 
3.  Include a report in the form of text, statistical information, tables, guidelines, and graphics that includes: 
i.  A statement of the purpose and intent of the proposed district; 
ii.  A description of the mix of land uses and the factors which ensure compatibility both within the development site, with adjacent land uses, and compliance with the recommendations town's master plan; 
iii.  A parking demand analysis for the mix of uses proposed to support the on-street and off-street parking to be provided in the development, especially if the applicant is not using section 82-74 as a guide; 
iv.  Statistical information including: 
A.  Gross acreage of the site, and net acreage of the site excluding jurisdictional wetlands, regulatory floodplains, and slopes over 20 percent; 
B.  The amount of land devoted to civic/open space, both in acres and as a percentage of the gross acreage of the site; 
C.  The amount of land devoted to different land uses, both in acres and as a percentage of the gross acreage of the site; 
D.  A plan for pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation describing the general design capacity of the system as well as access points to community wide network; 
E.  A daily and peak hour trip generation and directional distribution report by use unless the town engineer finds that the traffic to be generated by the proposed district does not warrant the preparation and submission of a study; 
F.  The maximum allowable building coverage, density, and height by each component area; and 
G.  The minimum and maximum building setbacks by component area. 
v.  Street design standards, with typical cross-sections and street classifications including the delineation of type A and type B streets for the proposed district (or for each phase, if it is to be developed by phases) specifying minimum pavement width, right-of-way width, presence of curbs, on-street parking, street trees, bikeways and sidewalks (if different than recommended under appendix A); 
vi.  Development standards for the proposed district (or for each phase, if it is to be developed by phases) specifying standards for all the "flexible" elements by each MU component area in the form of a table; 
vii.  Conceptual architectural standards for the proposed district (or for each phase, if it is to be developed by phases) identifying the design theme and specifying predominant materials and building configurations using renderings, character sketches, and conceptual elevations; 
viii.  A landscape concept plan that includes: the design direction and general schematics for all proposed landscaping including all aspects of the public realm such as street trees, streetscape treatments, pavement details, front yards, and medians; proposals for required parking lot landscaping, screening, design concepts for all open spaces, lighting, and any other information required by town council; 
ix.  A nonbinding schedule for the district (or for each phase, if it is to be developed by phases), which shall show generally how the applicant will complete the project containing the following information: 
A.  The proposed order of construction by section delineated on the concept plan; 
B.  The proposed schedule for construction of improvements to the civic/open space areas; 
C.  The proposed schedule for the installation of required public or utilities improvements and the dedication of public rights-of-way, easements and properties; and 
D.  The proposed land use mix of residential and nonresidential development by phase. 
c.  The applicant may request that the executive director of development services waive any of the foregoing requirements of the application and concept plan that are not applicable to the review of a specific development or defer them to the site plan approval stage. However, if any requirement is deferred to the site plan approval stage, it shall be approved by the town council upon a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  Site plan. A site plan approved by the planning and zoning commission shall be required before building permits can be issued for all multiple-residential, nonresidential and mixed use buildings unless the application is subject to a deferred application requirement in which case the site plan shall be approved by the town council after a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission. Applications for site plans shall be submitted only after the town council has approved a concept plan for that area incorporated by the site plan. 
a.  The planning and zoning shall make a decision on a site plan only after receiving a recommendation of the development review committee. 
b.  In addition to information required in Subpart B, Land Development Regulations, chapter 82, article II. site plans, an application for site plan approval shall include: 
1.  Any special standards for signage that provide a design palette addressing the location, lighting, colors, and materials for all signage in the district; 
2.  Specific parking layout, parking count, and parking lot landscaping 
3.  Detailed landscaping plan meeting the requirements of section 82-214. 
4.  Building elevations including materials, configurations of all building elements such as roofs, walls, doors, windows, and other features. 
c.  A building permit for any lot with a single-family detached dwelling may be approved after concept plan, preliminary plat, and record plat approval and filing at the county clerk's office and only if the design of the proposed residential use meets the approved development plan standards. 
(Ord. No. 62-08, § 2, 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 50-09, § 2, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 98-905. - Modifications. 
(a)  Mixed use standards. The town council may approve modifications to any of the standards in the MU after a recommendation by the planning and zoning commission based on unique site conditions and development context at the time of the application. In granting a modification, the town council may impose any conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to protect the public interest and implement the goals of the town's master plan with respect to mixed use. However, an applicant may submit to the zoning board of adjustment a request for a variance and the board may grant variances to any specifically established standards approved by the town council in the ordinance establishing the particular MU. All such requests will be subject to the standards imposed upon the zoning board of adjustment in section 78-85 of this Code. 
(b)  Park land dedication and park development fees requirements . The park land dedication and park development fee requirements set forth in division VIII of article 6, chapter 90 shall apply and exclusively govern MU mixed use zoning districts. This division 25 of article III, chapter 98 does not authorize park land dedication or park development fee standards that deviate from the requirements of division VIII of article 6, chapter 90. 
(c)  Tree preservation. 
(1)  General. In mixed use development projects, tree mitigation shall be evaluated in regard to the district as a whole based on the tree survey. Tree survey and planting requirements shall comply with chapter 94 "trees." Compliance with the requirements regarding tree removal and mitigation within the mixed use development shall comply with the following standards. 
(2)  Tree removal. 
a.  Undergrowth and unprotected trees. A property-owner/developer may, in its discretion, remove understory growth, including but not limited to vines, shrubs, briars and bushes, and trees that are three caliper inches or less in diameter, however neither protected nor specimen trees as shown on the tree survey shall be removed without the submittal and approval by the town of a tree removal permit. 
b.  Removal of protected or specimen trees. The removal of specimen or protected trees located within a lot or site do not require a tree removal permit, however; such trees shall not be removed from a lot or site prior to all of the conditions listed in this subsection being met. No protected or specimen trees may be removed from a lot or site prior to the approval of a development plan, site plan, plat or replat. In addition, a pre-construction meeting with appropriate town staff shall occur prior to the removal of any protected or specimen tree and/or the authorization of grading and construction activities to begin on the lot or site. 
(3)  Mitigation requirements for authorized tree removal. Tree mitigation requirements for mixed use districts shall not apply to non-residential uses within the mixed use project. Mitigation requirements for residential uses for mixed use districts shall comply with the following provisions. 
a.  Protected trees on-site. It shall be the responsibility of any person removing a protected tree from a lot or site to replace each protected tree so removed with one tree having a caliper of two and one-half—three inches, measured in accordance with the terms of chapter 94 "Trees." 
b.  Specimen trees on-site. It shall be the responsibility of any person removing a specimen tree from a lot or site to replace each specimen tree removed with one or more trees that total twice the caliper inches of the specimen tree(s) removed as measured in accordance with the terms of chapter 94 "trees." For example, if a 30-inch specimen tree is removed, it would be replaced with 60 caliper inches comprised of 20, three-inch caliper trees, five, 12-inch caliper trees or some other combination of trees the caliper measurement of which equates to 60 caliper inches. 
c.  Mitigation payments. Mitigation payments in lieu of planting replacement trees shall be calculated and submitted to the town for approval. Fees in lieu of planting shall be paid to the town's tree preservation fund. 
d.  Mitigation credits and incentives for preservation of protected and specimen trees. If any protected or specimen tree is preserved on a lot or site, credits for said preservation shall be given that will count toward the replacement or mitigation requirements within the lot or site. Credits will accrue only for those trees whose measured drip lines are left predominantly in their natural state. Minimal cutting, filling or other construction-related activities are allowed within the drip line of trees eligible for credits to the extent only that such trees are not damaged or killed by such activity within their drip line. Said credits will accrue as follows. 
1.  For each protected tree preserved or transplanted within a lot or site or transplanted elsewhere in the site, one tree credit shall be given. 
2.  For each specimen tree preserved or transplanted within a lot or site or transplanted elsewhere within the site, credit for caliper width equivalent to the caliper width of the tree preserved or transplanted shall be given. For example, preserving or transplanting a specimen tree having a 30-inch caliper width would result in 30 caliper inches of credit, or ten, three-inch caliper trees. 
3.  For purposes of this section, one credit shall be given for landscaping trees planted in compliance with the mixed use district landscaping standards. 
(Ord. No. 62-08, § 2, 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 49-12, § 2, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 13-19 , § 5, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 98-906. - Amendments to approved plans or regulations established in an MU ordinance. 
(a)  The concept plan shall establish an overall vision for the proposed development within the framework of flexible design standards as established by the applicant in conjunction with the zoning application. Any changes to the concept plan that are beyond the range of flexibility provided in the ordinance establishing the specific district shall be considered as major changes to an approved MU and shall be reviewed by staff and subject to planning and zoning commission recommendation and town council approval. The executive director of development services may approve minor changes to and deviations from an approved site plan with the applicant's written justification for such changes. Minor changes may be approved administratively by the executive director and a revised concept plan shall be filed with the town. Any changes shall be reviewed cumulatively from the last town council approved concept plan. Major changes to an approved MU shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Any change in area of a component zone in excess of 20 percent greater or less than approved in a concept plan. 
(2)  Deletion or addition of a component zone or change in location of a component zone relative to any other component zones or adjacent properties. 
(3)  Elimination or change in an external connection (automobile or pedestrian) that negatively impacts any adjacent properties. 
(4)  A ten percent or greater reduction in the gross amount of open space that was approved in a concept plan. 
(5)  A change that results in a 30 percent or greater transfer of open space between any of the component zones as compared to the approved concept plan. 
(6)  Any changes to the development standards that were approved with the ordinance creating the MU district. 
(7)  Any increases or reductions in the land use mix proposed in any phase of the development that was approved as part of the original MU concept plan. 
(b)  If the proposed change is major as defined by subsection (a) above or conflicts with regulations specified within the ordinance establishing the MU, it shall be processed as an amendment to the zoning ordinance, and must be approved by the town council after a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  If the town receives an application to rezone only a portion of the property within an MU established by ordinance, the town may consider the request for rezoning that portion and is not required to rezone the remainder of the property. However, the zoning change requested shall be evaluated based on the purpose, intent, and context of the proposed changes. 
(Ord. No. 62-08, § 2, 10-6-2008)  
Secs. 98-907—98-910. - Reserved.  
APPENDIX A - Street Design Standards for Mixed Use 
The following street cross sections have been established as meeting the town's standards for mixed use projects: 
Design Feature 	Arterial Boulevard 	Collector 59' 	Collector 41' 	Local 37' 	Local 30' 	Alley 
Number of lanes 	4 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2 
Lane width 	10.5' 	12' 	12' 	10' 	10'6" 	10' 
Pavement width (3) 	21' on each side of median 	24' 	24' 	20' 	20' 	20' 
Right-of-way width 	92' 	59' 	41' 	37' 	29' 	20' 
Design speed (mph) 	20 - 30 	20 - 30 	20 - 30 	20 - 30 	20 	10 
Maximum grade 	7½% 	7½% 	7½% 	7½% 	7½% 	7½% 
Minimum grade 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 	0.7% 
Minimum centerline radius 	150' 	150' 	150' 	150' 	150' 	N/A 
Median width 	15' 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
Median break 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
Type of on-street parking 	Angled 	Angled 	Parallel 	Parallel 	Parallel 	None 
Parking space depth 	17' 	17' 	8' 	8' 	8' 	N/A 
Parking space width 	9' 	9' 	23' 	23' 	23' 	N/A 
Location on street 	Both sides 	Both sides 	Both sides 	Both sides 	One side 	N/A 
Fire hydrant separation (1) 	200' 	200' 	300' 	300' 	200' 	N/A 
Sidewalk width (2) 	15' 	11.5' 	14.5' 	9.5' 	9.5' 	N/A 
Sidewalk planting area 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	N/A 
 
1. Arterial Boulevard 
 
2. Collector 59' 
 
3. Collector 41' 
 
4. Local 37' 
 
5. Local 30' 
 
6. Alley 
 
(Ord. No. 62-08, § 2, 10-6-2008)  
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 98-911. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 36-15 , § 2, adopted June 15, 2015, repealed § 98-911, which pertained to sale, serving or storage of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, and derived from Ord. No. 7-84, § 2, adopted Feb. 13, 1984.  
Secs. 98-912—98-930. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USES  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Secs. 98-931—98-950. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Regulations 
 
Sec. 98-951. - Use regulations generally. 
Land and buildings in each district may be used for any of the principal or accessory land uses authorized in the regulations set forth for that district in division 2 of article III of this chapter, IH interim holding district, through division 23 of article III of this chapter, CI campus industrial district, but no land shall hereafter be used, and no building or structure, shall hereafter be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished or converted that is arranged or designed to be used or used for other than those uses specified for the district in which it is located, other than accessory uses incidental to a permitted principal use and complying with the provisions of section 98-972, accessory use, general. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(a); Ord. No. 71-00, § 2, 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 98-952. - Use classification. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The use regulations of the zoning districts are based on the use classification system of this section. The purpose of the provisions of this section is to classify uses of land into a number of specially defined land use categories on the basis of common functional characteristics and similar compatibility with other uses, thereby providing a basis for regulation of uses in accordance with criteria that are directly relevant to the public interest. The provisions of this section shall apply throughout this chapter. 
(b)  Classification of principal uses. The use categories listed in the use regulations schedule in subsection (c) of this section shall be considered to be principal uses, with the exception of uses listed in the "accessory and temporary uses" category. A single lot, other than a lot used for residential dwelling purposes, may contain more than one principal use, or a single use that has the characteristics of more than one use category, unless otherwise prohibited by the provisions of this chapter. All existing and proposed uses shall be classified into the use category that most closely portrays the overall nature of such activity. Any use that cannot be so classified shall not be permitted in any district. 
(c)  Schedule of use regulations. The following use regulations schedule summarizes the use regulations of the districts. In the event of any conflict between the use regulations schedule and the text of the zoning district regulations, the text shall control. Uses that were established prior to the adoption of this chapter or its predecessors, but that are now inconsistent with the requirements of this chapter, shall be permitted if such uses meet the requirements of article V, chapter 78 of this Code, nonconformities, for a valid nonconforming use. The use regulations schedule shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  Permitted uses. Uses identified in a particular district column with a "P" shall be permitted in such district, subject to compliance with all applicable conditions and provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Specific uses. Uses identified in a particular district column with an "S" shall be permitted in such district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 98-953, specific use permits. 
(3)  Temporary uses. Uses identified in a particular district column with a "T" shall be permitted in such district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of [section] 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits. 
(4)  Not permitted. Uses not identified in a particular district column with a "P," "S" or "T" are not allowed in such district, unless otherwise expressly permitted in this chapter. 
(5)  Use conditions. Numbers occurring in parenthesis after the names of selected use categories refer to conditions applicable to such use and set forth in subdivision III of this division, special use conditions. 
SCHEDULE OF USE REGULATIONS 
Use Type/Section 	98-271 	98-301 	98-431 	98-331 	98-361 	98-391 	98-421 	98-451 	98-481 	98-511 	98-541 	98-571 	98-601 	98-631 	98-661 	98-841 	98-871 	98-691 	98-721 	98-751 	98-781 	98-811 	98-890 
Residential Uses 	A 	SFE 	SF-5 	SF30 	SF15 	SF10 	SFA 	2F 	MF 	MH 	O 	R1 	R2 	C1 	C2 	CC 	CI 	I1 	I2 	WR 	REC 	PD 	CBD 
Accessory dwelling (98-983) 	S 	S 																				S 	* 
Dwelling, duplex 								P 														P 	* 
Dwelling, mobile home (98-987) 										P 													* 
Dwelling, multifamily 									P 													P 	* 
Dwelling, single-family attached 							P 															P 	* 
Dwelling, single-family detached 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 														P 		P 	* 
Mobile home park (98-987) 										P 													* 
Accessory and Temporary Uses 	A 	SFE 	SF-5 	SF30 	SF15 	SF10 	SFA 	2F 	MF 	MH 	O 	R1 	R2 	C1 	C2 	CC 	CI 	I1 	I2 	WR 	REC 	PD 	CBD 
Accessory retail/service uses 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 	* 
Accessory use, general (98-972) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	* 
Animal exhibition 	S 																						* 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temp. (98-974) 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	* 
Aviary 	S 																						* 
Building material yard and construction office 											T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 				* 
Caretaker or guard residence (98-975) 	S 														S 			S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	* 
Caretaker or guard residence (mobile home) (98-975) 															S 			S 	S 				* 
Carnival or circus, temp. (98-976) 	T 											T 	T 	T 	T 			T 	T 			T 	* 
Day care home 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 										P 		P 	* 
Field office, temp. 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	* 
Garage sale (98-982) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 										P 		P 	* 
Home occupation (98-984) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 														P 		P 	* 
Model home (98-1000) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 														P 	* 
Off-street parking, accessory 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	* 
Parking lot, commercial 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Parking structure, commercial 											S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Recreation center 											S 	S 	S 				P 				P 	P 	* 
Recycling drop-off center (98-990) 														S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 			S 	* 
Refreshment stand (98-991) 												T 	T 	T 	T 					T 	T 	T 	* 
Sales trailer, temporary (98-993) 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 										T 		T 	* 
Sales, temporary or seasonal (98-992) 	T 										T 	T 	T 	T 	T 			T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	* 
Swimming pool, private (98-996) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 										P 		P 	* 
Temporary Special Event (98-976) 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	* 
Educational, Institutional and Civic Uses 	A 	SFE 	SF-5 	SF30 	SF15 	SF10 	SFA 	2F 	MF 	MH 	O 	R1 	R2 	C1 	C2 	CC 	CI 	I1 	I2 	WR 	REC 	PD 	CBD 
Animal control facility 	S 												S 	P 	P 							P 	* 
Cemetery or mausoleum 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 			S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	* 
Church or rectory 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 		P 	* 
College or university 	P 	S 	P 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Community center, public 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 		P 	* 
Convent or monastery 	P 	P 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 					P 			P 	P 			P 	* 
Day care center 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 			S 	* 
Exhibition area or fairgrounds 	S 													S 	S 			S 	P 	S 	S 	P 	* 
Fire station 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	* 
Fraternal club or lodge 	S 										S 		P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	S 		P 	* 
Hospital 	S 	S 		S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	* 
Institution, drug or psychiatric treatment 	S 										S 			S 	S 	S 	S 	S 				P 	* 
Museum, library or art gallery, public 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	S 	P 	* 
Nursing or congregate care facility 	S 	S 							S 		S 			S 	S 			S 		P 		P 	* 
Public building, shop or yard 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	* 
School, elementary or secondary 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 			P 				P 	* 
Utility and Public Services Uses 	A 	SFE 	SF-5 	SF30 	SF15 	SF10 	SFA 	2F 	MF 	MH 	O 	R1 	R2 	C1 	C2 	CC 	CI 	I1 	I2 	WR 	REC 	PD 	CBD 
Communication tower, commercial (98-977) 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	* 
Dump or sanitary landfill area 	S 																		S 				* 
Electrical energy generating plant 	S 													S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 	* 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage (98-979) 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	* 
Local utility line 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	* 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		P 	* 
Private utility shop, yard or building 	S 																S 	S 	P 		P 	P 	* 
Sewage pump station 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	* 
Sewage treatment plant 	S 																S 	S 	P 	S 	P 	P 	* 
Telephone equipment station 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	* 
Transmission pipeline (98-997) 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	* 
Water well, storage or pump station 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	* 
Transportation-Related Uses 	A 	SFE 	SF-5 	SF30 	SF15 	SF10 	SFA 	2F 	MF 	MH 	O 	R1 	R2 	C1 	C2 	CC 	CI 	I1 	I2 	WR 	REC 	PD 	* 
Airport or landing field 	S 																		P 		P 	S 	* 
Bus station or terminal 											S 				P 		P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	* 
Heliport 	S 															P 	P 	S 	S 		S 	P 	* 
Helistop 	S 										S 				S 	P 	P 	S 	S 	S 		S 	* 
Parking lot, trucks or trailers (transport) 																	S 	S 	P 			P 	* 
Railroad freight or passenger station 																	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Railroad team track 	S 																P 	P 	P 		S 	P 	* 
Railroad track 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Retail Uses 	A 	SFE 	SF-5 	SF30 	SF15 	SF10 	SFA 	2F 	MF 	MH 	O 	R1 	R2 	C1 	C2 	CC 	CI 	I1 	I2 	WR 	REC 	PD 	* 
Antique shop 												P 	P 	P 	P 							P 	* 
Art gallery or handicraft sales 												P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 	* 
Art supply store 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 	* 
Bait and sporting goods sales 													P 	P 	P 			P 		P 	S 	P 	* 
Bakery or confectionery shop, retail 												P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 	* 
Book or stationary store or newsstand 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 		P 	* 
Convenience store 													P 	P 	P 	S 				P 		P 	* 
Convenience store with beer/wine sales 																							* 
Convenience store with gasoline sales 													S 	S 	S 	S 				S 		S 	* 
Drugstore or pharmacy 											S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 				P 		P 	* 
Farmer's market (98-980) 	S 																						* 
Florist 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Fruit and vegetable stand (98-981) 	P 																						* 
Hardware store 													P 	P 	P 			P 				P 	* 
Optical sales 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 	* 
Pet store (98-988) 													P 	P 	P 							P 	* 
Plant nursery or garden shop 													P 	P 	P 			P 				P 	* 
Private club (98-989) 																							* 
Restaurant, drive-in 														S 	S 			P 					* 
Restaurant, fast food 													P 	P 	P 	S 	S 	P 				P 	* 
Restaurant, general 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	* 
Retail general (indoors) 												S 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 	* 
Retail, general (outdoors) 															S 								* 
Retail, single tenant (less than 25,000 sq. ft.) 												P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Retail, single tenant (25,000 square feet but less than 50,000 sq. ft.) 												S 	S 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Retail, single tenant (50,000 sq. ft. but less than 75,000 sq. ft.) 													S 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Retail, single tenant (75,000 sq. ft. but less than 100,000 sq. ft.) 														S 	P 	S 	S 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Retail, single tenant (100,000 sq. ft. or more) 															S 	S 	S 	S 	S 			S 	* 
Secondhand store 															P 							P 	* 
Supermarket 													P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	S 		P 	* 
Supermarket with beer/wine sales 																							* 
Personal Service Uses 	A 	SFE 	SF-5 	SF30 	SF15 	SF10 	SFA 	2F 	MF 	MH 	O 	R1 	R2 	C1 	C2 	CC 	CI 	I1 	I2 	WR 	REC 	PD 	CBD 
Assembly hall 												S 	S 	S 	S 							S 	* 
Bank or savings and loan 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	* 
Boardinghouse or roominghouse 									P 														* 
Cleaning/laundry pickup station only 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Cleaning/laundry shop with onsite plant 												S 	S 	P 	P 			P 	P 			P 	* 
Cleaning/laundry shop with pickup station 											S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 	* 
Custom personal service 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 		P 	* 
Dance hall 															P 			P 				P 	* 
Dancing, drama, and music school 											S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 	* 
Extended stay hotel 											S 				S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	* 
Hotel or motel 											S 				P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	* 
Laboratory, medical and dental 											S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Laundry, self-service 												P 	P 	P 	P 							P 	* 
Mortuary or funeral home 											S 	S 	P 	P 	P 							P 	* 
Office, general business and professional 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Office, medical and dental 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 	* 
Personal improvement services 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	* 
Repair services, limited 													P 	P 	P 			P 				P 	* 
School, business 											P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	* 
School, commercial trade 	S 													S 	S 	S 	P 	S 	P 			P 	* 
Sexually oriented business (98-994) 																		S 	S 				* 
Studio, television or radio 											S 			S 	S 	P 	P 	S 	S 				* 
Tool rental (domestic equipment) 															P 		P 	P 				P 	* 
Travel bureau or consultant 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 		P 	* 
Veterinary hospital (inside pens) (98-998) 	S 												S 	P 	P 							P 	* 
Veterinary hospital (outside pens) (98-999) 	S 																	P 	P 				* 
Wine retail establishment 																						S 	* 
Recreational and Entertainment Uses 	A 	SFE 	SF-5 	SF30 	SF15 	SF10 	SFA 	2F 	MF 	MH 	O 	R1 	R2 	C1 	C2 	CC 	CI 	I1 	I2 	WR 	REC 	PD 	CBD 
Amusement and recreation (indoors) (98-973) 	S 										S 		S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 		S 	S 	P 	* 
Amusement and recreation (outdoors) 	S 													S 	P 	S 	P 	P 			S 		* 
Boat storage and service 	S 																	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	* 
Country club, private (98-978) 	P 	P 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 								P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	* 
Day camp for children 	P 	S 												S 	S 			S 	S 	P 		P 	* 
Drag strip or commercial racing 																			S 				* 
Dude ranch 	S 																				S 		* 
Golf course, private 	S 																	S 	S 	S 		P 	* 
Golf course, public 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	* 
Health club or athletic club 											S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	S 	S 					P 	* 
Marina 	S 																	S 	S 	P 	S 	P 	* 
Park or playground, public 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	* 
Recreation center, public 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 	P 		P 		P 		P 	* 
Rodeo grounds 	S 																	S 	S 		S 		* 
Shooting range, commercial 																			S 		S 		* 
Stable, commercial boarding or rental (98-995) 	S 																				S 	S 	* 
Stadium or playfield, public 	P 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 					S 	S 			S 	P 	S 		P 	* 
Swimming pool, commercial 	S 										P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		S 		P 	* 
Swimming pool, public 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	* 
Theater 											S 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	S 	P 	* 
Theater, drive-in 																		S 	P 		S 		* 
Automobile and Related Service Uses 	A 	SFE 	SF-5 	SF30 	SF15 	SF10 	SFA 	2F 	MF 	MH 	O 	R1 	R2 	C1 	C2 	CC 	CI 	I1 	I2 	WR 	REC 	PD 	CBD 
Auto leasing or rental 														P 	P 			P 				P 	* 
Auto painting or body shop 																		P 	P 				* 
Auto parts and accessory sales (indoors) 													P 	P 	P 			P 				P 	* 
Auto parts and accessory sales (outdoor display) 																		P 					* 
Auto repair garage 													S 	S 	P 			P 	P 			P 	* 
Auto storage or auction 																		P 	P 				* 
Car sales, new or used 															P 			P 				P 	* 
Car wash, automatic 													S 	S 	P 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 		P 	* 
Car wash, full service 													S 	S 	P 	S 		P 	P 	P 		P 	* 
Car wash, self-service 													S 	S 	S 			S 	S 	S 		P 	* 
Motor vehicle fuel service station 													S 	S 	P 			P 	P 	P 		P 	* 
Tire retreading or capping 																		S 	P 				* 
Wrecking or salvage yard 																			S 				* 
Heavy Commercial Uses 	A 	SFE 	SF-5 	SF30 	SF15 	SF10 	SFA 	2F 	MF 	MH 	O 	R1 	R2 	C1 	C2 	CC 	CI 	I1 	I2 	WR 	REC 	PD 	CBD 
Building material sales or storage (indoors) 															P 		P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Building material sales or storage (outdoors) 																		S 	P 				* 
Cabinet and upholstery shop 														P 	P 		P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Cleaning, dyeing or laundry plant 															P 		P 	P 				P 	* 
Laboratory, manufacturing 																		S 	S 				* 
Laboratory, scientific and research 											S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Lithographic or print shop 														P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Maintenance service 															P 		P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Miniwarehouse 														S 	S 			S 	P 				* 
Office—showroom/warehouse 															S 	S 	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Repair services, general 																	S 	S 	P 				* 
Vehicle and equipment sales or rental 															P 			P 	P 			P 	* 
Warehousing and wholesale, general 																	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Welding or machine shop 																			P 			P 	* 
Industrial Uses 	A 	SFE 	SF-5 	SF30 	SF15 	SF10 	SFA 	2F 	MF 	MH 	O 	R1 	R2 	C1 	C2 	CC 	CI 	I1 	I2 	WR 	REC 	PD 	CBD 
Asphalt/concrete batching plant (permanent) 																			S 				* 
Bakery or confectionery, wholesale 															P 		P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Bottling works 															S 		P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Food processing 															P 		P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Manufacturing, general 																			P 			P 	* 
Manufacturing, hazardous/objectionable 																			S 				* 
Manufacturing, light 																	P 	P 	P 			P 	* 
Agriculture and Extractive Uses 	A 	SFE 	SF-5 	SF30 	SF15 	SF10 	SFA 	2F 	MF 	MH 	O 	R1 	R2 	C1 	C2 	CC 	CI 	I1 	I2 	WR 	REC 	PD 	CBD 
Crop agriculture 	P 	P 																		P 		P 	* 
Feed store 														S 	P 			P 	P 			P 	* 
Greenhouse, wholesale 	P 														P 			P 	P 			P 	* 
Keeping of livestock or poultry (Keeping animals 98-985) 	P 	P 																				P 	* 
Kennel (In enclosed building only) (98-986) 	S 												S 	P 	P 			P 	P 			P 	* 
Kennel (with outside runs or pens) (98-986) 	S 																	P 	P 			P 	* 
Livestock auction or feed lot 	S 																		S 				* 
Mining and quarrying 	S 																		S 				* 
Petroleum storage/collection facilities 	S 																		S 		S 		* 
 
* The uses allowed in the CBD are specified in the zoning ordinance as approved and adopted by the town council, establishing a CBD on a particular land use area and such zoning ordinance shall specify what uses are permitted uses, what uses are specific uses requiring a specific use permit, and what uses are temporary uses. A list of such category of uses shall be maintained by the executive director of development services for each CBD approved by the town council. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(b), (c); Ord. No. 27-99, § 1, 4-5-1999; Ord. No. 75-99, § 2(3.05), 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 14-00, § 2, 2-17-2000; Ord. No. 32-00, § 2(3.05), 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 50-00, § 1, 7-17-2000; Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 49-01, § 1, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 48-03, § 9, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 75-03, § 2, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 76-03, § 24, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 72-05, § 8, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 02-07, §§ 2(Exh. 1), 16, 1-18-2007; Ord. No. 47-07, § 2(Exh. 1), 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 80-07, § 17, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 17-08, § 3, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 45-08, § 3, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 05-10, § 4, 1-21-2010 Ord. No. 33-11, § 4, 7-18-2011; Ord. No. 06-12, § 35, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 61-19 , § 5, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 98-953. - Specific use permits. 
(a)  Applicability. No building permit shall be issued in any zoning district for any use for which a specific use permit is required under this subpart B until a specific use permit has been approved according to the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. Any person having a proprietary interest in any property within the corporate limits of the town requesting approval of a specific use permit shall file an application with the town. The completed application shall include the following information: 
(1)  A clear description of the proposed use. 
(2)  A drawing, at a scale of not less than one inch to 200 feet, indicating the following: 
a.  Existing zoning district classifications; 
b.  Proposed zoning district classifications in a format that identifies boundaries between different zoning districts; 
c.  Comprehensive master plan features, whether on-site or proposed, from any and all of the following elements: land use plan, urban design plan, parks and open space plan, trail network, and/or thoroughfare plan; 
d.  The location of high voltage electrical lines, transmission pipelines and associated easements. 
(3)  A vicinity map indicating the general location of the subject property. 
(4)  A metes and bounds description of the subject property typewritten on an 8 ½-inch by 11-inch sheet of paper. 
(5)  An 8 ½-inch by 11-inch photomatte (PMT) reduction of the above drawings. 
(6)  A filing fee shall be submitted with every application in accordance with the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. In addition, a site plan review fee shall be submitted with every application requesting a specific use permit that requires a site plan in accordance with the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
(7)  A site plan drawing meeting the requirements identified in section 82-33. Such site plan shall be attached as an exhibit to the specific use permit. Development of the site shall be in accordance with the approved site plan. 
(c)  Issuance. The town council, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected and after public hearing and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, may authorize the issuance of specific use permits for the uses indicated in the use regulations of the zoning district of the property for which the specific use permit is requested. 
(d)  Plans, information, operating data and evaluation. The planning and zoning commission, in considering and determining its recommendations to the town council on any request for a specific use permit, may require from the applicant plans, information, operating data and expert evaluation concerning the location, function and characteristics of any building or use proposed. 
(e)  Imposition of development standards and safeguards. The town council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to ensure compliance with this section, establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement and construction of any use for which a permit is authorized. In authorizing the location of any use listed as requiring a specific use permit, the town council may impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and location indicate important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property from noise, vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, fumes, gas, odor, explosion, glare, offensive view or other undesirable or hazardous conditions. 
(f)  Reference of permit to zoning district map. All specific use permits approved in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be referenced on the zoning district map and a file containing all documents relevant to the application and disposition of such specific use permit shall be maintained by the town. 
(Ord. No. 06-12, § 21, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 98-954. - Expiration or automatic renewal of SUPs. 
(a)  Except for uses where a mandatory expiration and automatic renewal option is otherwise required, a specific use permit granted in accordance with section 98-953 may include an expiration date or a provision providing eligibility for automatic renewal upon submission of a complete application package with automatic renewal requirements. 
(b)  Failure to timely file a complete renewal application will render a specific use permit ineligible for automatic renewal. The town council may, however, reinstate a SUP's eligibility for future automatic renewals as part of a new SUP ordinance or ordinance amendment. 
(c)  Automatic renewal does not result in an amendment to the SUP ordinance. An applicant seeking to change the SUP conditions or to otherwise amend the SUP ordinance must submit a new SUP application, as outlined in section 98-953. As part of the application for automatic renewal, the property owner shall state that all existing SUP conditions have been complied with, and that no changes to the conditions or other SUP ordinance provisions are being requested. 
(d)  Upon the filing of a complete application for automatic renewal, the director of development services, shall send written notice to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the area governed by the SUP. The notice must state that the SUP is eligible for automatic renewal and may be automatically renewed without further notice. 
(e)  If the owners of 20 percent or more of the land within 200 feet of the area governed by the SUP file a written protest against the automatic renewal in accordance with section 78-154, the application shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission for consideration, as outlined in section 78-154. In addition, if the director of development services determines that the conditions of the SUP have not been met, the director of development services may forward the application to the planning and zoning commission for consideration, as outlined in section 78-154. 
(f)  If forwarded for consideration, the planning and zoning commission shall make a recommendation to town council regarding the proposed renewal based on staff reports, field inspections, and the evidence presented at its public hearing. 
(g)  If forwarded for consideration, town council may: repeal the SUP's eligibility for automatic renewal; supplement, remove, or amend any of the conditions or provisions of the subject SUP ordinance; or take no action and allow the SUP to automatically renew. No renewal or expiration of a SUP may occur while the application is pending consideration. 
(h)  This subsection does not impair the ability of the town council to call a public hearing on its own motion for the purpose of passing an amending ordinance to repeal a SUP's eligibility for automatic renewal, or to supplement, remove, or amend any of the conditions or other provisions in a SUP ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 61-19 , § 3, 10-7-2019)  
Secs. 98-955—98-970. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Special Use Conditions 
 
Sec. 98-971. - Application of subdivision provisions. 
The conditions in this subdivision apply to the listed uses when referenced in the use regulations of a particular zoning district, division 2 of article III, IH interim holding district through division 23 of article III CI campus industrial district. 
(Ord. No. 71-00, § 3, 10-16-2000) 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, ch. 90.  
Sec. 98-972. - Accessory use, general. 
Accessory uses not elsewhere specifically provided for in this chapter shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Such accessory uses shall be limited to those customarily associated with and appropriate, incidental and subordinate to the principal use. 
(2)  Such accessory uses shall be located on the same lot or tract as the associated principal use. 
(3)  Such accessory uses shall be controlled in the same manner as the associated principal use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(1))  
Sec. 98-973. - Amusement, commercial (indoor). 
An indoor commercial amusement enterprise shall be wholly enclosed in a building that is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property line. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(2)) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.  
Sec. 98-974. - Asphalt or concrete batching plant (temporary). 
A temporary asphalt or concrete batching plant permit may be approved by the town manager, subject to the conditions of this section. Any exceptions to the following conditions shall require approval of the town council: 
(1)  The batching plant site shall comply with all applicable provisions of town, state and federal laws. 
(2)  The batch plant shall not be located within 600 feet of an inhabited residence. 
(3)  Hours of operation will be limited to Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Aggregate trucks shall be prohibited from hauling to or from the site on Saturday. 
(4)  The batch plant permit shall be valid for a three-month period. 
(5)  No portion of the batch plant or its operation shall be located on a public or private street, or on land dedicated to the town for parks and open space. 
(6)  The batch plant shall only furnish concrete, asphalt, or both, to the specific project for which the temporary permit is issued. The placement of a temporary batching plant for a private project is restricted to the site of the project. 
(7)  The temporary plant shall be operated in a manner that eliminates unnecessary dust, noise and odor (as illustrated by, but not limited to, covering trucks, hoppers, chutes, loading and unloading devices and mixing operations, and maintaining driveways and parking areas free of dust). 
(8)  The site must be clear of all equipment, material and debris upon completion of the project. 
(9)  All public improvements that are damaged during the operation of the temporary batching plant must be repaired or replaced within 30 days of completion of the project. 
(10)  Upon expiration of the temporary permit and cessation of activities, the town manager and permittee shall walk the site to verify compliance with these special conditions. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(3)) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.  
Sec. 98-975. - Caretaker or guard residence. 
A caretaker or guard residence shall contain a minimum floor area of 1,450 square feet. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(4)) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.  
Sec. 98-976. - Carnival, circus, or special event (temporary). 
A temporary use permit for a carnival, circus, or special event may be issued by the town manager, or his or her duly appointed representative subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A legible and complete application for a permit shall be made at least 15 business days prior to the date such temporary carnival, circus, or special event shall commence operation. 
a.  If a legible and complete application for a permit under this section is submitted less than 15 business days prior to the commencement date of any such event the applicant, specifically including nonprofit organizations, shall pay a late submittal fee in the amount of $100.00 per day for each day or part of a day less than 15 business days before the event that the submittal is made. 
b.  A legible and complete application for a permit under this section that is submitted less than three business days prior to the commencement date of any such event shall be subject to the foregoing late submittal fee. In addition the town makes no assurances that the review of the permit application and the issuance of the permit will be complete for any such application prior to the planned date of the event. Further, it shall be a violation of this section to commence operation of a temporary carnival, circus, or special event without first receiving a temporary event permit. 
c.  A permit pursuant to this section shall be granted or denied by the town manager or his or her duly appointed representative within 15 business days after submission to the town of a legible and complete permit application. 
d.  A maximum of six special event permits may be issued per year to the same address, property owner, and/or business owner. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the community services department, and shall contain the following information in order to be considered complete: 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of person, organization, or company conducting the event. 
b.  Date or dates of the carnival, circus, or special event. 
c.  Name of any and all food vendors participating in the event including, but not limited to, the types of foods and beverages to be offered to the public and the manner in which said foods and beverages are packaged, prepared and served. 
d.  A legible site plan drawn to scale and/or with dimensional detail showing the location, size, number and configuration in detail of the different component parts of the temporary carnival, circus, or special event including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  All shows; 
2.  Concessions; 
3.  Amusements (specifically including, but not limited to, inflatable slides and jump houses) or rides; 
4.  Businesses; 
5.  Signs, including balloons or inflatable devices, that are visible from the public right-of way; 
6.  Entrances and exits; 
7.  Parking area; 
8.  Sanitary facilities; 
9.  Loudspeakers or sound-amplification devices (together with an indication regarding their directional orientation); 
10.  Any other pertinent information. 
e.  A written lease or agreement from the owner of such property granting the applicant permission to operate a temporary carnival, circus, or special event on said property during the dates of the proposed application. The written lease or agreement must be signed by the owner of such property and be properly notarized. 
f.  The approximate number of persons who are anticipated to attend and, if applicable, the number and types of animals and vehicles that will constitute such event. 
g.  Proof of public liability insurance with minimum combined limits of $1,000,000.00. 
(3)  The temporary carnival, circus, or special event shall be set up and operated in accordance with and pursuant to the approved site plan and any conditions imposed by the permit. Before any modifications, revisions or deletions are made that conflict with the approved site plan including, but not limited to, the addition or removal of signs, concessions vendors, amusements and rides an amended site plan shall be submitted for review and approval three business days prior to commencement or continuation of the event in accordance with and pursuant to the amended site plan. Resubmittals or revised site plans shall be limited to one change per event. Not withstanding the timely submittal of the amended site plan the carnival, circus or special event shall not be authorized to operate in accordance with and pursuant to said amended site plan until such time as the amended site plan is approved. The amended site plan shall be approved or disapproved no later than three business days after submittal. An additional plan review fee shall be paid, as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code, for the one allowed amended revised site plan at the time of submittal for review. 
A submittal, including a submittal for an amended site plan, shall not be reviewed until it is complete. An amended site plan shall be submitted together with all information, detail and supporting documentation as is required for the initial submission to obtain a permit. In addition, the submission of an amended site plan shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. Failure to pay the fee or the omission of any component required for an original submittal may result in the delay, denial or revocation of the requested permit and/or amended site plan. 
(4)  Exception. A sidewalk sale or a religious or educational program, presentation or fund-raising event that is contained entirely upon or entirely within the confines of private property and does not require the temporary use of or closing off of public streets, fire lanes or public property; that lasts or runs for no more than eight hours on any one day and is limited to a total of four consecutive days in any calendar month; and, which is planned, presented, performed, offered or sponsored by and for the sole benefit of a nonprofit entity ("exempt event") shall not be required to obtain a special event permit. The fact that an event or gathering is held on Lewisville Independent School District ("LISD") property does not, in and of itself, make the event or gathering an exempt event. However, any event or gathering that is a component of, and which is specifically related to, the educational mission, programming and curriculum of LISD including LISD sponsored extracurricular activities in an exempt event. 
(5)  Safe and orderly movement of normal traffic shall not be substantially interrupted. The town may require the permit holder to provide additional signage for traffic control and safety-related issues, as deemed necessary by staff. If any circus, carnival, or special event is located adjacent to or abutting a TXDOT-controlled road, a TXDOT sign permit must be obtained and signs must be in place before the event starts. (The specific requirement for TXDOT signs may be waived if staff determines that sufficient traffic control measures are already in place.) 
(6)  The temporary carnival, circus or special event shall not impede the movement of fire fighting equipment, ambulances or any other emergency vehicle. 
(7)  Waste from nondomestic animals shall be removed daily from the premises which are the subject of the site plan. Animals shall be kept at least 300 feet away from any residence or commercial establishment during nonoperating hours of such event. 
(8)  The application shall be reviewed and approved or disapproved by the building official, police department, fire department and environmental health services as well as the town manager, or his or her duly appointed representative for traffic control, security, fire and other health and safety related issues. 
(9)  Any person or entity that seeks a permit for an event shall be required to pay all costs and expenses including, but not limited to, labor and overtime costs as well as materials, gasoline and equipment rental or usage incurred by the town to provide onsite police protection for the race and its participants as well as any costs and expenses incurred by the town to erect and take down warning signs, cones and barricades along and about the course to be traveled by the race participants. The town may require that the person or entity seeking a permit or to whom a permit is issued post a cash bond or deposit with the town against which the town may recover all such costs and expenses. Failure to post such a cash deposit or bond may result in the denial of the permit application or revocation of a previously issued permit. Events that are sponsored entirely, or in part, by the town may, in the sole discretion of the town, be excepted from the requirement to post a cash deposit or bond for such town-sponsored event. In the event that security precautions for the event are materially different than those contained in the permit application or in the event public safety is or may be compromised, then such concerns shall first be communicated by a town representative to the permit holder or designee of t he permit holder in an effort to expeditiously to resolve any such public safety concerns. In the event such public safety concerns are not adequately addressed, the town manager or his or her duly appointed representative may revoke the permit. 
(10)  Only one race or rally upon and across the roads, streets and thoroughfares of the town shall be allowed per day unless otherwise approved by the town. Dates for such races or rallies shall be assigned by the police department and maintained in the office of the community services department. If two or more such race or rally events are planned for the same date, the special event permit will be awarded first to a race or rally event that is sponsored entirely by the town. In all other circumstances, the special event permit shall be awarded to the race or rally event that first submits a fully completed permit application for the date in question. 
(11)  The permit will be valid for a maximum period of five days. If the permit is issued in conjunction with a seasonal sales permit, this permit shall last for no more than 31 days and will expire the same day as the seasonal sales permit expires. 
(12)  All signs for a special event must conform with the following provisions regarding signage, rather than and instead of chapter 86 "Signs", of this Code. An event shall be allowed only onpremise signs meeting the following provisions: 
a.  One primary event identification sign no greater than 32 square feet in size and ten feet in height measured from average ground level fronting on or facing the public right-of-way that is visible and/or legible from the public right-of-way; and 
b.  Two secondary signs no greater than ten square feet in size and six feet in height measured from average ground level that do not front on or face the public right-of-way and are not legible from the public roadway; and 
c.  One five square-foot entrance sign and one five square-foot exit sign no greater than three feet in height measured from average ground level at each point of ingress and egress on the subject property; and 
d.  Temporary directional or informational signs that shall be no greater than five square feet in area and three feet in height measured from average ground level, within 25 feet of the base of said sign, to the highest point of the sign. The temporary directional or interior signs permitted by this section include, but are not limited to, signs that provide directional assistance to parking areas, and identify one-way drives, concessions areas, amusements or rides or exhibitions. This provision is not intended to prohibit or exclude signs placed over or above doorways, concessions, amusements, rides or exhibitions if such signs are not visible or legible from the public right-of-way. No signs permitted under this subparagraph shall be visible from the public right-of-way. All signs permitted by this subparagraph shall be for interior use only. 
e.  All signs, excluding the five square-foot entrance and five square-foot exit signs, shall be set back at least 20 feet from the public right-of-way. The five square-foot entrance and five square-foot exit signs shall not be located within the public right-of-way. 
f.  Internal and external illumination of special event signs shall be prohibited. 
g.  The following balloons or inflatable devices excluding inflatable slides and inflatable jump houses, which excluded inflatable devices are considered amusements, shall be allowed: 
1.  One balloon or inflatable device up to a height not to exceed 35 feet measured from average ground level, within 25 feet of the base of said balloon or inflatable device, to the highest point of the balloon or inflatable device shall be permitted or allowed onpremise during the temporary carnival, circus or special event provided that it meets the requirements of subsection f. below. 
2.  All other balloons or inflatable devices shall not exceed a height of 20 feet measured from average ground level, within 25 feet of the base of said balloon or inflatable device, to the highest point of the balloon or inflatable device shall be permitted or allowed onpremise during the temporary carnival, circus or special event provided that it meets the requirements of subsection f. below. 
h.  All balloons and inflatable devices on the premises, which are identified as being allowed in subsection e. above, shall be spaced no closer than 20 feet from closest edge to closest edge of another balloon or inflatable device. In addition said balloons and inflatable devices shall be further constrained by the following requirements: 
1.  Balloons or inflatable devices may be internally illuminated only. External illumination shall be prohibited. 
2.  No portion of any balloon or inflatable device shall be located in, on, over, or above any public right-of-way. 
3.  No words which are legible from the right-of-way shall be allowed or permitted on any face or side of any balloon or inflatable device regulated by this section. 
(13)  Portable, moving, or vehicular signs including, but not limited to, signs attached to trailers such as hay rides, shall be prohibited. 
(14)  Signs displayed on and/or held by a person shall be prohibited. 
(15)  It shall be unlawful for any person to "hawk" or waive patrons into a carnival, circus or special event. 
(16)  A carnival, circus, or special event permit may be denied if: 
a.  A special event permit has been granted for another special event at the same place and time; or 
b.  The proposed special event will unreasonably disrupt the orderly flow of traffic and no reasonable means of rerouting traffic or otherwise meeting traffic needs is available; or 
c.  The application is incomplete; or 
d.  The applicant fails to comply with or the proposed special event will violate a town code or other applicable law, unless the prohibited conduct or activity would be allowed under this section; or 
e.  The applicant makes a false statement of material fact on an application for a special event permit; or 
f.  The applicant, or the operator of the event (the "event operator"), or the owner of the premises on which the event is planned (the "property owner") has had a special event permit revoked within the preceding 12 months or the applicant, event operator or property owner have individually or collectively entered a plea of guilty and/or been convicted of two or more violations of a condition or a provision of a special event permit or of this section within the preceding 11 months; or 
g.  The proposed special event would unduly burden town services, and pose a risk to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(17)  a.  The town may revoke a carnival, circus, or special event permit if: 
1.  The applicant fails to comply with or the carnival, circus, or special event is in violation of a condition or a provision of the permit or the site plan and any amended site plan, an ordinance of the town, or any other applicable law; or 
2.  The permit holder made a false statement of material fact on an application for a carnival, circus, or special event permit; or 
3.  The carnival, circus, or special event unduly burdens town services or unreasonably disrupts the public order and poses a risk to the public health, safety and welfare. 
b.  The applicant, event operator, and/or the property owner shall immediately, upon receiving notice that the town has revoked the carnival, circus, or special event permit, cause the event to cease operations and close and shut down all component parts of the event. At or about the same time, the applicant, event operator, and/or the property owner shall ask or direct all customers, visitors and patrons to leave the premises on which the event is being held. 
c.  The applicant, event operator, and/or the property owner may appeal the revocation of the carnival, circus, or special event permit to the town manager by filing a written request for appeal of said revocation with the town secretary's office, the town manager's office and the department that revoked said permit within three calendar days after the permit was revoked. 
d.  The written request for appeal shall identify the contact person for the carnival, circus, or special event and provide the contact person's telephone number, e-mail address and fax number to assist in scheduling a hearing on said appeal. The written request for appeal shall also state in detail what actions have been or will be taken to guarantee that the conditions which gave rise to the revocation will not recur. 
e.  Such an appeal shall not stay the revocation of the permit or authorize the continued or renewed operation of the carnival, circus, or special event. 
f.  The revocation appeal hearing shall, to the extent reasonably practicable, be scheduled to occur within three business days after receipt of the written request for appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the town manager or the town manager's duly authorized representative (referred to collectively as the "town manager"). The applicant, event operator, or property owner may present information regarding the revocation and the actions that have been taken or will be enacted to prevent a recurrence of the conditions that led to the permit revocation. Town staff shall also be allowed to present information regarding the revocation and opine regarding the continued or renewed operation of the carnival, circus, or special event with the additional conditions proposed by the applicant, event operator, or property owner. 
g.  The town manager shall uphold the revocation or overrule the revocation. The town manager may also overrule the revocation and impose such additional conditions on the continued or renewed operation of the carnival, circus, or special event as the town manager deems prudent to avoid a recurrence of the conditions that led to the permit revocation. If the town manager overrules the permit revocation, the operation of the carnival, circus, or special event may be renewed or continued provided that any and all additional conditions for operation are enacted and observed. 
h.  Any aggrieved party may appeal the town manager's determination to the board of adjustment in the manner provided for appeals of an administrative official's decision. The carnival, circus, or special event may be renewed or continued during the pendency of an appeal to the board of adjustment if and only if the town manager overrules the permit revocation and provided that any and all additional conditions for operation imposed by the town manager are enacted and observed. 
(18)  The granting of a special event permit does not relieve the applicant, event operator or property owner from complying with all other provisions of the town's Code of Ordinances (e.g. tent permits, building permits, electrical permits, food establishment and handling permits). All other permits and licenses required by code or other law for specific activities conducted in conjunction with or as a part of the carnival, circus, or special event must be applied for separately in a form satisfactory to the town. 
(19)  A person commits an offense if he/she: 
a.  Commences or conducts a carnival, circus, or special event without the appropriate permits or fails to comply with any requirement or condition of a permit or this ordinance; or 
b.  Participates in a carnival, circus, or special event for which a permit has not been granted, or for which a permit has been suspended or revoked; or 
c.  Sets up or operates the carnival, circus, or special event in a manner inconsistent with the approved site plan or any subsequently approved amended site plan. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(5); Ord. No. 14-03, § 4, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 53-06, § 3, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 50-08, § 2, 8-18-2008)  
Sec. 98-977. - Communication tower, commercial. 
A commercial communication tower shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Height. The height of commercial communication towers shall be measured from the average grade of the ground adjacent to the base to the highest point on the structure. If located on a building, the height of the tower shall include the height of the building. Commercial communication towers shall not be subject to the height regulations of the district in which they are located, provided that they shall not encroach into or through any established public or private airport approach path as established by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(2)  Setbacks. The principal support structure of all commercial communication towers shall conform to the minimum setback standards of the district in which the use is located. In addition, the following setback standards shall apply to all commercial communication towers: 
a.  Commercial communication towers shall be located so as to provide a minimum distance from the tower to all property lines equal to 20 percent of the height of the tower. 
b.  Commercial communication towers shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any existing or planned street right-of-way line. 
c.  Commercial communication towers shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any property line adjacent to a residential district. 
(3)  Residential districts. When a commercial communication tower is proposed in or adjacent to a residential district, it shall be demonstrated that existing or approved commercial communication towers within the proposed service area cannot accommodate the equipment planned to be located on the proposed commercial communications tower. Factors to be considered in evaluating the practicality of sitting a tower would include structural capacity, RF interference, geographic service area requirements, and cost (if fees and costs for sharing would exceed the cost of the new tower). 
(4)  Anchor location. Commercial communication tower peripheral supports and guy anchors may be located within required yard setbacks, provided that they shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the property on which the tower is located and shall be located no closer than five feet from any property line and no closer than 20 feet from a property line if the tower is adjacent to a single-family residential district or residential uses. All commercial communication tower supports and peripheral anchors shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any existing or planned street right-of-way line. 
(5)  Location of accessory structures. All structures accessory to a commercial communication tower, other than peripheral guy anchors, shall conform to the setback standards for the district in which the use is located. 
(6)  Fencing. A solid fence or wall of brick, stone or approved masonry construction not less than eight feet in height from finished grade shall be constructed around each commercial communication tower and around each guy anchor, if used. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate. Barbed wire shall be used along the top of the fence or wall if it is necessary to preclude unauthorized access to the tower. 
(7)  High voltage signs. If high voltage is necessary for the operation of the commercial communication tower and, it is present in a ground grid or in the tower, signs located every 20 feet and attached to the fence or wall shall display in large bold letters the following: "HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER." 
(8)  Landscaping and screening. Commercial communication towers shall comply with the screening requirements of section 82-301 of this Code, residential compatibility standards, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The landscape screen or wall shall be placed around the perimeter of the tower and any accessory structures, including guy anchors, provided that the screening requirement shall be waived when the base of the tower is not visible from adjacent lots or rights-of-way. Landscaping shall be placed on the outside of fences. 
b.  The requirements of section 82-303 of this Code, compatibility setback, shall not apply to commercial communication towers. 
(9)  Additional uses permitted on lot. Commercial communication towers may be located on lots containing another principal use, and may occupy a leased parcel on a lot meeting the minimum lot size requirement of the district in which it is located. Towers and their associated equipment shall be separated from other structures on the lot by a minimum distance of 50 feet. 
(10)  Aircraft hazard. Commercial communication towers shall not encroach into or through any established public or private airport approach path as established by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(11)  Shared use. To encourage shared use, all applicants for commercial communication towers shall issue and advertise for a two-week period a request for information (RFI) to obtain information from potential lessors. 
(12)  Removal of obsolete facilities. All obsolete or unused commercial communication towers shall be removed within 12 months of cessation of use. 
(13)  Radiation standards. A commercial communication tower shall comply with current Federal Communications Commission standards for nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER). 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(6))  
Sec. 98-978. - Country club, private. 
A private country club with a golf course shall only be permitted on a site with 50 acres or more. A private country club without a golf course shall only be permitted on a site with 20 acres or more. Such a club may contain adjunct facilities such as private club, dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational or service facilities. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(7)) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.  
Sec. 98-979. - Electrical line/substation, high voltage. 
(a)  No residential building or school facility shall be constructed within 100 feet of the edge of the right-of-way or easement for a high voltage electrical transmission line. 
(b)  No building located within an O office district zoned tract of land or any allowable use permitted thereunder, regardless of zoning district, shall be located within 50 feet of the edge of the right-of-way or easement for a high voltage electrical transmission line. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, no nonresidential building shall be located within the right-of-way or easement for a high voltage electrical transmission line. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(8))  
Sec. 98-980. - Farmer's market. 
(a)  All farmer's markets shall be located in covered spaces providing shelter for vendors and customers and shall provide for adequate off-street parking. No more than 20 percent of the display area shall be devoted to the sale of nonfood articles. All vendors shall abide by the provisions of applicable town ordinances and regulations and applicable state laws and regulations related to farmer's markets, including Texas Administrative Code, Title 25, Chapter 229, Subchapter FF. 
(b)  A farmer's market may be permitted by the town to operate on any property owned by the town notwithstanding the district regulations applicable to said property. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(9); Ord. No. 18-16 , § 2, 3-21-2016) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.  
Sec. 98-981. - Fruit and vegetable stand. 
Sales items at a fruit and vegetable stand shall be limited to produce grown on the premises. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(10)) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.  
Sec. 98-982. - Garage sale. 
A garage sale shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A garage sale shall only be permitted as a temporary accessory use to a single-family detached, duplex or single-family attached dwelling. 
(2)  An individual garage sale shall not exceed three consecutive days. 
(3)  The number of garage sales shall be limited to two per year per household. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(11))  
Sec. 98-983. - Accessory dwelling. 
The issuance of permits for construction and occupancy of an accessory dwelling shall be subject to compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  The accessory dwelling shall be located on the same lot/tract as the existing primary dwelling and located in a separate structure. 
(2)  An accessory dwelling shall not be located on any lot/tract of less than two acres. 
(3)  No more than one accessory dwelling per tract or lot shall be allowed. 
(4)  Accessory dwellings shall not be used as rental units. 
(5)  The accessory dwelling shall be serviced by the same utility meter as the primary dwelling, and the building materials and architecture will be similar to or in concert with the primary dwelling. 
(6)  The habitable floor area of the accessory dwelling shall not exceed 50 percent of the habitable floor area of the primary dwelling. The maximum habitable floor area shall not exceed 2,000 square feet. 
(7)  An accessory dwelling shall conform to the same side and rear yard setbacks as provided for the primary dwelling in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(8)  The front building line for an accessory dwelling shall be behind the primary structure at a point not closer than ten feet from the rear wall line of the primary dwelling. 
(9)  In no case shall the combined area of the primary dwelling, accessory dwelling and/or other accessory buildings exceed the maximum percentage of lot coverage allowed for the zoning district in which the structures are located. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 3, 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 98-984. - Home occupation. 
A home occupation shall be permitted as an accessory use to a dwelling unit, subject to compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  A home occupation shall be permitted only when it is an accessory use to a detached single-family dwelling unit. 
(2)  A home occupation shall not involve any external structural alteration of the main building. 
(3)  A home occupation shall be conducted wholly within the main building, and not in any accessory building. The total floor area to be used for a home occupation shall not exceed 20 percent of the total floor area of the main building, including garages. Notwithstanding the above, instructional classes may be held outside of the main building, providing a maximum of six students may be allowed in each session and other stipulations of this section are met. 
(4)  Only one employee other than occupants of the residence may be employed in the home occupation. A person who receives a wage, salary or percentage of the profits directly related to the home occupation shall be considered an employee for the purposes of this section, provided that this definition shall not include the coordination or supervision of employees who do not regularly visit the dwelling for purposes related to the business. 
(5)  No outdoor storage of materials, goods, supplies or equipment shall be allowed. 
(6)  A person who engages in a home occupation shall not place an advertisement, sign or display on or off the premises. 
(7)  A home occupation shall not involve more than four patrons on the premises at one time. 
(8)  Any outdoor activities associated with a home occupation shall be screened from the neighboring property by a solid fence of at least six feet in height. 
(9)  A home occupation may include the sale of products on the premises, provided that compliance is maintained with all other conditions specified in this section. 
(10)  A home occupation shall produce no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference, dim odors or heat in excess of those normally found in residential areas. No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, radioactive, or other hazardous materials shall be used or stored on the site for business purposes. 
(11)  A home occupation shall not include the physical or medical treatment of persons or animals, beauty shops, dance studios, carpenter shops, electrical shops, massage establishments, plumber shops, heating and air conditioning shops, radio shops, auto repairing or painting, furniture repairing, sign painting or similar activities. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(13)) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.  
Sec. 98-985. - Keeping animals. 
Livestock or poultry shall be kept as provided in chapter 6 of this Code. Stables, barns, poultry coops or other buildings for the housing of livestock or poultry shall not be located within 50 feet of any property line. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(14)) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 18.  
Sec. 98-986. - Kennel. 
No kennel shall be located within 50 feet of any property line, unless it is completely enclosed and soundproofed so that no noise from the kennel is audible at any bounding property line. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(15)) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.  
Sec. 98-987. - Mobile home park or dwelling. 
Mobile home parks and mobile home dwellings within a mobile home subdivision shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions with density exceeding one dwelling unit per two acres shall connect to the sanitary sewer system of the town. Existing mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions shall not be enlarged, expanded or additional mobile homes permitted unless the same shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system of the town. 
(2)  Exterior boundaries of mobile home parks shall be developed with a masonry wall constructed of brick, stone or other approved material having a minimum height of six feet and designed in an irregular or undulating pattern to create an attractive border. The land between the wall and the public street improvements shall be landscaped with street trees and other landscaping materials and shall be maintained by the owner of the mobile home park. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, mobile home sites in mobile home parks and mobile home lots within mobile home subdivisions shall be developed according to the dimensional regulations for mobile home dwellings set forth in division 11 of article III of this chapter, MH mobile home district regulations, except as such standards may be modified by conditions imposed by the town council in a planned development district. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(16))  
Sec. 98-988. - Pet store. 
A pet store shall be wholly enclosed in a building that is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property line. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(17))  
Sec. 98-989. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-07, § 16, adopted Oct. 1, 2007, deleted § 98-989, which pertained to private club and derived from Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(18); and Ord. No. 71-00, § 4, adopted Oct. 16, 2000.  
Sec. 98-990. - Recycling dropoff center. 
A recycling dropoff center shall be permitted as an accessory use in shopping center parking lots or other appropriate places, subject to section 82-272 outdoor storage areas and the following conditions: 
(1)  The use shall not occupy more than 500 square feet and shall not occupy any parking area required for the primary use. 
(2)  The use shall employ no mechanical sorting or processing equipment. 
(3)  The use shall be maintained free of litter, debris and residue on a daily basis. 
(4)  Containers shall be durable and covered. 
(5)  The name and phone number of a responsible party shall be clearly posted. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(19); Ord. No. 06-12, § 36, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 98-991. - Refreshment stand. 
A temporary use permit for a refreshment stand may be issued by the building official, subject to compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  A portable building may be used on a temporary basis as a refreshment stand for a period not to exceed six months on the same lot or parcel within any consecutive 12-month period, measured from the date of the issuance of the temporary permit. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to comply with all provisions of this section. 
(3)  A deposit in a sum listed in appendix A of this Code shall be required at the time the temporary permit for the refreshment stand is obtained to ensure the removal of the stand if the use is discontinued and the stand is not removed from the site within ten days of the expiration or abandonment of the permit. Such deposit will be refunded once the stand has been removed, and all other requirements have been met. 
(4)  All other applicable permits must be obtained. 
(5)  A refreshment stand and all appurtenances thereto, shall comply with all applicable requirements of the district in which it is located. Such facility shall not be required, however, to meet the landscaping, exterior masonry or underground utility requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(6)  A refreshment stand may be located on parking spaces, provided that such spaces are not necessary to meet the minimum parking requirements of the other uses on the lot or parcel. 
(7)  A refreshment stand in a portable building shall not be located within, nor encroach upon, a fire lane, maneuvering aisle, vehicle stacking space or required landscaping areas of the lot or parcel upon which the facility is placed. The location of such facility shall comply with all visibility obstruction regulations of the town. 
(8)  A site plan shall be submitted providing a well delineated "safety" area to keep vehicles from entry into the stand and table area; such site plan shall be reviewed and approved by the building official and the fire marshal. 
(9)  The refreshment stand shall be located on an approved surface of either asphalt or concrete. 
(10)  The refreshment stand shall meet all health requirements promulgated by the state department of health and set forth in article III of chapter 18 of this Code. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(20))  
Sec. 98-992. - Sales, temporary or seasonal. 
A temporary use permit may be issued by the building official for a temporary or seasonal sales use, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Temporary use permits shall be issued only for the following types of temporary or seasonal sales uses: Christmas tree sales and pumpkin sales. 
(2)  A temporary permit for Christmas tree sales shall only be issued for the period from Thanksgiving Day through the day after Christmas Day. A temporary permit for pumpkin sales shall only be issued for the months of October and November. 
(3)  The use shall not involve more than one tent or temporary building on a lot. 
(4)  The applicant shall have written permission from the property owner. 
(5)  No structure or activity relating to the use shall be located within the required yard setbacks. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(21))  
Sec. 98-993. - Sales trailer, temporary. 
(a)  Temporary permit allowing sales from a mobile office trailer shall be valid until the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a model home or for 120 days, whichever comes first. There shall be no extensions of such permit allowed. A trailer shall not be used for living or sleeping purposes. 
(b)  The trailer must have ground anchors for every ten feet of the length of the trailer. 
(c)  The trailer must have skirting around the trailer to conceal the undercarriage. 
(d)  The trailer must be located in a platted subdivision on a lot which is owned by the applicant/builder and be located behind the front yard building lot line. 
(e)  Locating and landscaping plans must be approved by the building official or designee. 
(f)  As a minimum, the front of the trailer must be landscaped with foundation planting to conceal the skirting, and the front yard must be grassed. 
(g)  A temporary three-foot wide sidewalk is required from the trailer to the curb. 
(h)  A building permit must be issued for the model home at the time of the temporary permit for the trailer. 
(i)  Building permit fees as listed in appendix A of this Code, plus any necessary utility connection fees shall be paid. 
(j)  Off-street parking of an all-weather surface shall be provided at a minimum rate of two spaces per proposed model on the same side of the street as the models. 
(k)  No permit shall be issued for a temporary sales trailer within a platted subdivision if any building permit has previously been issued within such subdivision exclusive of model home permits. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(22))  
Sec. 98-994. - Sexually oriented business. 
The establishment of a sexually oriented business shall include the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to a sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(23)) 
Cross reference— Sexually oriented businesses, § 18-301 et seq.  
Sec. 98-995. - Stable, commercial boarding or rental. 
Commercial boarding or rental stables shall not be located on any lot of less than two acres. Stables shall not be located within 50 feet of any property line. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(24))  
Sec. 98-996. - Swimming pool, private. 
A private swimming pool shall be located and fenced in accordance with the regulations of the town. The pool shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. No pool or deck shall be located within any easement. Distances from structures shall be dictated by the town's building codes. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(25); Ord. No. 06-12, § 37, 2-20-2012)  
Sec. 98-997. - Transmission pipeline. 
(a)  Residential lots shall not be platted into transmission pipeline easements or rights-of-way. Lots in areas designated as "rural density" in the comprehensive master plan shall be excluded from this requirement, provided that the buildable area of the lot is not affected and minimum safety distances are maintained. 
(b)  No building, structure, pool or spa shall be constructed in or moved into the transmission pipeline easement or right-of-way. 
(c)  Limited parallel fencing may be constructed within the transmission pipeline easement or right-of-way. Cross fencing may be constructed within areas designated as "rural density" in the comprehensive master plan or to contain livestock in agricultural areas, provided that a letter of approval is obtained from the transmission pipeline entity. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(26))  
Sec. 98-998. - Veterinary hospital (inside pens). 
An animal clinic or animal hospital is a facility where animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is limited to shortterm care incidental to the hospital use. A veterinary hospital (inside pens) shall be wholly enclosed in a building that is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property boundary line. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(27); Ord. No. 75-99, § 3, 12-6-1999)  
Sec. 98-999. - Veterinary hospital (outside pens). 
No veterinary hospital (outside pens) shall be located within 50 feet of any property line, unless it is completely enclosed and soundproofed so that no noise from the outside pens is audible at any bounding property line. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(28))  
Sec. 98-1000. - Model home. 
The construction of model homes prior to the acceptance of public improvements by the town shall be subject to the conditions of this section. Any exceptions to the following conditions shall require the approval of the town council: 
(1)  Each builder shall be allowed a maximum of two model homes per subdivision, subject to the limitations set forth in subsection (2) of this section. 
(2)  No more than six model homes shall be allowed in any one subdivision. 
(3)  No model home may be constructed prior to the issuance of a building permit by the town. 
(4)  No model home shall be sold until a final certificate of occupancy has been issued for the structure and a final acceptance of subdivision improvements is obtained from the town in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the town. 
(5)  The developer/owner shall file a hold harmless agreement with the town agreeing to fully release the town from all claims, suits, judgments and demands against the town which have accrued or which may accrue, and to hold the town harmless from all claims, suits, judgments and demands against the town, either severally or jointly, which have accrued or which may accrue as a result of the improvements, including sidewalks, streets, water and sewer lines, installation of electricity and other utilities, not having been fully inspected and improved by the town. 
(6)  The hold harmless agreement shall also indicate that the town shall assume no liability for the development or construction of the development or the improvements. The town only grants permission for the construction and showing of the model homes and in no way shall be held liable for the development of the development or for any injury or damages which may result from the improvements, including those mentioned in subsection (5) of this section, not having been fully inspected and accepted by the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(29))  
Sec. 98-1001. - Small wind energy systems. 
(a)  General purpose and description. The purpose of these regulations is to accommodate small wind energy systems in appropriate locations while protecting the public's health, safety and welfare, and to provide a permitting process for small wind energy systems to ensure compliance with the provisions of the requirements and standards established herein. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
(1)  Modification. Any change to a small wind energy system that materially alters the size, type or location of the system. Like-kind replacements shall not be construed to be a modification. 
(2)  Net metering. The difference between the electricity supplied to a customer over the electric distribution system and the electricity generated by the customer's small wind energy system that is fed back into the electric distribution system over a billing period. 
(3)  Occupied building. Any residence, school, hospital, church, public library or other building that is occupied or in use when the permit application is submitted. 
(4)  Owner. The person, entity or entities having an equity interest in the small wind energy system, including their successors or assigns, that intend to own and operate the system in accordance with this section. 
(5)  Power grid. The transmission system created to balance the supply and demand of electricity for consumers. 
(6)  Rotor. The blades and the hub together constitute the rotor. 
(7)  Shadow flicker. The visible flicker effect when rotating blades of the wind generator cast shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing a repeating pattern of light and shadow. 
(8)  Small wind energy system or system. A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind generator, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of 100 kilowatts (kW) or less and will be used primarily to convert wind energy into electricity for on-site consumption. 
(9)  System height. The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind generator blade when it is at its highest point. 
(10)  Tower. The monopole structure that supports a wind generator. 
(11)  Tower height. The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind generator. 
[12]  Wind generator. The blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components mounted on top of the tower whose purpose is to convert kinetic energy of the wind into rotational energy used to generate electricity. 
(c)  General regulations. The following general regulations shall apply to all small wind energy systems located within an agricultural district. 
(1)  Minimum lot size. Small wind energy systems shall not be sited on any property less than two acres in size. Small wind energy systems are allowed solely on land zoned as agricultural. 
a.  A small wind energy system on lot sizes of less than five acres shall be permitted only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186 of this Code. 
(2)  Maximum tower height. The tower height of a small wind energy system shall not exceed 65 feet to the center of the shaft. Additionally, no tower shall exceed the height recommended by the manufacturer or the distributor of the small wind energy system. 
a.  Additional tower height. Additional height of a tower may be permitted only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186 of this Code. In no instance shall the tower height exceed 85 feet in height. 
(3)  Location and minimum setback requirements: 
a.  The tower structure of a small wind energy system shall be located behind the main structure of the lot on which the system is located. 
b.  The tower for a small wind energy system shall setback a distance equal to 1.5 times the tower height from all property lines, public rights-of-way, occupied buildings, and overhead utility lines. 
1.  Setback reduction. A reduction of the setback requirements may be permitted only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186 of this Code. 
2.  Setback allowance. A reduction of the setback requirements to 20 feet is permitted when the subject property is adjacent to property owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or nonresidential zoning. 
c.  Only one tower shall be erected on a lot with only one turbine on such tower. 
(4)  Building permit. No small wind energy system shall be erected, constructed or installed without first receiving an approved building permit from the building official. A building permit also shall be required for any physical modification to an existing small wind energy system. 
(5)  Installation. A small wind energy system shall be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations and under the seal of a professional engineer registered by the State of Texas. 
(d)  Additional standards. 
(1)  Tower design. Only monopole towers can be used to support a small wind energy system. All wiring shall be internal to the tower structure. Wind generators shall not be attached to a roof or any other building structure or part thereof. 
(2)  Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the small wind energy system and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. 
(3)  Prohibited in easements. No portion of a small wind energy system shall be located in, on or across a public easement unless authorized in writing by the easement holder. 
(4)  Sound pressure levels and vibration. Sound pressure levels produced by the operation of a small wind energy system shall not exceed the limitations set forth in section 98-1052 of this chapter. Vibration produced by a small wind energy system at the property line or within adjacent homes or structures shall comply with section 98-1057 of this chapter. In no instance shall the operation of a system create vibration within structures on abutting property that exceeds the vibration perception threshold of the occupants. 
(5)  Shadow flicker/blade glint. Small wind energy systems shall be sited in a manner that does not result in significant shadow flicker impact or blade glint upon any inhabited structures (except for the owner's) or town roadways. "Significant shadow flicker" is defined as more than 30 hours per year on abutting occupied buildings. The applicant has the burden of proving that the shadow flicker will not have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses. Potential shadow flicker will be addressed either through siting or mitigation measures, and systems found to be in violation of this condition shall be shut down until the flicker or glint problem is remedied. 
(6)  Braking systems. All small wind energy systems shall be equipped with a redundant braking system. This includes both aerodynamic over-speed controls (including variable pitch, tip and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulation shall not be considered a sufficient braking system for over-speed protection. 
(7)  Utility connection. If the proposed small wind energy system is to be connected to the power grid through net metering, it shall adhere to applicable local, state and federal law. 
(8)  Battery storage. No battery storage of generated energy shall be allowed with a proposed small wind energy system. 
(9)  Tower access. The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of eight feet above the ground. All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access. 
(10)  State or federal requirements. A small wind energy system shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate small wind energy systems. If such standards and regulations are changed, and if the controlling state or federal agency mandates compliance, then the owner of the system shall bring such system into compliance with those revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. 
(11)  Lighting. A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration ("FAA"); however, this prohibition does not include operational lighting installed by the manufacturer of the system as original equipment. When lighting is required by FAA regulations, the applicant shall provide a copy of the FAA determination to establish the required markings and/or lights for the system, such lighting not to exceed the minimum requirements of those regulations. 
If so required, a small wind energy system tower structure may be artificially lighted only with steady-burning red obstruction lights (FAA type L-810) or flashing red obstruction lights (FAA type L0864), flashing no faster than 20 flashes per minute. Upward lighting, flood lights or other lighting not strictly required by the FAA is prohibited. 
(e)  Maintenance and abandonment. 
(1)  A small wind energy system shall be maintained at all times according to and consistent with the manufacturer's specifications. 
(2)  A small wind energy system that has become unstable, leans significantly out-of-plumb, or that poses a danger of collapse shall be removed or brought into repair within 60 days following notice by the building official to the owner of the lot upon which the system is located. The building official may order immediate repairs in the event of imminent collapse. Failure to make the required repairs within the time provided is an offense under this section. 
(3)  At such time that a small wind energy system is scheduled or required to be abandoned or discontinued, the owner of the system shall notify the building official by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation. Such notice shall be given no less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of operations. 
(4)  Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall physically remove the small wind energy system within 90 days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. This period may be extended at the request of the owner and at the discretion of the building official. For purposes of this section, "physically remove" shall include but not be limited to: 
a.  Complete removal of the wind generator and tower and related above-grade structures from the site of installation. 
b.  Restoration of the location of the small wind energy system to its natural condition, except that any landscaping, grading or below-grade foundation may remain in its same condition at initiation of abandonment. 
(5)  In the event that the owner fails to give such notice of abandonment or discontinuation, the small wind energy system shall be considered abandoned or discontinued if the system is not operated or is out-of-service for a continuous 12-month period. After the 12 months of inoperability, the building official is authorized to issue a notice of abandonment to the owner of the small wind energy system. The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice of abandonment within 30 days from the notice receipt date. After review of the information provided by the owner, the building official shall determine if the system has been abandoned. If it is determined that the system has not been abandoned, the building official shall withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the owner of the withdrawal. 
(6)  If the owner fails to respond to the notice of abandonment or if, after review by the building official, it is determined that the small wind energy system has been abandoned or discontinued, the owner of the system shall remove the wind generator and tower at the owner's sole expense within three months of receipt of the notice of abandonment. If the owner fails to physically remove the system after the notice of abandonment procedure, the building official may pursue legal action to have the system removed at the owner's expense. 
(f)  Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to construct, install, modify, or operate a small wind energy system that is not in compliance with this section. Small wind energy systems installed prior to the adoption of this section are exempt from this section except when modifications are proposed to the system. 
(g)  Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with any provision of this section or a building permit issued pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every violation or day such violation shall continue or exist, shall be deemed a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the town from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The town retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 03-11, § 3, 1-21-2011)  
Sec. 98-1002. - Solar panel systems for on-site residential use. 
(a)  General purpose and description. The purpose of these regulations is to accommodate solar panel systems in appropriate single family neighborhood locations while protecting the public's health, safety and welfare, and to provide a permitting process for solar panel systems to ensure compliance with the requirements and standards established in this section. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Solar panel system means a combination of equipment and/or controls, accessories, interconnecting means and terminal elements for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy. Solar panel systems do not include individually powered outdoor solar lights, such as garden lights, accent lights, security lights, or flood lights. 
(2)  Roof mounted systems means a solar energy system affixed to a principal or accessory building. 
(3)  Ground mounted systems means a solar panel system with a supporting framework that is placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that is independent of any building or other structure. 
(4)  Modification means any change to a solar panel system that materially alters the size, type or location of the system. Like-kind replacements shall not be construed to be a modification. 
(5)  Owner means the person, entity or entities having an equity interest in the solar panel system, including their successors or assigns, that intend to own and operate the system in accordance with this section. 
(c)  General regulations. Solar panel systems shall be allowed on single family lots or tracts. The following general regulations shall apply to all solar panel systems. 
(1)  Height. 
a.  Roof mounted systems. 
1.  Shall not project above the ridgeline of a pitched, gabled or gambrel roof and shall be parallel to the roofline. 
2.  Shall not exceed the maximum height permitted within the zoning district system is located within if on a flat roof and shall be screened in accordance with section 82-273 of the land development regulations. 
b.  Ground mounted systems. 
1.  Shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(2)  Location, and setback requirements for ground mounted systems. 
a.  Shall not be located within the front yard. 
b.  Shall comply with all zoning district setback and lot coverage requirements. 
c.  Shall not be located in, on or across a public easement unless authorized in writing by the easement holder. 
(3)  Building permit. 
a.  No solar panel system shall be erected, constructed or installed without first receiving an approved building permit from the building official. 
b.  A building permit also shall be required for any physical modification to an existing solar panel system. 
c.  If the solar panel system is to be interconnected with the distribution system of the electric utility provider, written authorization shall be required that the public utility company has been informed of the owner's intent to install a customer-owned solar panel and that such connection has been approved. 
d.  A letter from a professional engineer is required stating the roof will support the structural load of the system. 
(4)  Installation. A solar panel system shall be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(d)  Additional standards. 
(1)  All solar panel systems. 
a.  Town requirements. A solar panel system shall comply with all applicable adopted construction codes and amendments including, but not limited to the International Energy Conservation Code, the International Residential Code, the National Electrical Code and the International Fire Code. 
b.  State or federal requirements. A solar panel system shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate solar panel systems. If such standards and regulations are changed, and if the controlling state or federal agency mandates compliance, then the owner of the system shall bring such system into compliance with those revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. 
(e)  Maintenance, nuisance abatement and abandonment. 
(1)  A solar panel system shall be maintained by the owner at all times in accordance with chapter 14 of the Town's Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  The owner of the property with a solar panel system shall maintain the system so that it does not create a nuisance or a safety issue for surrounding property owners. 
(f)  Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to construct, install, modify, or operate a solar panel system that is not in compliance with this section. Solar panel systems installed prior to the adoption of this section are exempt from this section except when modifications are proposed to the system. 
( Ord. No. 40-14 , § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 98-1003. - Hotel or motel. 
Hotel or motel developments shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Shall provide at least three amenities from the list below: 
a.  Pool 
b.  Spa/sauna 
c.  Weight room/fitness center 
d.  Playground 
e.  Sports court 
f.  Plaza/atrium 
g.  Game room 
h.  Conference room (1,000 square foot minimum in size) 
i.  Full-service restaurant (with a minimum seating capacity of 35 patrons) 
(2)  Shall maintain ten percent of the lot area as open space, exclusive of required setbacks, buffers, and parking areas, but including amenities from the above list, except for conference room and full-service restaurant. 
(3)  Shall provide staff on-site 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(4)  The entrance to each room shall be gained from an interior corridor, which shall be climate controlled. First floor units may have secondary access from an interior courtyard or swimming pool area in addition to hallway access. 
(5)  A porte-cochere or covered area must be provided immediately adjacent to the entrance with a registration desk. The porte-cochere or covered area must be sufficient to accommodate the temporary parking of at least two vehicles parked side by side for guests checking in and out. 
( Ord. No. 61-19 , § 2, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 98-1004. - Extended stay hotel. 
Extended stay hotels must comply with the hotel or motel development standards set forth in section 98-1003 hereof and shall also be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Shall be restricted to a maximum density of 40 units per acre. 
(2)  Shall maintain laundry facilities on-site for guest use. 
(3)  Shall maintain booking records for a minimum of 60 days. 
(4)  Each guest room shall have a minimum area of 425 square feet, including sleeping area, kitchen, bathroom, and closet space. 
(5)  The kitchen in each guest room shall include a sink with running water and at least three major kitchen appliances (i.e. refrigerator, dishwasher, stove top or oven). 
(6)  The extended stay hotel shall install and maintain, in proper operating order, surveillance cameras in each interior hallway and lobby area, in the parking lots, and at each exterior door. The cameras shall be placed to provide visibility to the front and rear exteriors of the building. Monitors shall be provided for security and other hotel personnel so that on-site activities may be viewed at all times. Surveillance cameras shall be in operation 24 hours a day and records of images recorded shall be kept a minimum of 30 days. 
(7)  Extended stay hotels are required to operate in compliance with all zoning, building code, fire safety code, health code, and other ordinances and laws of the town and the state. 
The advertising of a specific property or proposed hotel brand as an extended stay hotel, whether it be online or in print, shall be considered prima facie evidence that the subject property constitutes an extended stay hotel, and shall comply with all of the town's associated standards and regulations. 
A specific use permit for an extended stay hotel shall expire five years from the passage of the approved ordinance, but is eligible for automatic renewal for additional five-year periods. For automatic renewal to occur, the property owner must file a complete application for automatic renewal with the director of planning services, as outlined in section 98-954, before the expiration of the current period. 
In the event of a change in ownership/rebranding of the hotel on the property, the new property owner shall be required to notify the director of planning services within 90 days from the date of closing. This will allow the town to send the new property owner a copy of the town's regulations and standards for extended stay hotels. A form acknowledging the receipt of the extended stay hotel regulations and agreeing to comply with said regulations must be returned to the director of planning services within 30 days of the mail or email date that the materials were sent by the town. 
Permanent residency is prohibited and no occupant of an extended stay hotel shall be deemed to be a resident of the extended stay hotel. 
( Ord. No. 61-19 , § 2, 10-7-2019)  
Secs. 98-1005—98-1020. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 98-1021. - Schedule of residential dimensional regulations. 
The residential dimensional regulations schedule included in this section summarizes the regulations of this chapter with regard to minimum lot size, minimum yards, maximum lot coverage, minimum floor area per dwelling unit and maximum building height of residential uses in the various zoning districts. For standards in the planned development district, see division 21 of article III of this chapter. The standards shown in the following schedule may be modified by additional provisions contained in this division or in the individual district regulations. In the event of any conflict between the text of this chapter and the schedule of residential dimensional regulations, the text shall control. 
RESIDENTIAL DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 
	Zoning District 
Development Standard 	A 	SF-E 	SF-5 	SF-30 	SF-15 	SF-10 	SF-A 	2F 	MF 	MH 	WR 	CBD 
Single-family detached 												* 
Min. lot area (sq. ft.) 	2AC 	1AC 	5,000 	30,000 	15,000 	10,000 					8,500 	* 
Min. lot width (ft.) 	200 	150 	50 	100 	80 	70 					65 	* 
Min. front yard (ft.) 	40 	40 	20 	25 	25 	25 					30 	* 
Min. side yard (ft.) 	25 	20 	5 	15 	12 	10 					8 	* 
Min. rear yard (ft.) 	20 	20 	20 	30 	30 	25 					20 	* 
Max. lot cover (percent) 	25 	25 	55** 	35 	35 	40 					40 	* 
Min. area/unit (sq. ft.) 	1,800 	2,400 	1,500 	2,100 	1,800 	1,800 					1,450 	* 
Max. height (stories/ft.) 	3/35 	3/35 	3/35 	3/35 	3/35 	3/35 					3/35 	* 
Single-Family Attached 												* 
Min. lot area (sq. ft.) 						5,000 						* 
Min. lot width (ft.) 						20 						* 
Min. front yard (ft.) 						25 						* 
Min. side yard (ft.) 						0 						* 
Min. rear yard (ft.) 						10 						* 
Max. lot cover (percent) 						40 						* 
Min. area/unit (sq. ft.) 						1,100 						* 
Max. height (stories/ft.) 						3/35 						* 
Duplex 												* 
Min. lot area (sq. ft.) 							5,000 					* 
Min. lot width (ft.) 							60 					* 
Min. front yard (ft.) 							25 					* 
Min. side yard (ft.) 							8 					* 
Min. rear yard (ft.) 							10 					* 
Max. lot cover (percent) 							40 					* 
Min. area/unit (sq. ft.) 							1,100 					* 
Max. height (stories/ft.) 							3/35 					* 
Multifamily 												* 
Min. lot area (sq. ft.) 								2,800 				* 
Min. lot width (ft.) 								60 				* 
Min. front yard (ft.) 								25 				* 
Min. side yard (ft.) 								10 				* 
Min. rear yard (ft.) 								10 				* 
Max. lot cover (percent) 								40 				* 
Min. area/unit (sq. ft.) 								700 				* 
Max. height (stories/ft.) 								3/35 				* 
Mobile Home 												* 
Min. lot area (sq. ft.) 									7,500 			* 
Min. lot width (ft.) 									60 			* 
Min. front yard (ft.) 									25 			* 
Min. side yard (ft.) 									10 			* 
Min. rear yard (ft.) 									20 			* 
Max. lot cover (percent) 									30 			* 
Min. area/unit (sq. ft.) 												* 
Max. height (stories/ft.) 									2/25 			* 
 
* The uses allowed in the CBD shall conform to this development standard save and except to the extent, only, that the zoning ordinance establishing a CBD on a particular land area specifically provides a different development standard approved by the town council. A list of specific development standards that have been altered by such a zoning ordinance shal be maintained by the executive director of development services for each CBD approved by the town council. 
** The maximum lot coverage in the SF-5 single family residential district shall be 55 percent, subject to section 98-1029, except that the 50 percent limitation set forth in section 98-1029(b) does not apply to single family detached dwellings. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.06(a); Ord. No. 17-08, § 4, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 45-08, § 4, 8-4-2008)  
Sec. 98-1022. - Schedule of nonresidential dimensional regulations. 
The nonresidential dimensional regulations schedule in this section summarizes the regulations of this chapter with regard to minimum yards, maximum lot coverage, maximum floor area ratio and maximum building height of nonresidential uses in the various zoning districts. For standards in the planned development district, see division 21 of article III of this chapter. The standards shown in the following schedule may be modified by additional provisions contained in this division or in the individual district regulations. In the event of any conflict between the text of this chapter and the schedule of nonresidential dimensional regulations, the text shall control. 
NONRESIDENTIAL DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 
	Residential Zoning District 
Development Standard 	A 	SF-E 	SF-5 	SF-30 	SF-15 	SF-10 	SF-A 	2F 	MF 	MH 
Min. front yard (ft.) 	40 	40 	20 	35 	35 	30 	25 	25 	25 	25 
Min. side yard (ft.) 	25 	20 	5 	15 	12 	10 	8 	8 	8 	
Min. Rear yard (ft.) 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 
Max. lot cover (percent) 	25 	25 	55** 	35 	35 	40 	40 	40 	40 	30 
Max. floor area ratio 										
Max. height (stories/ft.) 			3/35 							
 
** The maximum lot coverage in the SF-5 single family residential district shall be 55 percent, subject to section 98-1029, except that the 50 percent limitation set forth in section 98-1029(b) does not apply to single family detached dwellings. 
	Nonresidential Zoning District 
Development Standard 	O 	R-1 	R-2 	C-1 	C-2 	I-1 	I-2 	WR 	REC 	CC 	CI 	CBD 
Min. front yard (ft.) 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	60*** 	60*** 	† 
Min. side yard (ft.) 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	† 
Min. rear yard (ft.) 	15 	15 	15 	15 	15 	15 	15 	15 	15 	15 	15 	† 
Max. lot cover (percent) 	** 	50 	50 	50 	50 	** 	** 	50 	50 	50 	50 	† 
Max. floor area ratio 	1:1 			1:1 	1:1 	1:1 	1:1 			1:1 	1:1 	† 
Max. height (stories/ft.) 	3/35 	2/35 	2/35 	3/35 	3/35 	3/35 	3/35 	3/35 	3/35 	10/120 	3/45 	† 
 
† The uses allowed in the CBD shall conform to this development standard save and except to the extent, only, that the zoning ordinance establishing a CBD on a particular land area specifically provides a different development standard approved by the town council. A list of specific development standards that have been altered by such a zoning ordinance shal be maintained by the executive director of development services for each CBD approved by the town council. 
* Subject to buffering requirements as outlined in division 5 of article V of chapter 82 of this Code. 
** For lots containing up to five acres in area, the maximum lot coverage shall be 55 percent. For lots containing five acres or more in area, the maximum lot coverage shall be 50 percent. 
*** Sixty-foot front yard along major thoroughfares. Along all other roadways, subject to section 98-1026. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.06(b); Ord. No. 32-00, § 3(3.05), 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 17-08, § 5, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 45-08, § 4, 8-4-2008) 
_____ 
Sec. 98-1023. - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
(a)  Generally. Residential uses shall comply with the minimum lot area per dwelling unit standards contained in the district regulations and summarized in the residential dimensional regulations schedule, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this section or elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  On-site sewage facilities. Undeveloped areas master planned or classified as rural density have been so master planned or classified in response to several conditions that affect development in the area: 
(1)  Provision of two acres or larger residential lot sizes, which are considered the minimum necessary for individual septic systems, to avoid the cost burden to the town of maintaining lift stations and force mains; 
(2)  Minimization of increases in surface stormwater runoff into the already strained drainage channels, which are to remain in a natural condition; 
(3)  Minimization of increases in traffic volumes on the existing and planned network of predominantly two-lane roads; and 
(4)  Preservation of the rural, natural aesthetic qualities of the western part of the town, which provide value and amenity for the entire community. 
(c)  Density. No on-site sewage facilities shall be allowed on tracts of land or lots more than one dwelling unit per two acre density, unless documented extenuating circumstances justify consideration by the town of smaller lot sizes. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.06(c))  
Sec. 98-1024. - Minimum lot width. 
(a)  Generally. Lots used for residential uses shall comply with the minimum lot width standards contained in the district regulations and summarized in the residential dimensional regulations schedule, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this section or elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  Measurement. Lot width shall be measured as the distance between the side lot lines measured along the front building line. In the case of a lot having more than one required front yard, the lot width shall be measured along the building line associated with the shortest front lot line. 
(c)  Cul-de-sacs. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum front street line of 40 feet and a minimum lot width of 75 feet at the building line, provided that this subsection shall not apply in the PD planned development district, and that in the SF-10 single-family district-10, lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum front street line of 40 feet and a minimum lot width of 70 feet at the building line. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.06(d))  
Sec. 98-1025. - Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. 
(a)  Generally. Residential uses shall comply with the minimum floor area per dwelling unit standards contained in the district regulations and summarized in the residential dimensional regulations schedule, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this section or elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  Measurement. The floor area of a dwelling, for the purpose of these minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirements, refers to the total of the horizontal area of each floor, measured from the outside face of the building walls and excluding garages, carports, cellars and accessory buildings. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.06(e))  
Sec. 98-1026. - Minimum front yard setback. 
(a)  Generally. The location of buildings shall comply with the minimum front yard setback standards contained in the district regulations and summarized in the residential and nonresidential dimensional regulations schedules, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this section or elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  Permitted obstructions. Every part of a required front yard shall be open and unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and other architectural features of the main building, projecting no more than 12 inches into the required front yard. Roof eaves and roof extensions of the main building or a porch without posts or columns may project into the required front yard for a distance of no more than two feet, and subsurface structures, platforms or slabs may project into the front yard to a height no greater than 30 inches above the average grade of the yard. 
(c)  Corner lots. For lots with frontage on two intersecting streets, a front yard shall be provided along the shorter of the two street lines; provided, however, that, on key lots in residential districts platted after January 9, 1975, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards. 
(d)  Through lots. Where lots have double frontage, frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets, unless a building line for accessory buildings has been established along one frontage on the plat or by the ordinance establishing a planned development district, in which event only one required front yard shall be observed. 
(e)  Plat building lines. Where a building line has been established by a plat approved by the town or by an ordinance establishing a planned development district, and such line requires a greater or lesser front yard setback than is prescribed by this chapter for the district in which the building line is located, the required front yard shall comply with the building line so established by such ordinance or plat, provided that no such front yard setback shall be less than ten feet. 
(f)  Special regulations for residential districts. In all residential zoning districts, including agricultural, the following building setbacks from street lines shall be required: 
(1)  On minor arterials, a minimum 35 foot front yard setback shall be required. 
(2)  On major arterials, the minimum front yard setback shall be 60 feet. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, during the platting process, the town council may authorize exception to these special front yard requirements in instances where there exists right-of-way widths in excess of 150 feet, irregular or jogged right-of-way lines, or other such special circumstances. 
(g)  Special regulations for nonresidential districts. In the nonresidential districts, the following building setbacks from street lines shall be required: 
(1)  On major arterials, a minimum 60-foot front yard shall be required. 
(2)  On all other streets and roads, one of the following shall be provided, except that a combination of the two setback options may be allowed if approved by the planning and zoning commission on a site plan: 
a.  A minimum 30-foot front yard with no parking allowed in the minimum front yard; or 
b.  A 60-foot front yard. 
(h)  Gas pump islands. Motor vehicle fuel dispenser islands, including any roof or canopy over such islands, may not be located closer than 25 feet to the front property line. 
(i)  Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located within the required front yard in any district. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.06(f))  
Sec. 98-1027. - Minimum side yard setback. 
(a)  Generally. The location of buildings shall comply with the minimum side yard setback standards contained in the district regulations and summarized in the residential and nonresidential dimensional regulations schedules, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this section or elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  Permitted obstructions. Every put of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed, except for accessory buildings as permitted in subsection (c) of this section and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and other architectural features of the main building projecting no more than 12 inches into the required side yard. Roof eaves of the main building shall project no more than two feet into the required side yard. 
(c)  Accessory buildings. Detached accessory buildings may be located within a required side yard, subject to section 98-1032, accessory buildings. 
(d)  Garage or carport. Where a garage or carport is designed and constructed to be entered from a side street, such garage or carport shall be set back from the side street a minimum distance of 20 feet from the right-of-way line and shall not encroach over a sidewalk so as not to interfere with the use of the street by other vehicles or persons. 
(e)  Special regulations for residential districts. In all residential zoning districts, including agricultural, the following building setbacks from street lines shall be required: 
(1)  On minor arterials, a minimum 35-foot side yard setback. 
(2)  On major arterials, a minimum 60-foot side yard setback. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, during the platting process, the town council may authorize exceptions to these special side yard requirements in instances where there exists irregular or jogged right-of-way lines, or other such special circumstances. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.06(g))  
Sec. 98-1028. - Minimum rear yard setback. 
(a)  Generally. The location of buildings shall comply with the minimum rear yard setback standards contained in the district regulations and summarized in the residential and nonresidential dimensional regulations schedules, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this section or elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  Permitted obstructions. Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point 30 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot, except for accessory buildings as permitted herein and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and roof overhangs and other architectural features of the main building projecting no more than two feet into the required rear yard. 
(c)  Nonresidential buildings. No rear yard shall be required for nonresidential buildings if an alley is located adjacent to the rear lot line. In the I or in a PD-I district where rail lines exist at the rear of lots or tracts occupied by industrial or commercial buildings, the buildings may be located for direct service by rail transportation. 
(d)  Accessory buildings. Detached accessory buildings may be located within a required rear yard, subject to section 98-1032, accessory buildings. 
(e)  Garage or carport. Where a garage or carport is designed and constructed to be entered from an alley, such garage or carport shall be set back from the alley a minimum distance of 20 feet so as not to interfere with the use of the alley by other vehicles or persons. 
(f)  Special regulations for residential districts. In all residential zoning districts, including agricultural, the following building setbacks from street lines shall be required: 
(1)  On minor arterials, a minimum 35-foot rear yard setback. 
(2)  On major arterials, a minimum 60-foot rear yard setback. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, during the platting process, the town council may authorize exceptions to these special rear yard requirements in instances where there exists irregular or jogged right-of-way lines, or other such special circumstances. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.06(h))  
Sec. 98-1029. - Maximum lot coverage. 
(a)  Generally. The size of buildings shall comply with the maximum lot coverage standards contained in the district regulations and summarized in the residential and nonresidential dimensional regulations schedules, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this section or elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  Measurement. Lot coverage refers to the percentage of the lot area covered by the foundation or first floor of the main and all accessory buildings. In all districts permitting residential structures, the main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than 50 percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line joining the mid-point on one side lot line with the mid-point of the opposite side lot line. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.06(i))  
Sec. 98-1030. - Maximum floor area ratio. 
(a)  Generally. The size of buildings shall comply with the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) standards contained in the district regulations and summarized in the residential and nonresidential dimensional regulations schedules, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this section or elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  Measurement. Floor area refers to the total of the horizontal area of each floor, measured from the outside face of the building walls. Floor area ratio (FAR) refers to the ratio of the total floor area of the main and all accessory buildings on a lot to the area of the lot. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.06(j))  
Sec. 98-1031. - Maximum height. 
(a)  Generally. The height of buildings and structures shall comply with the maximum height standards contained in the district regulations and summarized in the residential and nonresidential dimensional regulations schedules, as may be modified by additional provisions in the district regulations, in this section or elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  Measurement. Height refers to the vertical distance of a building or structure measured from the average established grade at the street line or from the average natural front yard ground level, whichever is higher. Height may be measured in either feet or number of stories. Where the district regulations establish height standards in both feet and number of stories, buildings and structures shall comply with both standards as follows: 
(1)  Height, when measured in feet, shall be measured to the highest point of the roof surface if a flat surface, the deck line of mansard roofs or the mean height level between eaves and ridges for hip and gable roofs. If the street grade has not been officially established, the average front yard shall be used for a base level. 
(2)  Height, when measured in stories, shall not include cellars or basements where more than one-half of the height of the story is below average grade. 
(c)  Permitted exceptions. The calculation of building height shall exclude chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water towers, radio towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires, and parapet walls not exceeding ten feet in height 
(d)  Additional height. Additional height above that permitted by district regulations may be granted by the planning and zoning commission at the time of site plan approval, and the planning and zoning commission may require that the front, side and rear yards be increased above the minimum requirements to mitigate the impacts of such increased height. 
(e)  Other height restrictions. In addition to the district regulations, the height of buildings may be further restricted by section 82-303 of this Code, compatibility setback. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.06(k))  
Sec. 98-1032. - Accessory buildings. 
(a)  Generally. Attached accessory buildings shall conform to the regulations applicable to the main building to which they are attached. 
(1)  Number; area. Except in A agricultural zoning districts, no more than two accessory buildings may be placed on any residential lot. The combined floor area of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 750 square feet or 25 percent of the floor area of the primary structure, whichever is less, except for SF-E single-family estate zoning districts, in which the combined floor area of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 1,500 square feet. In no case shall the combined area of the primary structure and accessory buildings exceed the maximum percentage of lot coverage allowed for the zoning district in which the structures are located. Accessory dwellings are not subject to these regulations and shall be governed by other provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Barns and stables. In SF-E single-family estate and A agricultural zoning districts, barns and/or stables directly associated with the support of a bona fide agricultural use of the property shall be limited in area to that allowed by the building code for their use and construction type, but in no case shall the combined floor area of the primary use and all accessory buildings exceed the maximum percentage of lot coverage allowed for in an A or SF-E zoning district. In SF-E and A zoning districts, barns and/or stables shall be limited to a height of not more than twenty feet to the top of the roof. Such barns and/or stables shall not be located within 50 feet of any property line. Riding or rodeo arenas, whether enclosed, partially enclosed, or open air, shall require a specific use permit as provided in subsection 98-952(c), schedule of use regulations. 
(3)  Location. Accessory buildings must be located at least five feet from any other building or structure on the property. 
(4)  Walls abutting property line. When accessory buildings are constructed less than five feet from any property line, no windows, doors or other penetrations of the exterior wall shall be allowed in the wall abutting that property line. 
(b)  Setback requirements. 
(1)  Detached accessory buildings less than 120 square feet shall be subject to the following regulations, in addition to any applicable regulations of this Code. 
a.  Generally. 
1.  No accessory building shall be located within any easement. 
2.  No accessory building may be placed so as to negatively impact drainage on any adjacent lot by diversion or impoundment of stormwater flows. 
b.  Front. Accessory buildings shall not be located closer to the front property line than the primary building or the front yard setback requirement for that zoning district, whichever is greater. 
c.  Side. Accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the side property line. When accessory buildings are placed on corner lots adjacent to an exterior side yard setback, the accessory building shall be required to adhere to the exterior side yard setback established for the primary structure. 
d.  Rear. There need be no rear setback for accessory buildings where lots abut an alley. Where lots do not abut an alley, the rear setback shall be a minimum of three feet. 
e.  Height. Accessory buildings shall be limited to a height of not more than 14 feet to the top of the roof. 
f.  Permit. No building permit shall be required. 
(2)  Detached accessory buildings 120 square feet or larger shall be subject to the following regulations, in addition to any applicable regulations of this Code. 
a.  Generally. 
1.  No accessory building shall be located within any easement. 
2.  No accessory building may be placed so as to negatively impact drainage on any adjacent lot by diversion or impoundment of stormwater flows. 
b.  Front. Accessory buildings shall not be located closer to the front property line than the primary building or the front yard setback requirement for that zoning district, whichever is greater. 
c.  Side. Accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of three feet from an interior side property line. When accessory buildings are placed on corner lots adjacent to an exterior side yard setback, the accessory building shall be required to adhere to the exterior side yard setback established for the primary structure. When accessory buildings are constructed less than five feet from a side property line, no windows, doors or other penetrations of the exterior wall shall be allowed in the wall abutting the side property line. Where a garage or carport is designed to be entered from a side street, the structure shall be set back not less than 20 feet from the exterior side property line. 
d.  Rear. There need be no rear setback for accessory buildings where lots abut an alley. Where lots do not abut an alley, the rear setback shall be a minimum of three feet. Where a garage or carport is designed and constructed to be entered from an alley or street at the rear of a lot, such garage or carport shall be set back not less than 20 feet from the rear property line. 
(c)  Roof. 
(1)  The minimum roof slope shall be 3 to 12. 
Exception. Metal carports and engineered metal buildings. 
(2)  The color and materials of the roof of the accessory building must closely resemble the color and materials of the roof of the main building. 
(d)  Exterior walls. 
(1)  Accessory buildings 300 square feet and less in area may use exterior grade wood siding. 
(2)  Accessory buildings over 300 feet in area must have exterior walls that are at least the same masonry content required of the main structure. The masonry used on the accessory building shall closely resemble the masonry used on the main building. 
(e)  Height. Accessory buildings shall be limited to a height of not more than 14 feet to the top of the roof. 
Exception. Accessory building located in SF-E single-family estates and A agricultural shall be no more than 20 feet to the peak of the roof. 
(f)  Permit. A building permit shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 3-5-2001)  
Sec. 98-1033. - Mailboxes. 
(a)  Along streets and roadways with less than 24 feet of improved driving surface, mailboxes serving single-family residences shall not be placed closer than 12 feet from the centerline of the improved surface. An all-weather driving surface of asphalt, concrete crushed stone, or other material as approved by the town engineer shall be placed so as to provide access to the mailbox. Maintenance of the mailbox and driving surface shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. A light reflective device shall be affixed to each side of the supporting structure of the mailbox which faces in the direction of traffic. 
(b)  Along streets and roadway with 24 feet or more of improved driving surface, mailboxes serving single-family residences may be placed adjacent to the roadway or at the back of the curb. 
(c)  A building permit shall not be required; however, the location of the mailbox must be approved by the town manager or authorized representative prior to construction of the mailbox. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.06(m))  
Secs. 98-1034—98-1050. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 98-1051. - Applicability of division provisions. 
All uses in any district of the town shall conform in operation, location and construction to the performance standards specified in this division for noise, odorous matter, toxic and noxious matter, glare, smoke, particulate matter and other air contaminants, fire and explosive or hazardous matter, vibration and open storage. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.09(a))  
Sec. 98-1052. - Noise. 
(a)  Generally. At no point on the bounding property line of any use in any district shall the sound pressure level of any use, operation or plant exceed the standards specified in this division. For the purposes of this division, the bounding property line shall be interpreted as being at the far side of any street, alley, stream or other permanently dedicated open space from the noise source when such open space exists between the property line of the noise source and adjacent property. When no such open space exists, the common line between two parcels of property shall be interpreted as the bounding property line. 
(b)  Standards. The maximum permissible octave band-decibel limits at the bounding property line in any district shall be as shown in the following tables. Sound level may be measured in frequency bands as shown by Table A or by Table B as follows: 
_____ 
Table A 
Preferred Frequencies 	Table B 
Octave Band Frequencies 
Center Frequency (cycles per second) 	Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Levels (decibels) 	Octave Band (cycles per second) 	Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level (decibels) 
31.5 	76 	20—75 	75 
63.0 	74 	75—150 	70 
125.0 	68 	150—300 	64 
250.0 	63 	300—600 	59 
500.0 	57 	600—1,200 	53 
1,000.0 	52 	1,200—2,400 	47 
2,000.0 	45 	2,400—4,800 	40 
4,000.0 	38 	4,800—10,000 	34 
8,000.0 	32 		
 
_____
(c)  Modifications to standards. The following corrections shall be made to the table of preferred frequencies (Table A) or octave band-decibel limits (Table B) in determining compliance with the noise level standards in any district: 
Type of Operation or Character of Noise 	Correction in Decibels 
Noise source operates less than: 	
  20 percent of any one hour period 	Plus 5 
  5 percent of any one hour period 	Plus 10 
  1 percent of any one hour period 	Plus 15 
Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc.) 	Minus 5 
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.) 	Minus 5 
 
(d)  Noise measurement. For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequency of sound, the sound level meter, the octave band analyzer and the impact noises analyzer shall be employed. The flat network and fast meter response of the sound level meter shall be used. Sounds of short duration that cannot be accurately measured with the sound level meter shall be measured with the impact analyzer. 
(1)  Octave band analyzer calibrated in the Preferred Frequencies (American Standards Association S1-6-1960, Preferred Frequencies for Acoustical Measurement) shall be used with Table A. 
(2)  Octave band analyzers calibrated with pre-1960 octave bands (American Standards Association Z-24-1953, Octave Filter Set) shall be used with Table B. 
(e)  Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations specified in this section: 
(1)  Noises not directly under the control of the property user. 
(2)  Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (daylight hours). 
(3)  Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(4)  Transient noise of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.09(b)) 
Cross reference— Noise control, § 34-131 et seq.  
Sec. 98-1053. - Smoke and particulate matter. 
(a)  Opacity limit. No operation or use in any district shall cause, create or allow the emission for more than three minutes in any one hour of air contaminants, which at the emission point or with the bounds of the property are: 
(1)  As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7118, or in violation of the standards specified by the Texas Air Control Board Regulations for the Control of Air Pollution, as published by the state department of health, or as such regulations may be amended. 
(2)  Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(b)  Exception to opacity limit. When the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure to comply with subsection (a) of this section, or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building that prevents their escape into the outside atmosphere, the standards in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply. 
(c)  Open storage and processing. Open storage and open processing operations (including on-site transportation movements that are the source of wind or airborne dust or other particulate matter, and processes involving dust or other particulate air contaminant generating equipment such as used in paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage or sand blasting) shall be so conducted that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the bounding property line of the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding four grains per 1,000 cubic feet of air. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.09(c)) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.  
Sec. 98-1054. - Odorous matter. 
(a)  Odor threshold. No use shall be located or operated in any district that involves the emission of odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds the odor threshold at the bounding property line or any point beyond the tract on which such use or operation is located. The odor threshold shall be the concentration of odorous matter in the atmosphere necessary to be perceptible to the olfactory nerve of a normal person. 
(b)  Measurement. The odor threshold as set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be determined by observation by a person. In any case, where uncertainty may arise or where the operator or owner of an odor emitting use may disagree with the enforcing officer or where specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and procedures as specified by American Society for Testing Materials, A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57, entitled "Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres" shall be used, and a copy of A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57 is hereby incorporated into this section by reference. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.09(d)) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34.  
Sec. 98-1055. - Fire and explosive hazard material. 
(a)  Explosives. No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products that decompose by detonation shall be permitted in any district except that chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorus, and similar substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the town manager and the fire chief of the town as not presenting a fire or explosion hazard. 
(b)  Flammables. No storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the fire code of the town. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.09(e)) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.  
Sec. 98-1056. - Toxic and noxious matter. 
No operation or use in any district shall emit a concentration across the bounding property line of the tract on which such operation or use is located of toxic or noxious matter that will exceed ten percent of the concentration (exposure) considered as the threshold limit for an industrial worker as such standards are set forth by the state department of health in Threshold Limit Values Occupational Health Regulation No. 3, a copy of which is hereby incorporated by reference into this section and is on file in the office of the town building official. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.09(f)) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34.  
Sec. 98-1057. - Vibration. 
No operation or use in any district shall at any time create earthborne vibration that, when measured at the bounding property line of the source of operation, exceed the limit of displacement set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified: 
Frequency 
(cycles per second) 	Displacement 
(in inches) 
Less than 10 	0.0010 
10 to 20 	0.0008 
20 to 30 	0.0005 
30 to 40 	0.0004 
40 and over 	0.0003 
 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.09(g))  
Sec. 98-1058. - Open storage. 
No open storage of materials or commodities shall be permitted in any district except as an accessory use to a main use located in a building in an I, or PD industrial district. No open storage operation shall be located in front of a main building. No wrecking, junk or salvage yard shall be permitted as a storage use in any district. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.09(h); Ord. No. 40-97, § 1, 7-21-1997)  
Secs. 98-1059—98-1080. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FLOODPLAIN[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 98-1081. - Floodplain prefix to district designation. 
To provide for the appropriate use of land that has a history of inundation or is determined to be subject to flood hazard as a result of studies by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers ("Corps"), Federal Emergency Management Association ("FEMA") or other competent authority, and to promote the health, safety and general welfare and provide protection from flooding, portions of certain zoning districts are designated with a Floodplain (FP) prefix of "FP." Notwithstanding any such floodplain district designation or other state or federal regulated floodplain designation, the planning and zoning commission and/or the town council may require that, excepting construction associated with public infrastructure crossings or stormwater detention in FEMA fully developed floodplain, the one percent chance floodplain must be kept in its natural state and that no construction, construction-related activity, structure or use shall be allowed therein. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.10; Ord. No. 104-07, § 5, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 15-13, § 5, 4-1-2013; Ord. No. 44-14 , § 4, 8-4-2014)  
Secs. 98-1082—98-1100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Secs. 98-1101—98-1120. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Nonresidential Uses and Multifamily Uses 
 
Sec. 98-1121. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Purpose. Good outdoor lighting at night benefits everyone and enhances the town's nighttime character. New lighting technologies have produced lights that are extremely powerful, and these types of lights may be improperly installed so that they create problems of excessive glare and light trespass that reduce residents' privacy. Excessive glare can be annoying and may cause safety problems. There is a need for a lighting ordinance that recognizes the benefits of good outdoor lighting and provides clear guidelines for its installation so as to help maintain and complement the town's character and which strives to provide linkage between the built and natural environment and acknowledges and sustains the unique nature of the town's corporate-commercial, suburban and rural lifestyles. Appropriately regulated, and properly installed, outdoor lighting will contribute to the safety and welfare of the residents of the town. 
(b)  Objectives. Outdoor lighting for nonresidential uses and multifamily uses has the following objectives: 
(1)  It is intended to reduce the problems created by improperly designed and installed outdoor lighting in those areas zoned for nonresidential uses and multifamily uses; 
(2)  It is intended to eliminate problems of glare and minimize light trespass by establishing regulations which limit the area that certain types of outdoor lighting fixtures can illuminate and by limiting the total allowable illumination of lots located in the town; 
(3)  All lighting installed in nonresidential uses and multifamily uses should be designed with the idea of being a good neighbor, thereby eliminating or reducing unnecessary direct light from shining onto abutting properties or streets; 
(4)  It is the declared purpose of this subdivision that nonconforming luminaries be eliminated and be required to conform to the regulations of this subdivision within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(a), (b), 2-5-2002)  
Sec. 98-1122. - Applicability. 
(a)  New fixtures or additional lighting. This subdivision shall apply to all installations of new fixtures or additional lighting to any new or existing nonresidential or multifamily use or structure. 
(b)  Nonconforming Lighting. Luminaries installed prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this subdivision is derived shall immediately be re-aimed or shielded such that the fixture no longer creates a nuisance as defined in section 74-3. Shielding may be accomplished by louvers, baffles, visors, or shields placed on the luminaries, or any other method whereby the light therefrom does not constitute a nuisance as defined in section 74-3. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Street lighting installed by a governmental agency for public benefit on public rights-of-way; and 
(2)  Public outdoor recreational sport fields and sport courts complex. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(c) 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 14-03, § 4, 3-3-2003)  
Sec. 98-1123. - Enforcement. 
The enforcement of the rules and the provisions of this subdivision shall be by the town manager, or his duly appointed representative. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(d), 2-5-2002)  
Sec. 98-1124. - Measurement. 
(a)  Metering Equipment. Lighting levels shall be measured in footcandles with a direct-reading, portable light meter. 
(b)  Method of footcandle measurement. The meter sensor shall be not more than six inches above ground level in a horizontal position. The reading shall be taken only after the cell has been exposed long enough to provide a constant reading. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(e), 2-5-2002)  
Sec. 98-1125. - Prohibited lighting. 
The following lighting is prohibited. No owner or occupant of land shall permit any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  An unshielded light source, including bare bulbs, above 15 watts, except for temporary seasonal lighting; 
(2)  The operation of searchlights, strobes, or pulsating lights; 
(3)  The use of low pressure sodium bulbs as a light source; 
(4)  The use of a partial cutoff light source; 
(5)  The use of a drop lens; 
(6)  Luminaires located within the compatibility buffer between dissimilar uses; 
(7)  Any luminaire that produces a disability glare; 
(8)  Any light or combination of lighting that creates a nuisance as defined in section 74-3; 
(9)  Any lighting installed to illuminate an unimproved surface or private outdoor recreational activities that exceeds requirements set forth in subsection 82-275(b)(2) without an approved variance, as set forth in subsection 82-275(b)(3). 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(f), 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 101-04, § 6, 12-20-2004)  
Sec. 98-1126. - Height for light pole standards. 
Maximum height for light pole standards shall be as follows: 
(1)  In parking areas containing zero to 150 parking spaces, maximum height of lighting pole standards shall not exceed 25 feet. 
(2)  In parking areas containing 151 or more parking spaces, maximum height of lighting pole standards shall not exceed 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(g), 2-5-2002)  
Sec. 98-1127. - Building mounted lighting. 
All building mounted luminaires exceeding 15 watts shall be directed down with a full cutoff fixture. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(h), 2-5-2002)  
Sec. 98-1128. - Floodlighting. 
(a)  Luminaires used for floodlighting shall not direct the luminance above the facade of the object being lighted. 
(b)  Spotlights and floodlights mounted overhead on poles or building walls and used for area lighting, including but not limited to residential areas, shall be installed so that the fixture is full cutoff as defined herein, with no light above 90 degree nadir. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(i), 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 101-04, § 7, 12-20-2004)  
Sec. 98-1129. - Building entry points. 
At all building entry points average projected footcandle readings as determined by the point method photometrics shall not exceed a measurement of five footcandles. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(j), 2-5-2002)  
Sec. 98-1130. - Canopy lighting. 
All canopy lighting shall be fully recessed fixtures with full cutoff lens and shall not exceed 45 footcandles at any point under the canopy. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(k), 2-5-2002)  
Sec. 98-1131. - Spacing. 
(a)  In parking areas containing zero to 150 parking spaces, minimum spacing of lighting pole standards shall be no less than two times the height of the standard. 
(b)  In parking areas containing 151 or more parking spaces, minimum spacing of lighting pole standards shall be no less than four times the height of the light standard, a ratio of 4 to 1. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(l), 2-5-2002)  
Sec. 98-1132. - Parking area lighting. 
Parking area lighting shall not exceed a measurement of 15 footcandles at any point in the parking area. The average projected footcandle reading as determined by the point method photometrics shall not exceed two footcandles. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(m), 2-5-2002)  
Sec. 98-1133. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-13. A separate offense shall be deemed committed of each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. 
(b)  A footcandle reading, as performed in accordance with section 98-1124, in excess of those amounts defined as a nuisance in section 74-3, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(n), 2-5-2002)  
Sec. 98-1134. - Variance. 
(a)  A variance as to the height restriction may be permitted by the town council for the replacement of luminaries installed prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this subdivision is derived if such luminaires are damaged, destroyed, or otherwise become inoperable. 
(b)  A variance is permissible for such replacement luminaries only in those situations where more than one luminaire existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this subdivision is derived. The town council may grant a variance, upon application by the property owner or his designee, if the town council determines that the replacement of a damaged, destroyed, or otherwise inoperable luminaire with a luminaire conforming to the height requirement set forth in this subdivision would: 
(1)  Create a nuisance as defined in section 74-3; or 
(2)  Be aesthetically inconsistent with the remaining luminaires in determining whether a replacement luminaire would be aesthetically inconsistent, the town council may consider the following factors: 
a.  The location of the replacement luminaire on the subject property; 
b.  The type of construction material of the replacement luminaire; 
c.  The location of the subject property; and 
d.  The outdoor lighting used on adjacent and surrounding property. 
(c)  Notwithstanding these provisions, under no circumstances may the replacement luminaire exceed 35 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 3(o), 2-5-2002)  
Sec. 98-1135. - Architectural lighting of buildings and structures. 
For spotlights and floodlights mounted at or near ground level and used to light a building wall, sign, or other structure, the axis of illumination shall be adjusted to minimize the amount of light escaping above, below, and to the side of the illuminated object. 
(Ord. No. 101-04, § 8, 12-20-2004)  
Sec. 98-1136. - Architectural lighting of landscaping. 
Landscape lighting installed for nonresidential uses and multifamily uses shall be installed according to the following: 
(1)  Any lighting that is to be placed in the canopy of a tree shall be directed in a downward position to simulate natural light received by the area. 
(2)  The fixture shall be shielded so that all of the light is directed downward and shall not be directed toward the tree, to reduce light intrusion. 
(3)  All proposed lighting that is to be placed in a tree shall be affixed to the trunk or branch through the use of an adjustable bracketing system that will allow for the continued growth of the tree. 
(4)  The mounting height of landscape lighting shall not exceed 25 feet. 
(5)  No lighting shall be bolted, nailed, or glued to the trunk or any appendages of the tree, and such unauthorized attachment will be treated as a violation of chapter 94, Vegetation, of the town's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 101-04, § 9, 12-20-2004)  
Secs. 98-1137—98-1140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - FENCES AND WALLS 
 
Sec. 98-1141. - Generally. 
In any residential district or along the common boundary between any residential or nonresidential district where a wall, fence or screening separation is erected or where a screening wall or fence is required by ordinance, the standards for height and design contained in this division shall be observed. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.06)  
Sec. 98-1142. - Fence height and visibility. 
(a)  Except in A, agricultural district and key lots as defined by this code, no fence or wall within a required front yard shall exceed four feet in height above the adjacent grade. 
(b)  In the A, agricultural district no solid fence or wall within a required front yard shall exceed four feet in height above the adjacent grade; however, notwithstanding the foregoing, barbed wire or metal/wire livestock fencing not exceeding five feet in height above the adjacent grade shall be permitted within a required front yard. 
(c)  No fence or wall erected within a required side or rear yard shall exceed eight feet in height above the adjacent grade. 
(d)  Fences and walls shall be erected in accordance with the requirements of section 82-161 of this Code, corner visibility. 
(e)  No fence or wall within the established front yard for key lots shall exceed four feet in height above the adjacent grade. Fences constructed within the additional required front yard shall not exceed eight feet in height, but must be setback a minimum of ten feet from the property line. Fences constructed within the first ten feet of the additional required front yard shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(f)  Town council may grant an exception for maximum fence height or fencing materials for individual lots in situations where a new subdivision perimeter fence caused compatibility concerns with an existing residential fence due to topography and/or location. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.06(a)—(e); Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 1-4-2001; Ord. No. 06-12, § 38, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 67-19 , § 4, 12-16-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 67-19 , § 4, adopted Dec. 16, 2019, changed the title of § 98-1142 from "Front yard fence height and visibility" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 98-1143. - Perimeter and open space walls and fences. 
(a)  Subdivision perimeter fences and walls constructed adjacent and parallel to the rights-of-way of arterial and collector streets shall consist of masonry, stone, wrought-iron or tubular steel, or a combination of such materials. The fences and walls shall be a minimum of six feet in height and shall have masonry or stone columns measuring a minimum of 24 inches by 24 inches, with monolithic tops, placed a maximum of 40 feet apart on center. Vertical or horizontal spacing of members of wrought-iron or tubular steel fencing and their attachment to any column shall not allow passage of a four-inch sphere. Wrought-iron and tubular steel fencing shall be used in conjunction with, and further provide for, approved plantings from section 82-277 of this Code, "Screening plant selection list," placed three feet on center adjacent to all wrought-iron and tubular steel fencing. Such perimeter fencing shall be located within a three-foot wide fence easement dedicated to the mandatory homeowners' association for perpetual maintenance by such association. Parallel privacy fences of wood or other construction shall not be allowed between the perimeter fencing and parallel foundation lines on adjacent or contiguous lots. Notwithstanding the foregoing, wrought-iron or tubular steel fencing of a minimum of four feet in height may be allowed at the open end of cul-de-sacs and between parallel streets, provided that such fencing complies with all of the requirements contained in this section other than height. 
(b)  Fences constructed adjacent and parallel to dedicated park, trail, or open space areas shall consist of wrought-iron or tubular steel. Such fences shall be a minimum of four feet in height and shall be of consistent color throughout a development. Vertical or horizontal spacing of members of wrought-iron or tubular steel fencing shall not allow passage of a four-inch sphere. Parallel privacy screening of masonry construction, not exceeding 50 percent of the lot width, shall be allowed between the wrought-iron or tubular steel fencing and parallel foundation lines on abutting lots. Approved plantings from section 82-277, screening plant selection list, shall be placed three feet on center along the entire length of that side of the masonry screening facing the wrought-iron or tubular steel fencing. Such masonry screening shall be located a minimum distance of ten feet from the wrought-iron or tubular steel fencing. Fences of wood shall not be allowed between such perimeter fencing and parallel foundation lines on adjacent or contiguous lots. 
(c)  Property owners replacing existing masonry walls in neighborhoods where HOAs were not established and/or designated to provide ongoing fence/wall maintenance and that have no applicable planned development standards, shall either match original construction materials or meet the perimeter fence standards established in section 14-542 of the town's Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.06(a)—(e); Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 1-4-2001; Ord. No. 06-12, § 38, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 67-19 , § 5, 12-16-2019)  
Secs. 98-1144—98-1160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - EXTERIOR BUILDING MATERIAL[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 98-1161. - Compliance with division provisions. 
The exterior wall surface of buildings shall comply with the standards of this division. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.07)  
Sec. 98-1162. - Exterior wall construction for residential districts; exceptions. 
Exterior wall construction for residential dwelling units in all residential districts, except A agricultural and SF-E single-family estate, shall conform to the following restrictions and requirements: 
(1)  Exterior wall construction on each story or floor of every single-family or multifamily residential dwelling unit shall consist of 100 percent masonry construction, exclusive of the following: 
a.  Windows, doors, dormers and gables over the entrance of an extended garage. 
b.  Any rear wall area cantilevered 12 or more inches from the wood frame wall. 
c.  Any side wall area cantilevered 12 or more inches from the wood frame wall; provided, however, that such cantilevered side wall area shall not exceed 35 percent of the total exterior wall area of the side wall from which it is cantilevered. 
d.  Any rear multistory straight wall with an exterior surface construction that is in excess of 70 percent glass or windows. 
e.  Any wall area above a first floor roof where the exterior masonry veneer cannot directly bear upon the foundation (for example, wall area above a shed roof or an attached garage). 
(2)  The exterior area or sides of chimney flues on exterior walls that are visible from the street shall be enclosed in 100 percent masonry veneer construction, except that chimney flues not visible from the street may be enclosed by materials approved by the building code for exterior exposure and in compliance with the flue manufacturer's recommendation. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any exterior wall of any residential dwelling unit facing a street or thoroughfare, public park area or school yard shall consist of 100 percent masonry construction, exclusive only of windows, doors, dormers and gables over the entrance of an extended garage. 
(4)  The masonry restrictions and requirements established in subsections (1)a—c of this section shall not apply to an existing planned development for which other specific masonry construction restrictions and requirements have been adopted prior to September 1, 1992, or to any planned development or subdivision, or phase of a planned development or subdivision, for which a record plat has been filed and recorded and a building permit has been issued for construction therein prior to September 1, 1992. 
(5)  In all residential districts except A and SF-E, all exterior walls and roofs shall be constructed of materials having an Underwriter's Laboratory Class B or Uniform Building Code Class 2 "stoned fired" retardant rating or better. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.07(a))  
Sec. 98-1163. - Exterior wall construction in R-1, R-2, O, A or SF-E districts; exceptions. 
Exterior wall construction in R-1 retail district-1, R-2 retail district-2, O office district, and for any buildings constructed within an A agricultural district or SF-E single-family estate district, except for single-family residences and for accessory buildings related to a single-family structure, shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The front of the building shall consist of 100 percent masonry construction, exclusive of doors, windows, glass and entryway treatments, and atriums of glass and metal construction, provided that the exterior surface construction of such entryway treatments and atriums are in excess of 70 percent glass or windows; and 
(2)  All remaining sides or portions of the building below the first floor ceiling plate line shall consist of not less than 85 percent masonry construction, exclusive of doors, windows, glass and entryway treatments, and atriums of glass and metal construction, provided that the exterior surface construction of such entryway treatments and atriums are in excess of 70 percent glass or windows; all in accordance with the town's building and fire codes. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.07(b))  
Sec. 98-1164. - Exterior wall construction in C-1, C-2, I-1 and I-2 districts. 
Exterior wall construction in C-1 commercial district-1, C-2 commercial district-2, I-1 industrial district-1 and I-2 industrial district-2 zoning districts shall consist of 100 percent masonry construction on the front of the building, exclusive of doors, windows, glass and entryway treatments, and atriums of glass and metal construction, provided that the exterior surface construction of such entryway treatments and atriums are in excess of 70 percent glass or windows, and all remaining sides or portions of the building shall consist of masonry, wood or metal construction in accordance with the town's building and fire codes. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 5.07(c))  
Secs. 98-1165—98-1200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OBSOLETE ZONING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 98-1201. - Scope and applicability of article provisions. 
The zoning regulations of this article shall apply only to planned development districts approved prior to the effective date of this chapter. This article contains the following five types of obsolete zoning regulations: 
(1)  Obsolete districts. The MF-1, MF-2 and CC districts have been removed from the remainder of this chapter and shall not henceforth be applied to any property in the town. The standards of these districts shall continue to apply only in planned development districts approved prior to the effective date of this chapter that reference the regulations of these districts in the adopting ordinance. 
(2)  Modified dimensional regulations. Some of the dimensional regulations for single-family detached dwellings have been modified as of the effective date of this chapter. The original regulations existing prior to the effective date of this chapter and retained in this article shall continue to apply only to planned development districts approved prior to the effective date of this chapter that reference the dimensional regulations of such districts in the adopting ordinance. 
(3)  Obsolete use. Some planned development districts approved prior to the effective date of this chapter authorize the development of single-family detached (medium density) dwellings. The development standards for single-family detached (medium density) dwellings contained in this article shall continue to apply to such districts. 
(4)  Obsolete planned development standards. Prior to the effective date of this chapter, the town's zoning ordinance contained specific development standards for uses other than single-family detached (medium density) dwellings in planned development districts. These standards applied in planned development districts where no other standards were specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance. These standards shall continue to apply to such districts, but shall not be applicable to planned development districts approved after the effective date of this chapter. 
(5)  The SF-1, SF-2 and SF-3 districts have been recodified by this chapter. SF-1 has been recodified as SF-30, SF-2 has been recodified as SF-15, and SF-3 has been recodified as SF-10. Zoning that has been approved prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be subject to the corresponding regulations contained in this article. In cases of a planned development district approved prior to the effective date of this chapter, where the regulations of these districts are inconsistent with the regulations enumerated in the ordinance creating the planned development district, the regulations contained in such ordinance will control. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 7.01)  
Sec. 98-1202. - Obsolete MF-1 multiple-family district-1. 
(a)  Application of section provisions. For planned development districts approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, that reference the standards of the MF-1 multiple-family district-1, the standards of this section shall apply. This MF-1 district shall not be applied to any property within the town after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the MF-1 multiple-family district-1, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Church or rectory 
Community center, public 
Convent or monastery 
Day care home 
Dwelling, single-family attached 
Dwelling, duplex 
Dwelling, multifamily 
Dwelling, single-family detached 
Fire station 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Guest quarters, subject to section 98-983 
Home occupation, subject to section 98-984 
Local utility line 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
School, elementary or secondary 
Swimming pool, public 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Telephone equipment station 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(c)  Specific uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the MF-1 multiple-family district-1 only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186, specific use permits: 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
College or university 
Country club, private, subject to section 98-978 
Day care center 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Hospital 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Stadium or playfield, public 
(d)  Temporary uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the MF-1 multiple-family district-1 only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
(e)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the MF-1 multiple-family district-1 shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1023: 
(1)  Eight thousand five hundred square feet per single-family detached dwelling unit; 
(2)  Five thousand square feet per duplex dwelling unit; and 
(3)  Two thousand eight hundred square feet per single-family attached or multifamily dwelling unit. 
(f)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the MF-1 multiple-family district-1 shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1024: 
(1)  Sixty-five feet for single-family detached dwellings; 
(2)  Twenty feet for single-family attached dwellings; and 
(3)  Sixty feet for duplex or multifamily dwellings. 
(g)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the MF-1 multiple-family district-1 shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1025: 
(1)  One thousand four hundred fifty square feet per single-family detached dwelling unit; 
(2)  One thousand one hundred square feet per single-family attached or duplex dwelling unit; and 
(3)  Seven hundred square feet per multifamily dwelling unit. 
(h)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the MF-1 multiple-family district-1 shall be 25 feet, subject to section 98-1026. 
(i)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard for residential uses in the MF-1 multiple-family district-1 shall be as follows, with no minimum requirement for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1027: 
(1)  Eight feet for single-family detached and duplex dwellings; 
(2)  No side yard requirement for single-family attached dwellings, provided that no building complex shall exceed 300 feet in length and provided that a minimum side yard of five feet shall be provided at the end of building complexes to maintain a minimum ten-foot separation between buildings; and 
(3)  Ten feet for multifamily dwellings. 
(j)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the MF-1 multiple-family district-1 shall be ten feet for residential uses and 15 feet for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(k)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the MF-1 multiple-family district-1 shall be 40 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(l)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area requirement in the MF-1 multiple-family district-1. 
(m)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the MF-1 multiple-family district-1 shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 7.02)  
Sec. 98-1203. - Obsolete MF-2 multiple-family district-2. 
(a)  Generally. For planned development districts approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, that reference the standards of the MF-2 multiple-family district-2 shall apply. This MF-2 district shall not be applied to any property within the town after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the MF-2 multiple-family district-2, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Boardinghouse or roominghouse 
Church or rectory 
College or university 
Community center, public 
Convent or monastery 
Dwelling, single-family attached 
Dwelling, duplex 
Dwelling, multifamily 
Dwelling, single-family detached 
Fire station 
Garage sale, subject to section 98-982 
Golf course, public 
Guest quarters, subject to section 98-983 
Home occupation, subject to section 98-984 
Hotel or motel 
Local utility line 
Nursing or congregate care facility 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Park or playground, public 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
School, elementary or secondary 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Swimming pool, public 
Swimming pool, private, subject to section 98-996 
Telephone equipment station 
Theater 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(c)  Specific uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the MF-2 multiple-family district-2 only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186 of this Code, specific use permits: 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
Communication tower, commercial, subject to section 98-977 
Country club, private, subject to section 98-978 
Day care center 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage, subject to section 98-979 
Hospital 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
(d)  Temporary uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the MF-2 multiple-family district-2 only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
(e)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the MF-2 multiple-family district-2 shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1023: 
(1)  Eight thousand five hundred square feet per single-family detached dwelling unit; 
(2)  Five thousand square feet per duplex dwelling unit; and 
(3)  Two thousand eight hundred square feet per single-family attached or multifamily dwelling unit. 
(f)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the MF-2 multiple-family district-2 shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1024: 
(1)  Sixty-five feet for single-family detached dwellings; 
(2)  Twenty feet for single-family attached dwellings; and 
(3)  Sixty feet for duplex or multifamily dwellings. 
(g)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the MF-2 multiple-family district-2 shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1025: 
(1)  One thousand four hundred fifty square feet per single-family detached dwelling unit; 
(2)  One thousand one hundred square feet per single-family attached or duplex dwelling unit; and 
(3)  Seven hundred square feet per multifamily dwelling unit. 
(h)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the MF-2 multiple-family district-2 shall be 25 feet, subject to section 98-1026. 
(i)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard for residential uses in the MF-2 multiple-family district-2 shall be as follows, with no minimum requirement for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1027: 
(1)  Eight feet for single-family detached and duplex dwellings; 
(2)  No side yard requirement for single-family attached dwellings, provided that no building complex shall exceed 300 feet in length and provided that a minimum side yard of five feet shall be provided at the end of building complexes to maintain a minimum ten-foot separation between buildings; and 
(3)  Ten feet for multifamily dwellings. 
(j)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the MF-2 multiple-family district-2 shall be ten feet for residential uses and 15 feet for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(k)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the MF-2 multiple-family district-2 shall be 40 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(l)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be no maximum floor area requirement in the MF-2 multiple-family district-2. 
(m)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the MF-2 multiple-family district-2 shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 7.03)  
Sec. 98-1204. - Obsolete CC community center district. 
(a)  Generally. For planned development districts approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that reference the standards of the CC community center district, the following standards shall apply. This CC district shall not be applied to any property within the town after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the CC community center district, subject to compliance with any applicable conditions and all other provisions of this chapter: 
Accessory use, general, subject to section 98-972 
Accessory retail/service use 
Antique shop 
Art gallery or handicraft sales 
Art supply store 
Auto parts and accessory sales (indoors) 
Bait and sporting goods sales 
Bakery or confectionery shop, retail 
Bank or savings and loan 
Book or stationary store or newsstand 
Bus station or terminal 
Church or rectory 
Cleaning shop or laundry pickup station 
College or university 
Communication tower, commercial 
Community center, public 
Country club, private, subject to section 98-978 
Custom personal service 
Day care center 
Drugstore or pharmacy 
Dwelling, duplex 
Dwelling, multifamily 
Dwelling, single-family detached 
Fire station 
Fraternal club or lodge 
Golf course, public 
Guest quarters 
Hardware store 
Home occupation, subject to section 98-984 
Hospital 
Laboratory, medical and dental 
Local utility line 
Mortuary or funeral home 
Museum, library or art gallery (public) 
Nursing or congregate care facility 
Off-street parking, accessory 
Office, general business and professional 
Office, medical or dental 
Park or playground, public 
Parking lot or structure, commercial 
Personal improvement services 
Pet store 
Plant nursery or garden shop 
Public building, shop or yard 
Railroad track 
Recreation center, public 
Repair services, limited 
Restaurant, general 
Retail, general (indoors) 
School, business 
School, elementary or secondary 
Stadium or playfield, public 
Swimming pool, public 
Telephone equipment station 
Theater 
Travel bureau or consultant 
Water well, storage or pump station 
(c)  Specific uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the CC community center district only upon approval of a specific use permit by the town council in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 90-186 of this Code, specific use permits: 
Boat storage and service 
Cemetery or mausoleum 
Convent or monastery 
Electrical energy generating plant 
Electrical line/substation, high voltage 
Helistop 
Private club, subject to section 98-989 
Private franchise utility (not listed) 
Swimming pool, commercial 
(d)  Temporary uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the CC community center district only upon approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of section 78-87 of this Code, temporary use permits: 
Asphalt/concrete batch plant, temporary, subject to section 98-974 
Field office, temporary 
Sales trailer, temporary, subject to section 98-993 
(e)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the CC community center district shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1023: 
(1)  Eight thousand five hundred square feet per single-family detached dwelling unit; 
(2)  Five thousand square feet per duplex dwelling unit; and 
(3)  Two thousand eight hundred square feet per multifamily dwelling unit. 
(f)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the CC community center district shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1024: 
(1)  Sixty-five feet for single-family detached dwellings; and 
(2)  Sixty feet for duplex or multifamily dwellings. 
(g)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the CC community center district shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1025: 
(1)  One thousand four hundred fifty square feet per single-family detached dwelling unit; 
(2)  One thousand one hundred square feet per duplex dwelling unit; and 
(3)  Seven hundred square feet per multifamily dwelling unit. 
(h)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for residential uses in the CC community center district shall be as follows, with no requirement for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1026: 
(1)  Thirty feet for single-family detached dwellings; and 
(2)  Twenty-five feet for duplex and multifamily dwellings. 
(i)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard for residential uses in the CC community center district shall be as follows, with no minimum requirement for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1027: 
(1)  Eight feet for single-family detached and duplex dwellings; and 
(2)  Ten feet for multifamily dwellings. 
(j)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in the CC community center district shall be ten feet for residential uses and 15 feet for nonresidential uses, subject to section 98-1028. 
(k)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the CC community center district shall be 50 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(l)  Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio in the CC community center district shall be 1:1. 
(m)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the CC community center district shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 7.04)  
Sec. 98-1205. - Obsolete district standards. 
The dimensional regulations for single-family detached units in planned developments, approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, where reference was made in the planned development approval ordinance to the standards of a residential zoning district, shall be the current standards of the referenced district, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be 8,500 square feet where the SF-A, 2F, MF-1, MF-2 or MH district standards are referenced. 
(2)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard shall be ten feet where the SF-2 district is referenced and eight feet where the SF-3 district is referenced. 
(3)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard shall be ten feet for all referenced districts. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 7.05)  
Sec. 98-1206. - Single-family detached (medium density). 
(a)  Generally. For planned development districts approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that allowed single-family detached (medium density) dwellings, the standards of this section shall apply to areas designated for such uses, except as otherwise provided in the planned development approval ordinance. 
(b)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling for single-family detached (medium density) dwellings shall be 3,500 square feet, subject to section 98-1023. 
(c)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for single-family detached (medium density) dwellings shall be 35 feet, subject to section 98-1024. 
(d)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit for single-family detached (medium density) dwellings shall be 1,100 square feet, subject to section 98-1025. 
(e)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for single-family detached (medium density) dwellings shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1026: 
(1)  Where the garage faces the street, a minimum 20-foot front yard shall be provided from the face of the garage to the right-of-way line; 
(2)  Where the side of the garage faces the street, a minimum ten-foot front yard shall be provided from the side of the garage to the right-of-way line; and 
(3)  Where a rear entry garage is provided, the minimum front yard shall be 15 feet from the foundation line to the right-of-way line. 
(f)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard for single-family detached (medium density) dwellings shall be five feet from the foundation line to the side property line, subject to the following and subject to section 98-1027: 
(1)  A side yard may be reduced to zero, provided that no doors, windows or other openings are provided on the wall of the building facing or along the reduced side yard and provided an access and maintenance easement of five feet shall be provided and indicated within the subdivision plat on all contiguous lots to allow the adjacent owner to maintain and repair the side of a structure with a reduced or no yard space. 
(2)  A minimum distance of ten feet from foundation line to foundation line shall be provided between all buildings. 
(3)  Side yards on corner lots shall be no less than ten feet from the foundation line to the street right-of-way line. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard for single-family detached (medium density) dwellings shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1028: 
(1)  Ten feet from the foundation line to the rear property line, except that a rear yard may be reduced to zero, provided that no doors, windows or other openings are provided on the wall of the structure facing or adjacent to the rear yard and provided an access and maintenance easement of five feet shall be provided and indicated within the subdivision plat on all contiguous lots to allow the adjacent owner to maintain and repair the side of the structure with a reduced or no yard space. 
(2)  On lots backing up to any other single-family residential district, and not separated by a public street, a minimum rear yard of 20 feet shall be provided where any adjacent structures are two stories in height or more. On lots backing up to any other single-family residential district and not separated by a public street, a minimum rear yard of 15 feet shall be provided where any adjacent structures are less than two stories in height. 
(3)  A minimum distance of ten feet from foundation line to foundation line shall be provided between all buildings. 
(h)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage for single-family detached (medium density) dwellings shall be 45 percent, subject to section 98-1029. 
(i)  Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio for single-family detached (medium density) dwellings shall be 1:1, subject to section 98-1030. 
(j)  Maximum height. The maximum height for single-family detached (medium density) dwellings shall be two stories or 25 feet, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 7.06)  
Sec. 98-1207. - Obsolete planned development standards. 
(a)  Generally. For planned development districts approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, that contained no references to the development standards of other districts for uses other than single-family detached (medium density) dwellings, the following standards shall apply to areas designated for such uses, except as otherwise provided in the planned development approval ordinance. 
(b)  Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the PD planned development district shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1023: 
(1)  Eight thousand five hundred square feet per single-family detached dwelling unit; 
(2)  Five thousand square feet per duplex dwelling unit; and 
(3)  Two thousand eight hundred square feet per single-family attached or multifamily dwelling unit. 
(c)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the PD planned development district shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1024: 
(1)  Sixty-five feet for single-family detached dwellings; 
(2)  Sixty feet for duplex and multifamily dwellings; and 
(3)  Twenty feet for single-family attached dwellings. 
(d)  Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the PD planned development district shall be as follows, subject to section 98-1025: 
(1)  One thousand four hundred fifty square feet per single-family detached dwelling unit; 
(2)  One thousand one hundred square feet per single-family attached or duplex dwelling unit; and 
(3)  Seven hundred square feet per multifamily dwelling unit. 
(e)  Minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for all uses in the PD planned development district shall be as established by the approved site plan. Where the front yard is not specified on the site plan, the minimum front yard shall be 25 feet with the following exceptions, subject to section 98-1026. The minimum front yard for shopping center or retail development shall be 60 feet, except drive-in service buildings may have a minimum 30-foot front yard and gasoline service station pump islands may not be located nearer than 18 feet to the front property line. 
(f)  Minimum side yard. The minimum side yard requirements in a planned development shall be one of the following, subject to section 98-1027: 
(1)  Ten percent of the width of the lot but not less than six feet between property line and foundation line for single-family detached and multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  No side yard requirement for single-family attached dwellings, provided that no building complex shall exceed 300 feet in length and provided that a minimum side yard of five feet shall be provided at the end of building complexes to maintain a minimum ten-foot separation between buildings. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard. The minimum rear yard in a PD planned development district shall be established on the site plan, which shall be made a part of the amending ordinance. In no case shall the required rear yard for the main building be less than ten feet, except as provided in section 98-1028. 
(h)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage in the PD planned development district shall be 50 percent for all uses, subject to section 98-1029. 
(i)  Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio in the PD planned development district shall be 1:1, provided that floor area ratios up to 2:1 may be approved in a planned development district when plans illustrating how such structures relate to the overall community are submitted to and approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(j)  Maximum height. The maximum height of buildings and structures in the PD planned development district shall be three stories or 35 feet for all uses, subject to section 98-1031. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 7.07) 
  
8.02 Lot Dimensions, 8.03 Lot Lines 
 
8.03 Lot Lines (continued) 
 
8.04 Front Yard/Corner Lot 
 
8.05 and 8.06 
 
8.07 Adjacent Public Street 
 
8.08 Attached Dwelling Units Distinguished 
 
8.09 Floor Area Ratio 
 
8.10 Equestrian Trails 
 
Street 
 
Measuring Building Height 
Illustration 8.11.1  
Illustration 8.11.1 
(Ord. No. 72-00, § 16(exhibit A), 10-16-2000) 
Illustration 8.11.2  
Illustration 8.11.2 
 
Bodoni 
 
Helvetica Medium 
(Ord. No. 72-00, § 8.11.2, 10-16-2000) 
Illustration 8.14.1.  
Illustration 8.14.1 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 8.14.1, 2-5-2002) 
Illustration 8.14.2  
Illustration 8.14.2 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 8.14.2, 2-5-2002) 
Illustration 8.14.3  
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 8.14.3, 2-5-2002) 
Illustration 8.14.4  
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 8.14.4, 2-5-2002)  
APPENDIX A - FEE SCHEDULE 
Chapter 2. Administration. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
2-451 et seq. 	Charges for public records: 
 
For the services in locating or making available municipal records or copies thereof, the charges assessed shall be as provided in the Texas Building and Procurement section of the Texas Administrative Code for the actual cost of duplication. 
Chapter 6. Animals. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
6-126 	Animal control fees: 
 
(a)  The owner of an impounded domestic animal not under quarantine will pay the following fees in order to redeem such animal; provided, however, the fees shall be waived for the first impoundment of an animal fostered by a residential foster owner upon presentation of documentation that the animal has been placed in the foster care of the foster owner by a humane society: 
(1)  First impoundment within one year ..... $25.00 
Second impoundment within one year ..... 35.00 
Third impoundment within one year ..... 45.00 
Fourth impoundment within one year ..... 55.00 
Each additional impoundment within one year of first impoundment ..... 65.00 
(2)  The term "year" as used in this subsection shall refer to any consecutive 12-month period. 
(3)  A boarding charge of $8.00 per day will be added to the above amount before redemption of the animal. 
(4)  Any person claiming any animal that has not been vaccinated for rabies as required by the Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 169 shall pay the appropriate impoundment fee, plus $10.00 per day for boarding. Upon release of the animal, the owner has ten days to give the animal control officer written proof signed by a licensed veterinarian that the animal has been vaccinated for rabies. If the animal control officer has not received written proof of the vaccination for rabies, the owner is in violation of this section and subject to fines prescribed in this section. 
(b)  The owner of an impounded domestic animal which is under quarantine will pay the appropriate impoundment fee, and $15.00 per day boarding fee for any animal quarantined. 
(c)  The owner of impounded small livestock (sheep, goats, etc.) will pay a $35.00 impoundment fee, and $10.00 per day boarding fee for any animal impounded. 
(d)  The owner of a dog or cat which is required to be vaccinated to prevent rabies shall register the animal with the town animal control officer and obtain an identification tag for the animal. There shall be no fee for the identification tags. 
(e)  There will be no fee for the transfer of ownership of an animal that is currently registered and has been issued an identification tag. 
(f)  There will be no fee for the issuance of a wild or exotic animal permit. 
(g)  There will be no fee for the adoption of an animal from the animal control facility. 
(Ord. No. 04-00, § 4, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. 61-03, § 4, 10-6-2003) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
6-404 	Residential breeder/foster owner license: $25.00 
 
Chapter 14. Buildings and Building Regulations. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
14-1 	Building, plumbing, mechanical and electrical permit fees: 
 
When a building, plumbing, mechanical or electrical permit is required by the building, plumbing, mechanical or electrical code adopted by the Town of Flower Mound, the following fees shall be assessed: 
(a)  New single-family fees (including duplexes): 
2,000 sq. ft. or less ..... $1,150.00 
2,001 to 2,500 sq. ft. .....  1,300.00 
2,501 to 3,000 sq. ft. .....  1,450.00 
3,001 to 4,000 sq. ft. .....  1,600.00 
4,001 to 5,000 sq. ft. .....  1,750.00 
5,001 to 7,500 sq. ft. .....  1,900.00 
7,501 to 10,000 sq. ft. .....  2,050.00 
10,001 sq. ft. or more .....  2,200.00 
(1)  A nonrefundable plan review deposit of $100.00 is due at time of plan submittal. The plan review deposit will be applied toward the cost of the building permit only if the building permit fee is paid within six months of the date the plan was submitted for review. 
(b)  New multifamily fees (3 attached units or more): 
$500.00 per unit 
(1)  A nonrefundable plan review deposit of $100.00 is due at time of plan submittal. The plan review deposit will be applied toward the cost of the building permit only if the building permit fee is paid within six months of the date the plan was submitted for review. 
(c)  New commercial fees: 
(1)  Building permit fees for new construction: 
a.  1,000 sq. ft. or less ..... $300.00 
1,001 sq ft or more ..... 200.00+$0.10/sq. ft. 
b.  Fees for tenant finish out and shell buildings will be 75 percent of the above fees. 
c.  A nonrefundable plan review deposit equal to 50 percent of the building permit fee is due at time of plan submittal. The plan review deposit will be applied toward the cost of the building permit only if the building permit fee is paid within six months of the date the plan was submitted for review. 
(2)  Plumbing, mechanical and electrical fees for new construction (each): 
a.  1,000 sq. ft. or less ..... $100.00 
1,001 sq. ft. or more ..... 75.00 + $0.04/sq. ft. 
b.  Fees for tenant finish out and shell buildings will be 75 percent of the above fees. 
(d)  Fees for additions, alterations, repairs, demolition, screening walls, retaining walls and accessory buildings. The following fees shall be charged for small construction jobs involving additions, alterations and repairs. Projects that involve substantial work shall be charged as new construction at the discretion of the building official. 
Type of Construction 	Permit Fee 
Accessory building 	$100.00 
Demolition 	150.00 
Electrical 	60.00 
Foundation repair 	100.00 
HVAC replacement 	150.00 
Mechanical 	150.00 
Miscellaneous 	175.00 
Patio cover 	200.00 
Plumbing 	75.00 
Residential remodel (no additional square footage) 	200.00 
Residential remodel (addition of square footage) 	1—500 sq. ft. - 450.00 
501—1000 sq. ft. - 600.00 
1001—1500 sq. ft. - 850.00 
1501—2000 sq. ft. - 1,000.00 
Square footage in excess of 2000, refer to (a), new single family fees. 
Retaining wall, screening wall, or global fence permit 	150.00 
Umbrella permit 	Each portion of the project will be assessed individually using the fees listed in appendix A. 
Water heater 	60.00 
Window/door replacement 	35.00 + 2.00 per window/door to be replaced. 
 
(Ord. No. 86-00, § 1(5.00), 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 78-02, § 1, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 23-19 , § 1, 6-17-2019; Ord. No. 67-19 , § 6, 12-16-2019) 
(e)  Miscellaneous fees. 
Any activity listed below shall be charged the following fee associated with the activity: 
Certificate of occupancy (only charged when no permit issued for new construction) 	$100.00 
Temporary certificate of occupancy (charged for all temporary certificates of occupancy) 	 100.00 
Early start for model homes 	 250.00 each model 
Fence permit 	  60.00 
In-ground swimming pool 	 350.00 
Spa or above-ground pool 	 200.00 
Lawn sprinkler 	  60.00 
Mobile home 	 100.00 
Tent 	  50.00 
Sales trailer 	 100.00 
Construction trailer 	 100.00 
Drive approach, per approach 	  50.00 
Sidewalk, per lot 	  50.00 
Structure moving permit (Any structure moved through or into the town that exceeds 250 square feet) 	 100.00 
Additional plan review 	  40.00 per hour—Minimum one hour 
 
(Ord. No. 86-00, § 1(6.00), 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 78-02, § 1, 11-4-2002) 
(f)  Inspection fees: 
Fees for the associated inspection activities are as follows: 
Reinspection fee ..... $100.00 
After hours inspection, per hour (minimum 2 hours) ..... 60.00 
Special inspection ..... 60.00 
High-hazard inspection, annual ..... 50.00 
(g)  Drainage Inspection Fees. 
Fees for drainage inspection shall be assessed as follows: 
Type of Structure 	Drainage 
Inspection Fee 
New single-family residence (incl. duplexes) 	$250.00 
New multi-family fees (three attached units or more) 	$250.00 + $12.50 per unit 
New commercial buildings 	$250.00 + $0.0625/sq. ft. 
Additions, alterations, and repairs requiring site grading 	$250.00 
Swimming pools 	$250.00 
 
(Ord. No. 66-99, § 1(8.00), 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 86-00, § 1(8.00), 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 78-02, § 1, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 32-09, § 2, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 55-10, §§ 6, 7, 9-7-2010) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
14-471 	Public Rights-of-Way Registration Fee 
 
All users and contractors performing work within the public rights-of-way shall annually register with the town and pay the following fee. Fees shall be paid annually and registration will be valid from January 1 through December 31. There shall be no pro-ration of fees for registrations occurring after January 1. Registrations received and fees paid between December 1 and December 31 of any calendar year shall be valid from that date until December 31 of the following calendar year. 
ROW registration ..... $125.00 
( Ord. No. 44-19 , § 1, 9-3-2019) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
14-472 	Construction (ROW) permit fee 
 
All users and contractors performing work within the public rights-of-way shall obtain a construction (ROW) permit from the town and pay the following fee. 
Construction (ROW) permit ..... $90.00 
( Ord. No. 44-19 , § 2, 9-3-2019) 
Chapter 18. Businesses. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
18-31 	Contractor registration and license fees: 
 
General, plumbing, mechanical, electrical and irrigation contractors shall not be eligible to receive a permit within the town until they have registered with the town as a contractor and paid the following fee. Fees shall be paid annually and registration will be valid from January 1 through December 31. There shall be no pro-ration of fees for registrations occurring after January 1. Registrations received and fees paid between December 1 and December 31 of any calendar year shall be valid from that date until December 31 of the following calendar year. 
General contractor ..... $125.00 
Plumbing contractor ..... 125.00 
Irrigation contractor ..... 125.00 
Backflow tester ..... 125.00 
Mechanical contractor ..... 125.00 
Electrical contractor ..... 125.00 
(Ord. No. 66-99, § 1(7.00), 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 86-00, § 1(7.00), 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 78-02, § 1, 11-4-2002) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
18-123 	Food establishment fees 
 
(a)  Food establishment permit fees. Each separate food establishment operating within the corporate limits of the Town of Flower Mound, shall pay the following fees: 
Food establishment (annually) ..... $300.00 
Temporary food establishment (per booth/per event) ..... $40.00 
Mobile food establishment (annually) ..... $300.00 
Snow cone-type seasonal refreshment stand (six months) ..... $50.00 
Deposit to ensure removal of refreshment stand ..... $350.00 
Farmers' market permit (annually): 
1—30 vendors ..... $200.00 
31—60 vendors ..... $300.00 
60+ vendors ..... $400.00 
(b)  Plan review fees. A fee as prescribed below shall be paid to obtain a permit to construct a permitted food establishment. These fees shall be based on the square footage of the proposed facility. 
0—150 square feet ..... $65.00 
151—1,000 sq. ft. ..... $150.00 
1,001—4,000 sq. ft. ..... $200.00 
4,001—8,000 sq. ft. ..... $250.00 
8,001—20,000 sq. ft. ..... $350.00 
20,001—up sq. ft. ..... $500.00 
(c)  Reinspection fees. 
Follow up ..... $50.00 
Full reinspection ..... 50 percent of food establishment's annual permit fee 
(d)  Food protection manager's registration. 
Initial/renewal/new employee ..... $25.00/manager 
(every five years upon expiration of town 
registration or upon expiration of state-issued 
food protection manager's certification) 
*No fee shall be charged to any food establishment owned and operated by a governmental agency, independent school district, institution of purely public charity, church, and/or other nonprofit organizations; however, such establishments may be operated only after a permit is issued by the regulatory authority and all other requirements of these rules and applicable law are met. Proper documentation of tax-exempt status under federal or state law must be provided to the regulatory authority at the time of application in order to be exempt from the permit fee. 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, § 3.05(d)(20); Ord. No. 52-97, § 2, 9-15-1997; Ord. No. 65-99, § 3, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 82-02, § 2, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 55-10, § 8, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 47-11, § 2, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 11-16 , § 3, 2-15-2016; Ord. No. 23-16 , § 1, 5-2-2016; Ord. No. 52-19 , § 2, 11-4-2019) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
18-252 	Solicitation permit fee: 
 
A nonrefundable fee for investigation and administration of the application shall be charged. Such fee shall not be prorated and shall be paid at the time the application is made and shall not be returned to the applicant, regardless of whether a permit is issued. All fees are subject to change upon resolution of the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
(1)  A fee of $75.00 shall be charged for a master permit. A master permit shall be valid for six months from the date of issuance. 
(2)  A fee of $20.00 shall be charged for individual permits obtained by a master permit holder for individuals operating under a master permit. Individual permits shall be valid only for so long as the master permit holder's permit is valid and shall not exceed six months. 
(Ord. No. 32-09, § 3, 9-8-2009) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
18-331 	License fees for sexually oriented businesses: 
 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is $500.00. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
18-523 and 18-524 	Alcoholic beverage fees: 
 
Town mandated application fees and permit fees shall be in an amount equal to 50 percent of the state fee imposed for the permit under which any person manufactures, distills, brews, imports, transports, stores for purposes of sale, distributes or sells any beer, wine or mixed beverages within the Town's corporate limits; or such other maximum amount therefore allowed by state law. The initial and renewal fees for alcoholic beverage permits for all other types of permits issued by the TABC shall be an amount equal to 50 percent of the state fee imposed for the permit or such other maximum amount as is allowed by state law. The actual amount of the town fee to be paid for an initial or renewal alcoholic beverage permit shall automatically increase as the state fee for the specific type of permit increases. 
(Ord. No. 53-10, § 2, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 47-11, § 3, 9-6-2011) 
Chapter 26. Courts. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
26-103 	Transcript preparation fee of $25.00. Copies of transcript: $0.10 per page. 
26-172 	Technology fee: $4.00. 
26-192 	Building security fee: $3.00. 
 
Chapter 30. Emergency Services. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
30-32(b) 	A service fee of $25.00 for incorrect permit number given in alarm notification. 
30-33 	A fee of $50.00 for each other false alarm occurring after the third false alarm within said preceding 12-month period and $150.00 for each false alarm occurring after the seventh false alarm with said preceding 12-month period. 
30-34 	Financial institution indicator panel installation fee of $100.00. 
30-53 	Initial alarm permit fee 
 
$35.00 for residential permit; $50.00 for commercial permit. An annual renewal fee of $35.00 for residential; $50.00 for commercial for permit holders who have had a false alarm in the said preceding 12-month period. No annual renewal fee will be assessed to permit holders with no false alarms in the said preceding 12-month period. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
30-92 	Emergency ambulance service fees 
 
(a)  A fee of $750.00 for residents of the town and $850.00 for nonresidents shall be charged per trip, per person for basic life support (BLS) treatment and transportation by emergency ambulance to a full service hospital facility in response to a request received by the fire department for emergency medical services. 
(b)  A fee of $850.00 for residents of the town and $950.00 for nonresidents shall be charged per trip, per person for advanced life support I (ALSI) treatment and transportation by emergency ambulance to a full service hospital facility in response to a request received by the fire department for emergency medical services. 
(c)  A fee of $950.00 for residents of the town and $1,050.00 for nonresidents shall be charged per trip, per person for advanced life support II (ALSII) treatment and transportation by emergency ambulance to a full service hospital facility in response to a request received by the fire department for emergency medical services. 
(d)  An additional fee of $15.00 shall be charged per loaded mile. 
(e)  In addition to all other fees charged hereunder, a fee of $200.00 shall be charged per trip, per person for single-usage disposable items for those persons provided basic life support (BLS) treatment. 
(f)  In addition to all other fees charged hereunder, a fee of $400.00 shall be charged per trip, per person for single-usage disposable items for those persons provided advanced life support (ALS) treatment. 
(g)  In addition to all other fees charged hereunder, a fee of $150.00 shall be charged per trip, per person for single-usage disposable items utilized in conjunction with the provision and use of oxygen. 
(h)  The foregoing fees have been established based, in part at least, on the centers for Medicare and Medicaid services (CMS) rates, which rates are the reimbursement rates for ambulance fees set by Medicare. When the CMS rate for advanced life support, level 2 ambulance service ("ALS 2") is increased the town's fee for providing advanced life support II ("ALSII") treatment and transportation ambulance service shall be increased from the then current fee amount by a similar amount and rounded up to the next higher $10.00 increment. All other fee amounts for ambulance services shall be similarly increased from the then current fee in an amount proportionate to the ALSII increase and rounded up to the next higher $10.00 increment. Any such increase shall become effective on the first day of the next fiscal year (October 1) of the Town of Flower Mound, and the foregoing fee schedule revised accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 68-99, § 1, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 86-04, § 2, 10-18-2004; Ord. No. 01-07, § 3, 1-18-2007; Ord. No. 32-09, § 4, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 62-10, § 4, 10-4-2010; Ord. No. 41-13, § 2, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 35-14, § 1, 7-21-2014; Ord. No. 49-16 , § 3, 9-6-2016) 
Chapter 32. Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
32-3 	Flat rate inspection fee to work outside of normal working hours (charged in addition to the usual inspection fee(s) for the work inspected) 
 
Weekdays outside of the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. ..... $90.00 
Saturdays (and Sunday emergency work) ..... $180.00 
(Ord. No. 25-12, § 2, 8-6-2012) 
Chapter 34. Environment. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-95 	Administrative fee for work services 
 
A charge, which shall be known as the "administrative fee for work services," shall be made against each lot or tract of land, and the owner thereof, whose lot or tract of land is found in violation, pursuant to sections 34-31 et seq., and causes the Town of Flower Mound to do or have done work, to a lot or tract of land necessary to obtain compliance with such sections. Such administrative fee shall be $150.00. A separate $150.00 administrative fee shall be assessed for each violation causing work to be done. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-215 	Impoundment and lien fees for abandoned (and recovered) motor vehicles and personal property 
 
(a)  The charges made against all abandoned motor vehicles and personal property shall be the actual expense incurred by the town in hauling and storing the same, except that there shall be a minimum charge of $8.00 per day for storage of motor vehicles. 
(b)  The town shall have a lien on all abandoned, stolen and/or recovered motor vehicles for towing and storage charges in the following amounts: 
Towing charge ..... $45.00 
Storage charge (per day) ..... $10.00 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-356(a) 	Public swimming pool and spa permit fee 
 
Each separate public swimming pool and spa operating within the corporate limits of the town shall pay the following fees, except that splasher and/or wading pools operating in conjunction with a Class C or Class D pool and located at the same address or physical location shall not be charged a separate annual permit fee: 
Swimming pool ..... $250.00 (annually) 
Spa ..... $250.00 (annually) 
(Ord. No. 83-02, § 2, 11-18-2002) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-357(c) 	Certified pool operator's registration 
 
Initial/renewal/new employee ..... $25.00 per operator (upon expiration of town 
registration or upon expiration of an approved 
pool operator's certification). 
NB: No fee shall be charged to any public swimming pool or spa owned and operated by a governmental agency, independent school district and/or other nonprofit organizations. Proper documentation of tax-exempt status under federal or state law must be provided to the regulatory authority at the time of application in order to be exempt from the permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 83-02, § 3, 11-18-2002) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-358(d) 	Plan review fees 
 
A fee of $200.00 shall be paid to obtain a permit to construct a permitted public swimming pool or spa. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-364(c) 	Reinspection fee 
 
Reinspection ..... $50.00 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-393 	On-site sewage facility fees. 
 
(a)  Upon approval of the application and planning materials to construct, alter, extend, or repair an on-site sewage facility which requires an on-going maintenance contract as provided in the adopted Administrative Rules 30 TAC 285.1-285.91, a fee of $310.00 shall be assessed and collected prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application and planning materials to construct, alter, extend, or repair an on-site sewage facility which does not require a maintenance contract as provided in the adopted Administrative Rules 30 TAC 285.1-285.91, a fee of $210.00 shall be assessed and collected prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(c)  Upon approval of the application and planning materials to repair an on-site sewage facility, as defined in 20 TAC 285.2(60), a fee of $50.00 shall be assessed and collected prior to the issuance of the permit. This repair permit fee shall also include relocating spray heads associated with surface application systems. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  A fee of $50.00 shall be assessed and collected prior to the re-inspection of an on-site sewage facility. 
(f)  If an on-site sewage facility is installed, repaired, replaced, altered, or relocated without a permit for such work, the applicable permit fee defined herein shall be doubled. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-420(a)(1) 	Seismic survey permit required 
Every application for a seismic survey permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $100.00. 
 
(Ord. No. 47-11, § 4, 9-6-2011) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-421(b) 	Oil, gas, or combined well permit application and filing fees 
Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $10,000.00 per well. 
34-421(c) 	Annual inspection fees 
An inspection fee of $4,250.00 per well shall be required annually, starting one year after the initial date the oil, gas, or combined well permit is issued and each year thereafter. 
34-421(d)(18) 	Road maintenance fees 
 
A one-time road maintenance fee shall be collected by the town engineer prior to the issuance of any and all oil, natural gas, or combined well drilling and operations permit(s). The fee shall be determined from the paving coefficient index (PCI) methodology enumerated in the final road maintenance agreement prior to execution by the applicant and the town. 
(Ord. No. 58-00, § 3, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 95-02, § 2, 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 25-03, § 3, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 51-03, § 2, 8-28-2003; Ord. No. 56-08, § 8, 9-15-2008; Ord. No. 58-10, § 2, 9-20-2010) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-423(b)(1) 	Amended well permit fees 
Every application for an amended oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $2,500.00. 
 
(Ord. No. 47-11, § 4, 9-6-2011) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-423.1(b) 	Transfer of oil and gas well permits 
The transfer fee for oil and/or gas well permits shall be $500.00 per well. 
(Ord. No. 32-09, § 5, 9-8-2009) 
34-432(c) 	Appeal fees 
Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal in the amount of $2,000.00 per well. 
 
(Ord. No. 25-03, § 3, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 56-08, § 9, 9-15-2008) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-455(b) 	Centralized natural gas production facility permit application and filing fees. 
 
Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $10,000.00 per application. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 2, 3-1-2010) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-456 	Oil and Gas Pipeline Permit Fees 
 
(a)  Oil and gas pipeline permit application fee. Every application for an oil and gas pipeline permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $2,500.00. 
(b)  Oil and gas pipeline right-of-way review and inspection fee. Every applicant for an oil and gas pipeline permit where a portion of the project is located within the public rights-of-way shall pay a fee equal to five percent of the total construction costs of that portion of the project that is located within the public rights-of-way. Each permit application for use of a public right-of-way is subject to review and determination by the town's director of environmental services or his/her designee. 
(1)  In the event the permit application for use of public right-of-way is approved, the review and inspection fee shall be paid within 30 days of approval. Permittees using the public right-of-way shall enter into a town-approved right-of-way use agreement with the town prior to receiving a permit authorizing the use of the town right-of-way. 
(2)  In the event a permit application for use of public right-of-way is denied, an applicant may appeal such denial within five days of receipt of written notice of such denial to the town manager. The decision of the town manager shall be final. 
(c)  Oil and gas pipeline right-of-way annual use fee. Annual fee of $1.80 times the number of linear feet of public ROW occupied. Payment for the first year is due within 30 days of approval and payment for subsequent years is due prior to each anniversary of the effective date of the agreement. This fee may, in the sole discretion of the town, be adjusted for inflation. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 2, 3-1-2010) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
34-459 	Pipeline Information Reporting Requirements 
 
A fee in the amount of $500.00 shall be required annually on or before June 30 of each year together with the required annual safety report letter. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 2, 3-1-2010) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
38-3 	Registration fees. 
 
Fees shall be paid annually. The registration will be valid from January 1 through December 31. Registrations received and fees paid after December 1 of any calendar year shall be valid from that date until December 31 of the following year. The registration fee shall be $100.00. 
See section 1 of the definitions and explanation phraseology following this fee schedule for chapter 38. 
(Ord. No. 65-01, § 2, 10-1-2001) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
38-4 	Construction or repair permit and plan review fees. 
 
The following is a list of fees for the installation and/or repair of fire protection systems. 
(1)  Fire suppression system aboveground. The permit fee is based on the total valuation of the fire protection work being completed. The fire department fee schedule is utilized for calculating the fee. The fee includes a plan review fee. 
(2)  Fire alarm system. The permit fee is based on the total valuation of the fire protection work being completed. The fire department fee schedule is utilized for calculating the fee. The fee includes a plan review fee. 
Fire Department Fee Schedule 
(Valuation based on total cost of fire protection system installation or repair.) 
Total Valuation 	Fee 
$1.00 to $500.00 	$20.00 
$500.01 to $2,000.00 	$20.00 for the first $500.00 plus $2.50 for each additional $100.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00 
$2000.01 to $25,000.00 	$50.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $10.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00 
$25,000.01 to $50,000.00 	$280.00 for the first $25,000.00 plus $8.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00 
$50,000.01 to $100,000.00 	$680.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $6.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00 
$100,000.01 to $500,000.00 	$980.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00 
$500,000.01 to $1,000,000.00 	$2,580.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00 
$1,000,000.01 and over 	$4,080.00 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $2.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof 
 
(3)  A nonrefundable plan review fee for fire suppression systems and fire alarms systems, equal to 50 percent of the total permit fee, is due at the time of plan submittal. The remainder of the fee is due at the time the permit is obtained. 
(4)  Fire suppression system underground ..... $75.00 
(5)  Mechanical hood fire suppression system ..... 75.00 
(6)  Underground or aboveground fuel storage tanks ..... 150.00 
(7)  Security, privacy or emergency access gates ..... 100.00 
(8)  Liquid petroleum gas tanks ..... 100.00 
(9)  Portable fuel tanks ..... 50.00 
(10)  Hydrant flow test ..... 50.00 
(11)  Reinspection—Third inspection ..... 60.00 
(12)  Daycare inspections ..... 100.00 
(13)  Nursing home inspection ..... 100.00 
(14)  Operational permits annual (maximum of four permits per business) ..... 75.00 
(15)  Tent (per tent fee) ..... 50.00 
(16)  After hours inspections (per hour or portion of an hour—Minimum 2 hours) ..... 60.00 
See section 2 of the definitions and explanation phraseology following this fee schedule for chapter 38. 
(Ord. No. 65-01, § 2, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 64-08, § 5, 10-20-2008) 
DEFINITIONS AND EXPLANATION 
PHRASEOLOGY 
The following text outlines the provisions that detail the need for a Fire Code Permit. 
SECTION 1—REGISTRATION AND LICENSE FEES 
600.0001—CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION FEE 
Permit fee: $100.00 (per discipline) 
First time contractor registration fee to conduct business within the Town of 
Flower Mound. Fee is not pro-rated. Registration expires on December 31 each year. 
SECTION 2—CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR WORK FEES 
600.0002—INSTALLATION OF A FIRE ALARM SYSTEM 
Permit fee: Fee based on Fire Department Fee Schedule, which is computed on value of job and includes a plan review fee. 
Permit to install a new fire alarm system or make alterations or additions to an existing system. System to receive inspections to review installation and conduct an acceptance test operation. 
600.0003—INSTALLATION OF FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM—ABOVEGROUND 
Permit fee: Fee based on Fire Department Fee Schedule, which is computed on value of job and includes a plan review fee. 
Permit to install a fire suppression system and receive periodic inspections to review installation and conduct an acceptance test. (On existing systems a permit is required if change effects 6 or more heads) 
600.0004—INSTALLATION OF FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM—UNDERGROUND 
Permit fee: $75.00 
Permit to install underground for a fire suppression system and receive periodic inspections to review installation and conduct an acceptance test. (On existing systems a permit is required if change effects vault or FD connections.) 
600.0005—INSTALLATION OF MECHANICAL HOOD/FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM 
Permit fee: $75.00 per system 
Permit to install a mechanical exhaust hood or a fixed fire extinguishing system or the combination of both. 
600.0006—INSTALLATION OF UNDERGROUND OR ABOVE GROUND FUEL STORAGE TANKS 
Permit fee: $150.00 per tank 
Permit to install an underground fuel dispensing system or above ground fuel dispensing system, or product lines or vapor recovery system. 
600.0007—INSTALLATION OF SECURITY, PRIVACY OR EMERGENCY ACCESS GATES 
Permit fee: $100.00 
Permit to install a controlled access gate or light attenuated opening devices within an emergency access easement or fire lane. 
600.0008—INSTALLATION OF LIQUID PETROLEUM GAS TANKS 
Permit fee: $100.00 per tank 
Permit to install underground or nonresidential Liquid Petroleum Gas tanks over 250 gallons. 
600.0009—PORTABLE FUEL TANKS 
Permit fee: $50.00 
Fee is for the temporary installation of a portable fuel tank at construction sites. 
600.0010—PLAN REVIEW FEE 
Permit fee: Fee is based on a 50 percent of the construction permit fee, which is computed using the Fire Department Fee Schedule. 
Fee paid provides for a review of plans and specifications submitted for fire and/or building code compliance. Fee is 50 percent of the construction permit fee paid upon submittal. The paid fee will be applied to the total fee paid. 
600.0011—HYDRANT FLOW TEST 
Permit Fee: $50.00 for each test 
Permit to conduct a flow test of the Town's water system for the purposes of installing a fire suppression system. 
600.0012—REINSPECTION FEE—Third Inspection and each subsequent reinspection 
Permit fee: $60.00 
Fee charged on the third inspection of the same item(s). 
(Ord. No. 65-01, att. A, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 64-08, § 5, 10-20-2008) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
38-7(c) 	False fire alarm and fire alarm malfunctions fee charges 
 
(2)  Beginning with the fourth false alarm and continuing through the seventh such false alarm within a single calendar year, a fee of $250.00 shall be paid by the owner/occupant for each false alarm located in a group A, B, E, F, H, I M, U. R-1 and S occupancy. After the seventh false alarm has occurred at the premises within a single calendar year, the fee shall be $500.00 for each false alarm located in a group A, B, E, F, H, I M, U. R-1 and S occupancy during the remainder of the then current calendar year. 
(3)  Beginning with the fourth false alarm and continuing through the seventh such false alarm within a single calendar year, a fee of $25.00 shall be paid by the owner/occupant for each false alarm located in a group R-3 occupancy premises. After the seventh false alarm has occurred at the premises within a single calendar year, the fee shall be $50.00 for each false alarm during the remainder of the then current calendar year. 
(5)  Should any fee assessed pursuant to this section remain unpaid in excess of 60 days from the date the charge is billed, a collection fee in the amount of $25.00 and interest in the amount of 12 percent per annum shall be assessed on the outstanding balance and shall be payable by the owner/occupant of the premises in addition to the original fee. 
(Ord. No. 64-08, § 6, 10-20-2008) 
Chapter 42. Impact Fees. 
 
Code Section Number 	Description 
42-37(b) 	Water impact fees [exhibit E]: 
 
PLATS FILED ON OR AFTER SEPTEMBER 8, 2015 
Water Impact Fees 
Meter Size 
(in inches) 	Residential 	Non-Residential 
5/8 " × ¾" PD 	$4,098 	$2,049 
¾" PD 	$6,147 	$3,074 
1" PD 	$10,245 	$5,123 
1½" PD 	$20,490 	$10,245 
2" PD 	$32,784 	$16,392 
2" Compound 	$32,784 	$16,392 
2" Turbine 	$40,980 	$20,490 
3" Compound 	$65,568 	$32,784 
3" Turbine 	$98,352 	$49,176 
4" Compound 	$102,450 	$51,225 
4" Turbine 	$172,116 	$86,058 
6" Compound 	$204,900 	$102,450 
6" Turbine 	$377,016 	$188,508 
8" Compound 	$327,840 	$163,920 
8" Turbine 	$655,680 	$327,840 
10" Turbine 	$1,024,500 	$512,250 
 
Code Section Number 	Description 
42-37(c) 	Wastewater impact fees [exhibit E]: 
 
PLATS FILED ON OR AFTER SEPTEMBER 8, 2015 
Wastewater Impact Fees 
Meter Size 
(in inches) 	Service Area 
	Cross Timbers Conservation District 	Long Prairie District 	Lakeside District 	Denton Creek District 	Prairie Vista District 
		Residential 	Non- 
Residential 	Residential 	Non- 
Residential 	Residential 	Non- 
Residential 	Residential 	Non- 
Residential 
5/8 " × ¾" PD 	$0.00 	$2,436 	$1,218 	$2,733 	$1,367 	$715 	$358 	$934 	$467 
¾" PD 	$0.00 	$3,654 	$1,827 	$4,100 	$2,050 	$1,073 	$536 	$1,401 	$701 
1" PD 	$0.00 	$6,090 	$3,045 	$6,833 	$3,416 	$1,788 	$894 	$2,335 	$1,168 
1½" PD 	$0.00 	$12,180 	$6,090 	$13,665 	$6,833 	$3,575 	$1,788 	$4,670 	$2,335 
2" PD 	$0.00 	$19,488 	$9,744 	$21,864 	$10,932 	$5,720 	$2,860 	$7,472 	$3,736 
2" Compound 	$0.00 	$19,488 	$9,744 	$21,864 	$10,932 	$5,720 	$2,860 	$7,472 	$3,736 
2" Turbine 	$0.00 	$24,360 	$12,180 	$27,330 	$13,665 	$7,150 	$3,575 	$9,340 	$4,670 
3" Compound 	$0.00 	$38,976 	$19,488 	$43,728 	$21,864 	$11,440 	$5,720 	$14,944 	$7,472 
3" Turbine 	$0.00 	$58,464 	$29,232 	$65,592 	$32,796 	$17,160 	$8,580 	$22,416 	$11,208 
4" Compound 	$0.00 	$60,900 	$30,450 	$68,325 	$34,163 	$17,875 	$8,938 	$23,350 	$11,675 
4" Turbine 	$0.00 	$102,312 	$51,156 	$114,786 	$57,393 	$30,030 	$15,015 	$39,228 	$19,614 
6" Compound 	$0.00 	$121,800 	$60,900 	$136,650 	$68,325 	$35,750 	$17,875 	$46,700 	$23,350 
6" Turbine 	$0.00 	$224,112 	$112,056 	$251,436 	$125,718 	$65,780 	$32,890 	$85,928 	$42,964 
8" Compound 	$0.00 	$194,880 	$97,440 	$218,640 	$109,320 	$57,200 	$28,600 	$74,720 	$37,360 
8" Turbine 	$0.00 	$389,760 	$194,880 	$437,280 	$218,640 	$114,400 	$57,200 	$149,440 	$74,720 
10" Turbine 	$0.00 	$609,000 	$304,500 	$683,250 	$341,625 	$178,750 	$89,375 	$233,500 	$116,750 
 
Code Section Number 	Description 
42-76(b), 42-77(e) 	Roadway impact fees [exhibit F]: 
 
 
(Ord. No. 87-00, § 5, 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 36-01, § 1, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 37-01, § 1, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 30-04, § 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 26-06, §§ 2, 3, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 08-10, § 11, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 50-15 , § 9(Exhs. E, F), 9-8-2015) 
Chapter 46. Library. 
 
Code Section Number 	Description 
46-1 	Late charges for overdue library materials 
 
A.  No fines for late returns. 
B.  A $2.00 charge for lost compact disc, video and cassette cases. 
C.  A $1.00 charge for replacing a lost library card. 
D.  A $2.00 charge for a lost bar code on an item. 
E.  A $24.00 charge for adult items which are lost or damaged beyond repair. 
F.  A $16.00 charge for children's items which are lost or damaged beyond repair. 
G.  An $8.00 charge for mass market paperback books which are lost or damaged beyond repair. 
H.  Charging the list price, if available, for items whose cost is well below or well above the fees set forth in items B-G, as applicable. 
(Code 1989, ch. 7, § 7.00; Ord. No. 48-98, § 2, 8-14-1998; Ord. No. 14-05, § 2, 2-21-2005; Ord. No. 39-08, §§ 2, 3, 7-21-2008) 
Chapter 54. Parks and Recreation. 
 
Code Section Number 	Description 
54-2(a)(2) 	Participation/user fees: Sports leagues 
 
a.  The fee for residents participating in an organization shall be $2.00 per player per season. The fee for nonresidents participating in an organization shall be $14.00 per player per season. 
b.  The fee for adult leagues shall be $60.00 per team for adult softball, $30.00 per team for adult basketball, and $40.00 per team for adult flag football. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
54-2(b)(3) 	Fees and refunds 
 
a.  The fee for each game field shall be $10.00 (without lights) and $15.00 (with lights) per session for residents and $15.00 (without lights) and $25.00 (with lights) per session for nonresidents. Game soccer fields may be subdivided for reservations at the discretion of the recreation and leisure services division. Each session shall be for no longer than one and one-half hours in accordance with the reservation schedule maintained by the recreation and leisure services division. This includes any league play that is not sanctioned or cosponsored by the town. 
b.  The reservation fee for tournaments is $100.00 per field, per day. A $100.00 refundable tournament deposit is required for potential damage to the facility and scoreboards. If no damage is done to the facility and scoreboards, as determined by town staff, the deposit shall be returned. The town retains all concession rights, selling any food and drink products, during leagues and tournaments. 
c.  Maintenance fees will be assessed for any custodial, maintenance, or grounds work that is required outside of regular working hours for leagues and tournaments (i.e. weekends and evenings) for an additional fee of $25.00 per hour per employee. There will be a minimum charge of two hours per employee, per day requested. This includes any field preparation such as dragging and chalking after the initial field preparation for each day of the tournament or league. If a mound is required or one has to be removed for a tournament and subsequently rebuilt, a $100.00 fee for mound clay would be charged for each mound. Organizations that have a sports facility agreement with the town are not exempt from paying maintenance fees. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
54-2(c) 	Flower Mound Community Activity Center: Usage fees 
 
Membership Rates—Pass Type 	Resident 
Rates 	Resident 
Business 
Rates 	Non-Resident 
Rates 
Daily admission—Youth 	$4.00 	N/A 	$6.00 
Daily admission—Adult 	6.00 	N/A 	8.00 
Monthly pass—Youth 	17.00 	20.00 	24.00 
Monthly pass—Adult 	25.00 	30.00 	35.00 
Monthly pass—Senior 	20.00 	24.00 	28.00 
Monthly pass—Family 	50.00 	60.00 	70.00 
Monthly pass—Flower Mound 
  ACMS crossing guard 	10.00 	10.00 	10.00 
Monthly pass—Flower Mound 
  ACMS crossing guard and one child 	24.17 	24.17 	24.17 
Monthly pass—Flower Mound 
  ACMS crossing guard and spouse 	30.83 	30.83 	30.83 
Monthly pass—Flower Mound 
  ACMS crossing guard and two or more family members 	30.83 	30.83 	30.83 
Annual pass—Youth 	170.00 	204.00 	238.00 
Annual pass—Adult 	250.00 	300.00 	350.00 
Annual pass—Senior 	200.00 	240.00 	280.00 
Annual pass—Family 	500.00 	600.00 	700.00 
Annual pass—Full-time town employee and family 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
Annual pass—Part-time town employee 	0.00 	0.00 	0.00 
 
Tot Drop Usage Rates 	Resident Rates 	Non-Resident 
Rates 
Daily use fee—Two-hour maximum 	$2.00 	$2.00 
20-visit punch card—Two-hour maximum per day 	30.00 	30.00 
 
Rental Rates 	Resident Rates 	Non-Resident 
Rates 
Meeting Room Rentals 		
One room—Per hour 	$50.00 	$60.00 
Two rooms—Per hour 	80.00 	90.00 
Three rooms—Per hour 	120.00 	130.00 
Indoor pool party room 1 —Per Hour 	65.00 	75.00 
After hours staff fee—Per hour 	15.00 	15.00 

Gym Rentals 		
Half court—Per hour 	40.00 	50.00 
Full court—Per hour 	80.00 	90.00 
Full gym after hours—Per hour 	170.00 	193.00 
After hours staff fee—Per hour 	15.00 	15.00 

Lock-In 		
Flat fee to include up to 200 participants, plus any additional costs for pool costs and staffing costs 	900.00 	1,000.00 
Each additional participant over 200 	5.00 	5.00 
Each additional pool hour after the first two hours 	100.00 	125.00 

Catering Kitchen 		
Flat fee 	20.00 	25.00 

Game Room 		
Per Hour 	60.00 	70.00 
After hours staff fee—Per hour 	15.00 	15.00 

Indoor Pool Party Rentals—After Hours 		
Includes lifeguards, two-hour minimum, per hour 	175.00 	200.00 

Outdoor Pool Rental—After Hours 		
  Includes lifeguards, two-hour minimum, per hour 	300.00 	350.00 
Outdoor Pool Shade Pavilion 1 	65.00 	75.00 

Swim Team Rental Rate 2 		
Per hour—Per lane, two-hour minimum 		
  Peak hours 3 	9.00 	
  Non-peak hours 4 	7.00 	

Refundable Deposits 		
Facility rental deposit 	200.00 	200.00 
Entire facility 	500.00 	500.00 
 
1 Cannot be reserved more than three days prior to the date of the event. 
2 Unless otherwise provided pursuant to a written agreement with the town, executed by the town manager or his/her designee. 
3 Monday through Friday, 4:00 p.m.—8:00 p.m.; Saturday, 11:00 a.m.—7:00 p.m.; Sunday 1:00 p.m.—6:00 p.m. 
4 Hours other than peak hours. 
Locker Rentals 	One-Half Locker 	Full Locker 
1. Monthly installment payments 	Electronic fund transfer (EFT) only 	Electronic fund transfer (EFT) only 
  Deposit 	$15.00 	$20.00 
  Monthly payment 	15.00 	20.00 
  Cancellation notice 	30-days' written notice 	30-days' written notice 
2. Advance seasonal payments 	Cash, check or credit card 	Cash, check or credit card 
  Deposit 	$15.00 	$20.00 
  Seasonal payment 
(4 months) 	60.00 	80.00 
  Renewal notice 	30 days prior to end of then current season 	30 days prior to end of then current season 
 
Code Section Number 	Description 
54-2(d) 	Seniors in Motion membership fee 
 
Membership Fees 	Resident Rates 	Non-Resident Rates 
12-month pass 	$10.00 	$20.00 
Day pass 	1.00 	2.00 
Membership fees must be paid as a condition of participation in Seniors in Motion activities. Membership fees are non-transferable and non-refundable. 
 
Code Section Number 	Description 
54-2(e) 	Pavilion rental fees (excluding CAC) 
 
Rental Rates 	Resident Rates 	Non-Resident Rates 
Flat fee to include up to four hours 	$50.00 	$75.00 
Each additional hour after the first four hours 	10.00 	15.00 
 
Code Section Number 	Description 
54-2(f) 	Flower Mound Senior Center banquet rooms rental fees 
 
Hourly Rates 	Deposit 	Room One 
(Stage Only) 	Two Rooms 	Three Rooms 	Kitchen Usage 
Public (resident) 	$200.00 	$65.00 	$95.00 	$135.00 	$20.00 
Town sponsored event 1 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$87.00 	$123.00 	$20.00 
Town events 2 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
 
1 Requires advanced TMO approval. 
2 Must be scheduled with Flower Mound Senior Center manager. The town department hosting the event shall provide supervision. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
54-2(g)(3) 	Fees: Disc golf course rental 
 
(a)  The reservation fees for tournaments are $200.00 for one-day tournaments and $360.00 for two-day tournaments. 
(b)  A $200.00 deposit is required upon reservation of the disc golf course. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
54-178.1 	Recreational use fees 
 
Twin Coves Park 	Fees 
Day use fee 	$10.00 per vehicle 
Annual pass 	Residents: $45.00 per year for one access card 
Non-resident: $75.00 per year for one access card 
Additional access card 
  
(only one additional access card per annual pass purchased) 	Resident: $20.00 
Non-resident: $40.00 
Replacement access card 	$10.00 
RV camping fees 	$35.00 per night (water and electric (50amp)) 
$45.00 per night (water, sewer and electric (50amp)) 
$55.00 per night (pull-through site with water, sewer and electric (50amp)) 
RV late checkout 	$25.00 per hour (if not checked out by 1:30 p.m.) 
Cabin fees—Peak season (March—October) 	$130.00 per night for 2-person accommodations 
$145.00 per night for 4-person accommodations 
$160.00 per night for 6-person accommodations 
Cabin fees—Off-peak (November through February) 	$115.00 per night for 2-person accommodations 
$130.00 per night for 4-person accommodations 
$145.00 per night for 6-person accommodations 
Cabin fees—Holiday 
  
Holiday is defined as: New Year's, Spring Break, Easter, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas 	$145.00 per night for 2-person accommodations 
$160.00 per night for 4-person accommodations 
$175.00 per night for 6-person accommodations 
Cabin late check-out fee 
  
Check-in at 3:00 p.m. 
Check-out at 11:30 a.m. 	$50.00 per hour 
Lost key charge 	$30.00 per key 
Primitive camping 	$20.00 per night 
Discounts 	10% discount on nightly RV, cabin and primitive camp sites for active military, seniors (65 and older) and current Flower Mound residents 
Pavilion rental fee 	$100.00 flat fee to include up to four hours 
$20.00 each additional hour after the first four hours 
Park quiet hours 	10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
Minimal rental age 	Guests renting a cabin, primitive, and/or RV site must be 21 years of age or older with photo ID 
Cabin and RV nightly minimum rental requirements 	Weekend: Two-night minimum (Friday through Sunday) 
Holidays: Three-night minimum (Friday through Sunday, including the Friday or Monday of the holiday. If a holiday falls outside of Friday or Monday, the days charged will be the holiday and the preceding days or days after. 
RV and cabin cancellation policy 	Cancellations are subject to a minimum $25.00 cancellation fee. In addition, cancellations made within 14 days of scheduled check-in are subject to a penalty equal to one days' reservation fee. 
 
(Ord. No. 87-02, § 1, 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 103-07, § 2, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 55-10, §§ 9—14, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 47-11, § 5, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 07-14, § 1, 2-17-2014; Ord. No. 10-16 , § 2, 2-15-2016; Ord. No. 67-16 , § 1, 12-19-2016; Ord. No. 11-17 , § 3, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 18-17 , § 1, 6-5-2017; Ord. No. 04-18 , § 2, 3-5-2018; Ord. No. 58-19 , § 2, 12-2-2019) 
Chapter 58. Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
58-1 et seq. 	Road impact fees 
 
The town will not issue a building permit or certificate of occupancy if the applicant for such permit cannot furnish proof that the road impact fee required by section 42-76 has been paid in full to the town. 
Chapter 70. Utilities. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-55 	Water meter rereads, testing, water meter equipment replacement, check for leak, data logging 
 
(a)  Any request, beyond the initial request, of any combination to include a re-read, check for leak or a data logger pull request within a 12-month period shall be charged a $15.00 trip charge. If it is determined that a continuous leak exists on either the customer and/or the town side of the service line at the time of the request, then the trip charge will not be assessed. For purposes of this section the term "town side" is any leak at the rear meter tail/coupling gasket or before the water meter. 
(b)  Water meter test fees. Five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch through two-inch meters shipped out to an independent contractor, shall be charged the test fees per the town's current "water meter testing and repair" contract plus shipping. All compound meters two-inch through six-inch and High Performance Turbine (HPT) meters three-inch through six-inch, tested on site by an independent contractor, shall be charged the town's current "water meter testing and repair" contract. 
(c)  Water meter replacement due to damages, willfully or accidently destroyed or for testing purposes shall be charged a fee as follows: 
(1)  A charge equal to the cost of the new water meter, see section 70-56(d) "Water meter fee schedule" of appendix A of this Code. 
(2)  Labor charge 5/8 " × ¾" through 1" ..... $ 45.00 
(3)  Labor charge 1.5" though 2" ..... 200.00 
4)  Labor charge - all compound meters ..... 625.00 
5)  Labor charge - all HPT meters 3" and larger ..... 625.00 
6)  Trip charge ..... 25.00 
7)  Administrative fee ..... 25.00 
(d)  Water meter pro-read register replacement due to damages, willfully or accidently destroyed shall be charged a fee as follows: A charge equal to the cost of a new data logger register, plus $35.00 labor charge, $25.00 trip charge, and a $25.00 administrative fee. 
(e)  Radio read and/or data logger register replacement due to damages, willfully or accidently destroyed shall be charged a fee as follows: a charge equal to the cost of a new data logger unit, plus $35.00 labor charge, $25.00 trip charge, and a $25.00 administrative fee. 
(f)  Water meter box replacement due to damages, willfully or accidently destroyed shall be charged a fee as follows: small water meter box $100.00; large water meter box $275.00, plus $35.00 labor charge, $25.00 trip charge, and a $25.00 administrative fee. 
(g)  Barrel lock replacement for damaged or destroyed barrel lock after meter has been disconnected for non-payment shall be charged a fee as follows: barrel lock $15.00, plus $25.00 trip charge, and a $25.00 administrative fee. 
(h)  All fees related to this section will be billed to the customer's active account. 
(i)  All replacement of meter equipment will be charged pursuant to the town's contracted pricing. 
( Ord. No. 59-19 , § 1, 10-7-2019) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-56(d) 	Water meter fee schedule 
 
Water Meter Size 	Water Meter Fee 	Administrative/Parts Fee 	Total 
?×¾ T-10 R900i DL 	$190.55 	$40.00 	$230.55 
1" T-10 R900i DL 	262.65 	40.00 	302.65 
1½" T-10 R900i DL 	409.94 	40.00 	449.94 
1½" HPT R900i DL 	566.50 	40.00 	606.50 
2" T-10 R900i DL 	503.67 	40.00 	543.67 
2" HPT R900i DL 	592.25 	40.00 	632.25 
2" Compound R900i DL 	1,529.55 	40.00 	1,569.55 
3" Compound R900i DL 	1,783.96 	40.00 	1,823.96 
3" HPT R900i DL 	963.05 	40.00 	1,003.05 
4" Compound R900i DL 	2,428.74 	40.00 	2,468.74 
4" HPT R900i DL 	1,215.40 	40.00 	1,255.40 
6" Compound R900i DL 	3,553.50 	40.00 	3,593.50 
 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 1-7-2001; Ord. No. 68-03, § 2, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 15-08, § 2, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 61-13, § 2, 12-2-2013; Ord. No. 40-18 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-57 	Town-issued fire hydrant meter(s). 
 
(a)  All readings must be faxed, emailed, or the equipment physically brought to the customer service department during regular business hours for a meter reading between the 20th and 25th of each month. If the contractor, builder, and/or customer fails to fax, email, or physically bring the meter in for a reading between the 20th and 25th of each month, the account shall be assessed a non-read penalty of $150.00. 
(b)  The town does not allow a garden hose to be connected to a three-inch fire hydrant meter; only large-diameter hoses will be allowed to be connected to the meter for large bulk-type watering, such as filling storage water tanks. Any contractor, builder, customer, and/or person found to be in violation of this section shall be accessed a penalty of $250.00 and billed to the water account. 
(c)  The inspection form with the fire hydrant meter parts costs is on file in the office of the utility billing division. Listed below are the labor and administrative fees for repairing damaged fire hydrant meters: 
(1)  Labor fee ..... $35.00 
(2)  Administrative fee ..... 25.00 
( Ord. No. 59-19 , § 1, 10-7-2019) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-58 	Residential and commercial installation policy 
 
Water meters shall be installed at the address indicated on the water meter(s) to prevent billing errors. If a water meter is installed at the wrong location, an administrative fee and a trip charge will be billed to the contractor and/or builder(s) water account for correcting the information in the town's billing system for each address. 
• Administrative fee ..... $25.00 
• Trip charge ..... 25.00 
( Ord. No. 59-19 , § 1, 10-7-2019) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-59 	Town-issued water meter(s) mandatory 
 
Any contractor and/or builder found to be installing water meters not purchased through the town shall be considered in violation of this section and a penalty fee of $150.00 for each occurrence will be assessed. 
( Ord. No. 59-19 , § 1, 10-7-2019) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-223 	Industrial waste charges 
 
The method of cost allocation or derivation of industrial waste charge may be computed by the generalized formula: 
Ci = v o Vi + b o Bi = S o Si 
Note: The principal applies equally well with additional terms, e.g., chlorine feed rates. 
Where Ci = charge to industrial users, $/yr. 
V o = unit cost of treatment chargeable to volume, $/100 gal. 
b o = unit cost of treatment chargeable to BOD, $/lb. 
s o = unit cost of treatment (including sludge treatment) chargeable to SS, $/lb. 
Vi = volume of wastewater from industrial users, gal/yr. 
Bi = amount of BOD from industrial users; lb/yr. 
Si = amount of SS from industrial users, lb/yr. 
The constants n, v o , b o s o Vi, Bi and Si shall be defined in a separate ordinance and are subject to change at least annually in accordance with section 70-224. 
For example, secondary treatment plant servicing a municipality is enlarged from 2 MGD to 6 MGD. 
Anticipated loading at the completion of the project. 
Volume 	3.6 MGD 
BOD 	7,300 lbs/day 
SS 	9,800 lbs/day 
 
Computation of Costs 
Project Cost 	$1,200,000.00 
Grant Funds 	  -660,000.00 
Sub-total of Capital Costs 	
Exclusive of P.L. 660 Funds 	$540,000.00 
Capital Cost of Existing Facilities (Outstanding Debt) 	+260,000.00 
Total Allocable Capital Costs 	$800,000.00 
Less Excess Capacity Portion (40%)** 	 -320,000.00 
Utilized Capacity Portion of Allocable Capital Costs 	$480,000.00 
  ×.065* 
Uniform Annual Payment 	$31,200.00 
 
*Capital Recovery Factor, 30 years at 5 percent 
**The portion attributable to excess capacity for future use should ideally be charged to property to the extent that the entire community benefits. As utilized capacity increases, the portion of recoverable costs paid for from general revenues should be gradually reduced until, at design capacity, all revenues result from the user's charges. However, if it is evident that a portion of the excess capacity is assignable to a particular industry or industries, then it is necessary to include that portion of capital costs in the total to be allocated under the cost-recovery system. 
Capital cost. 
Uniform Annual Payment 	 $31,200.00 
Estimated operation and maintenance annual cost for year project is completed 	 +74,400.00 
Total Annual Treatment Cost 	$105,600.00 
 
Assumed allocation percentages. 
	Capital Cost 
(percent) 	Operation and Maintenance 
(percent) 
Volume 	40 	25 
BOD 	45 	35 
SS 	15 	40 
 
This method of allocation implies technical knowledge of the extent to which component costs are attributable to the components of volume and loading. This technical knowledge will vary considerably by component costs and is not generally a precise determination for any component of total project costs. 
Allocated costs. 
	Capital 	Operation & Maintenance 
	Allocation 
(percent) 	Cost 	Allocation 
(percent) 	Cost 	Total 
Volume 	40 	$12,480.00 	25 	$18,600.00 	$31,080.00 
BOD 	45 	$14,040.00 	35 	$26,040.00 	$40,080.00 
SS 	15 	$4,680.00 	40 	$29,760.00 	$34,440.00 
 
Calculation of unit costs. 
	Annual 
Loading 	Treatment 
Cost 	Unit 
Cost 
Volume 	1,314 MG 	$31,080.00 	$23.65/MG 
BOD 	2,664,500 lbs. 	$40,080.00 	$0.0150/lb. 
SS 	3,577,000 lbs. 	$34,440.00 	$0.0096/lb. 
 
Application of costs to formula. 
Ci - v o Vi + b o Bi = s o Si 
Ci = Charge to industrial users in $ 
Vi = Volume of wastewater from industrial users, 1,000 gal./month 
Bi = weight of BOD from industrial users, lb/month 
Si = weight of SS from industrial users, lb/month 
Industrial waste charge formula for municipality. 
v o = $0.0237/1,000 gal. 
b o = $0.0150/lb. 
s o = $0.096/lb. 
Ci = $0.00237 Vi + $0.0096 Si 
Assume: 
Vi = 250,000 gallons 
Bi = 500 mg/l = 1042.5 lb. 
Si = 300 mg/l = 625.5 lb. 
then: 
Ci = $0.0237 (250) + $0.0150 (1042.5) + $0.0096 (625.5) 
   = $5.93 + $15.64 + $6.00 
   = $27.57 
(Code 1989, ch. 11, § 14.17) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-225 	Wastewater contribution permits: 
 
Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file with the town, an application in the form prescribed by the town, and accompanied by a review fee of $1,000.00. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-312 	Utility deposits: 
 
(a)  The deposits for residential utility customers shall be due prior to furnishing service and shall be as follows: 
Water and sewer service ..... $60.00 
Water service only ..... 60.00 
Sewer service only ..... 60.00 
(b)  The deposit for commercial and industrial customers shall be determined by adding the first two full monthly bills of the commercial and industrial customer. The director of utilities may require an additional deposit amount from a commercial or industrial customer at a later date if the utility consumption by the customer has increased substantially. This additional deposit shall be determined by the difference of the latest two months utility bills less the customers original deposit. In no case shall the deposit for a commercial or industrial customer be less than $75.00 for each connection. 
(c)  If a new user acquires property already having a water connection, such new user shall make the regular deposit as required above, plus the actual cost of meter installation, if required. 
(d)  The deposits for fire hydrant meters shall be due prior to furnishing service and shall be as follows: 
Town meter - three inches ..... $550.00 
Town meter - one inch ..... 150.00 
Customer's meter - three inches ..... 550.00 
(Ord. No. 70-97, § 1, 11-17-97) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-332 	Connection to system: 
 
(a)  Connection to the water system where a previous account has been shall be charged a connection fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this Code. 
• $15.00 
(Ord. No. 77-02, § 6, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 35-17 , § 2, 9-18-2017) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-333 	Utility service transfers: 
 
A service fee of $5.00 will be charged when a previous customer moves to a residence or commercial establishment from a previous residence or commercial establishment. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-333 	Water and wastewater impact fees: 
 
The town will not furnish a water meter or allow connection to the town water or wastewater system if the applicant for such connection cannot furnish proof that the water or wastewater impact fee required by section 42-37 has been paid in full to the town. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-334 	Reconnect charge after cutoff: 
 
(a)  If a customer fails to pay for water service after the expiration of 15 days from original billing, a delinquent tag will be delivered to the service address notifying the customer of delinquent charges. If the charges are not paid prior to 9:00 a.m. the following business day, service at the delinquent address will be discontinued. The meter shall not be reconnected or service resumed until the customer has paid the entire amount for which he or she has been billed at the time, plus a ten percent charge on any outstanding balance, and the applicable reconnect charges as follows: 
8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. weekdays ..... $25.00 
All other hours ..... $50.00 
(Ord. No. 35-17 , § 3, 9-18-2017) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-361 	Water service rates: 
 
The minimum monthly charge for each sized meter in the town, which amount includes 2,000 gallons of water is as follows: 
Water Meter Size 
(inches) 	Minimum Bills 
Water Usage Beginning 10/01/2019 
and Thereafter 
¾ or 5/8 	$35.86 
1 	59.02 
1½ 	97.58 
2 	143.89 
3 	267.34 
4 	406.21 
6 and larger 	768.92 
 
The monthly volume charge per 1,000 gallons after the first 2,000 gallons of water usage is as follows: 
Volumetric Rates 	Per 1,000 Gallons 
Water Usage Beginning 10/01/2019 
and Thereafter 
2,000—10,000 Gallons 	$4.06 
10,001—15,000 Gallons 	5.49 
15,001—50,000 Gallons 	6.25 
Over 50,000 Gallons 	7.01 
Town meters 	2.11 
Fire hydrants 	7.01 
 
(Ord. No. 77-02, § 5, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 97-02, § 2, 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 86-03, § 2, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 87-05, §§ 2, 4, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 95-07, § 5, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 55-08, § 2, 9-15-2008; Ord. No. 41-10, § 2, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 50-11, § 2, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 55-14 , § 2, 9-15-2014; Ord. No. 35-17 , § 4, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 48-19 , § 2, 9-16-2019) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-381 	Sewer service rates: 
 
The minimum monthly charge for sewer service for each sized water meter in the town, which amount includes 2,000 gallons of water usage is as follows: 
Water Meter Size 
(inches) 	Minimum Bills 
Water Usage Beginning 10/01/2019 
and Thereafter 
All sizes 	$20.82 
"Residential no-average maximum" 	46.20 
 
The monthly volume charge per 1,000 gallons after the first 2,000 gallons of water usage is as follows: 
Volumetric Rates 	Per 1,000 Gallons 
Water Usage Beginning 10/01/2019 
and Thereafter 
Over 2,000 gallons 	$4.23 
 
(Ord. No. 95-07, § 7, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 55-08, § 3, 9-15-2008; Ord. No. 41-10, § 3, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 50-11, § 3, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 55-14 , § 3, 9-15-2014; Ord. No. 35-17 , § 5, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 48-19 , § 3, 9-16-2019) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-406 	Returned check fee: 
 
A check returned to the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, shall be assessed a fee of $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 77-02, § 7, 11-4-2002) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-474 	Water conservation fixtures are available at $5.00 each. 
 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-562 	Water well permit fee: 
 
The fee for a permit to construct a new water well shall be $60.00. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
70-777 	Stormwater utility system fee: 
 
(a)  The drainage charge for single family residential, townhome, duplex, and mobile home parcels that are not entitled to a discount: 
(1)  For property that is less than one acre in size is $4.55 per month; 
(2)  For property that is between one acre and five acres in size is $3.92 per month; and 
(3)  For property greater than five acres in size is $3.30 per month. 
(b)  The drainage charge for multi-family, commercial, and industrial parcels that are not entitled to a discount: 
(1)  For property that is up to 25,000 square feet in size is $34.25 per month; 
(2)  For property that is between 25,000 square feet and 50,000 square feet in size is $46.71 per month; and 
(3)  For property that is over 50,000 square feet in size is $59.16 per month. 
(c)  The drainage charge for single family residential, townhome, duplex, and mobile home parcels that are entitled to a discount: 
(1)  For property that is less than one acre in size is $3.77 per month; 
(2)  For property that is between one acre and five acres in size is $3.26 per month; and 
(3)  For property greater than five acres in size is $2.74 per month. 
(d)  The drainage charge for multi-family, commercial, and industrial parcels that are entitled to a discount: 
(1)  For property that is up to 25,000 square feet in size is $28.43 per month; 
(2)  For property that is between 25,000 square feet and 50,000 square feet in size is $38.77 per month; and 
(3)  For property that is over 50,000 square feet in size is $49.10 per month. 
(Ord. No. 33-09, § 2, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 47-11, § 6, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 40-13, § 2, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 51-15 , § 2, 9-21-2015; Ord. No. 34-17 , § 2, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 47-19 , § 2, 9-16-2019) 
Chapter 78. Administration. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
78-125 	Outdoor lighting fees: 
 
Plan review fee ..... $100.00 
Reinspection fee* ..... 50.00 
* A reinspections fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which the inspection is requested is not in compliance with all local codes or when requested corrections are not made. In instances where reinspections fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4, 2-5-2002) 
Chapter 86. Signs. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
86-63 	Sign permit fees are as follows: 
 
(1)  Initial permit fees. Initial permit fees shall be as follows: 
Sign type or characteristic 	Fee 
Ground sign 	$100.00 
Wall or window sign 	100.00 
Changeable sign face (additional fee) 	25.00 
Off-premise[s] project or development sign 	250.00 
On-premise[s] project or development sign 	100.00 
Model home sign 	50.00 
Real estate sign greater than six square feet in area 	50.00 
Grand opening or coming soon signage 	25.00 
Special event sign* 	20.00 
Awning or canopy sign 	100.00 
Neon sign (wall transom) 	100.00 
Now hiring 	25.00 
Change of business/ownership 	25.00 
Business/office park ground sign 	100.00 
Building identification ground sign 	100.00 
Miscellaneous sign types not classified (monuments, statues, art work, towers, architectural designs and etc.) 	200.00 
Comprehensive sign package review       Aggregate amount of each sign type 
 
* There shall be no permit fee for special event of public announcement signs for bona fide charitable and other nonprofit organizations upon proof of tax exempt status under federal or state law. 
(2)  Renewal permit. The fee for renewal of a permit shall be $25.00. 
(3)  Sign repair permit. The fee for a sign repair permit shall be $10.00. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
86-104 	Registration requirement. The annual fee to register for a permit for the erection or alteration of a sign is $75.00. 
86-142 	Confiscated signs may be reclaimed by the owner provided that an administrative fee of $50.00 is paid. 
86-238 	Bandit sign annual permit. The annual permit fee for a bandit sign is $50.00. 
	The permit fee for replacement of a lost, damaged or stolen bandit sign is $50.00. 
86-241 	Grand opening sign permit. The permit fee for a grand opening sign is $25.00. 
86-246 	Temporary sign permit. The biannual permit fee for certain temporary signs is $100.00. 
 
(Code 1989, ch. 12, §§ 5.05(e)(7)n., o, 5.05(e)(10)f, 5.05(e)(16), 6.16(b)(1)—(3); Ord. No. 72-00, §§ 7, 13, 15, 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 74-01, § 11, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 85-01, §§ 8, 11, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 100-02, § 2, 12-16-2002) 
Chapter 90. Subdivisions. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
90-31 et seq. 	Development plan: $100.00 + $3.00/lot 
90-91 et seq. 	Platting fees: 
 
(a)  Replat ..... $200.00 
+ $4.00/lot 
(b)  Record plat: 
(1)  With mandatory homeowners' association. ..... $500.00 
+ $4.00/lot 
(2)  Without mandatory homeowners' association ..... $200.00 
+ $4.00/lot 
(3)  Minor record plat ..... $200.00 
+ $4.00/lot 
(c)  Amended plat ..... $200.00 
(d)  Site plan: 
(1)  Five acres or less ..... $200.00 
(2)  More than five acres ..... 400.00 
(e)  Plat and construction plan resubmitted fee ..... 200.00 
Such fee is required at such time any record plat and/or construction plans are resubmitted in accordance with the requirements of the respective section of the land development regulations. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
90-446 	Park development fee: $1,388.00 per unit. 
 
(Ord. No. 59-07, § 3, 8-6-2007) 
Chapter 94. Vegetation. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
94-92 	Tree removal permit: 
	(1) Tree removal permit for protected trees is $100.00 per tree not to exceed $2,000.00 per permit application. 
	(2) Tree removal permit fee for a specimen tree, majestic tree or historic tree is $250.00 per tree. 
 
Chapter 98. Zoning. 
Code Section Number 	Description 
98-1 et seq. 	Zoning fees: 
 
(a) 	Development plans (preliminary plats) 	
	Single-family residential 	$500.00 
+ $10.00/lot 
	Multifamily and nonresidential 	500.00 
+ 15.00/ac 
(b) 	Record plats (final plats) 	
	Capacity reserved and HOA documents reviewed 	
	Single-family residential 	500.00/plat 
+ 15.00/lot 
+ recording fees 
	Capacity reserved 	
	Multifamily and nonresidential 	500.00/plat 
+ 20.00/ac 
+recording fees 
(c) 	Replats (all) 	
		350.00/plat 
+ 20.00/lot 
+ legal notices 
+ recording fees 
(d) 	Minor record plats 	
	Capacity reserved 	
	Residential 	250.00 
+ 
10.00/lot 
+ recording fees 
	Multifamily and nonresidential 	300.00 
+ 20.00/ac 
+ recording fees 
(e) 	Amended record plats 	
	Residential 	250.00 
+ 10.00/lot 
+ recording fees 
	Multifamily and nonresidential 	300.00 
+ 20.00/ac 
+ recording fees 
(f) 	Vacating plat (all) 	300.00 
(g) 	Appeal of administrative decision (all) 	100.00 
(h) 	Variance to subdivision regulations (all) 	250.00 
+ legal notices 
(i) 	Subdivision name change 	
	after plat recorded (all) 	500.00 
(j) 	Street name change after plat recorded 	300.00 
+ sign costs 
(k) 	Legal notification * 	1) $2.50 per property owner notice 
		2) 40.00 per newspaper notice 
* All notification fees are due no later than the Friday before the notice is to be mailed and sent to the newspaper. If the notification fees are not paid, the application will not be scheduled for the public hearing. 
(l) 	Specific fee type 	
	Annexation petition (all acreages) 	Legal notices 
	Master plan amendments 	
	0 to 5 acres 	750.00 
+ 25.00/acre 
+ legal notices 
	5+ acres to 20 acres 	1,000.00 
+ 
25.00/acre 
+ legal notices 
	20+ acres to 50 acres 	1,250.00 
+ 20.00/acre 
+ legal notices 
	50+ acres 	1,500.00 
+ 15.00/acre 
+ legal notices 
(m) 	DRC 	DRC meetings included w/application 
(n) 	Zone change 	
	0 to 5 acres 	500.00 
+ 25.00/acre 
+ legal notices 
	5+ acres to 20 acres 	750.00 
+ 25.00/acre 
+ legal notices 
	20+ acres to 50 acres 
1,000.00 + 20.00/acre 
+ legal notices 	
	50+ acres 	1,250.00 + 
15.00/acre 
+ legal notices 
(o) 	Single-family PD 	
	Concept plan 	Base zoning fee 
+ 200.00 + 
legal notices 
(p) 	Multifamily and nonresidential PD 	
	Concept plan 	Base zoning fee 
+ 500.00 
+ legal notices 
(q) 	Specific use permit 	Same as zone change 
+ legal notices 
	Site plan with SUP 	Base SUP fee 
+ 200.00 
+ legal notices 
	Change in ownership/ building addition 	500.00 
+ 10.00/acre 
+ legal notices 
(r) 	Site plan—Reserves capacity 	
	Site plan reviews include plan review, architectural review, and landscape plan review 	
	All, except multifamily 	500.00 
+ 25.00/acre 
	Multifamily 	500.00 
+ 10.00/DU 
(s) 	Minor administrative amendment (all 	None 
(t) 	SMARTGrowth analysis * 	
	0 to 5 acres 	500.00 
	* Analyses performed within the previous 12 months may be counted towards current fee 	
	5+ acres to 20 acres 	500.00 
	20+ acres to 50 acres 	750.00 
	50+ acres 	1,000.00 
(u) 	SMARTGrowth analysis—Environmental survey. Additional fees may be assessed if environmental protection plan required 	0.00 
(v) 	SMARTGrowth analysis. 	
	Transportation deposit. 
(Additional fees may be assessed, depending on scope of work) 	2,500.00 
	Water deposit. 
(Additional fees may be assessed, depending on scope of work.) 	550.00 
	Wastewater deposit. 
(Additional fees may be assessed, depending on scope of work.) 	550.00 
(w) 	Variance to zoning regulations 	
	Zoning 	250.00 
+ legal notices 
(x) 	Zoning verification letter, each 	25.00 
(y) 	Zoning withdrawal—Fee refund 	
	Before public hearing notice 	50% refund 
	After public hearing notice 	No refund 
(z) 	Land development code 	Paper copy 50.00, 
CD 10.00, 
free online 
	Master plan 2001 	Paper copy 75.00, 
Chapters, each 10.00, 
CD 10.00, 
free online 
(aa) 	SMARTGrowth analysis manual 	Paper copy 50.00, 
CD 10.00, 
free online 
(bb) 	8.5 × 11? color maps 	2.00 
(cc) 	24 × 36? zoning map 	16.00 
(dd) 	Land development code, master plan, and SGA manual CDs, all three 	25.00 
 
(Ord. No. 54-00, § 2 (45.00), 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 79-02, § 1, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 11-10, § 10, 2-15-2010) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
 
98-976 		Additional plan review 	$40.00 
		Late submittal fee, per day 	100.00 
 
(Ord. No. 53-06, § 4, 9-5-2006) 
98-991 		The deposit for a refreshment stand: 	$350.00 
98-993 		The permit fee for a temporary sales trailer: 	60.00 
 
Code Section Number 	Description 
	Application fee: 
 
A nonrefundable fee for investigation and administration of the application shall be charged. Such fee shall not be prorated and shall be paid at the time the application is made and shall not be returned to the applicant, regardless of whether a permit is issued. All fees are subject to change upon resolution of the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
	Engineering design criteria and construction standards manual fee: 
 
A charge, which shall be known as "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Standards Manual" fee, shall be made for the sale of each manual sold to the public. The administrative fee shall be $25.00, to include sales tax. 
(Ord. No. 79-02, § 1, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 76-03, § 27, 11-3-2003) 
Code Section Number 	Description 
	Miscellaneous Fees: 
Description 	Fee Amount 
1. Finger Print Service 	
  a. Residents of Flower Mound 	First five cards free (each calendar year), $20.00 per card thereafter 
  b. Non-Residents of Flower Mound 	$20.00 per card 
2. Notary Services 	As prescribed by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 406.024 
 
(Ord. No. 47-11, § 7, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 44-19 , § 3, 9-3-2019)  
APPENDIX B - FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Cable television rate regulations, § 18-461 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CABLE TELEVISION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the cable television franchise with Communications Services, Inc., as adopted by Ordinance Number 64-93 on November 15, 1993. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
DIVISION 1. - COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES INC. 
An ordinance granting a nonexclusive franchise to Communications Services, Inc., d/b/a TCI Cablevision of North Texas, Inc., for the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable system in the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, and providing for all matters incident and related to the grant of said franchise; repealing conflicting ordinances; providing for severability; and providing an effective date. 
Whereas, Communications Services, Inc., d/b/a TCI Cablevision of North Texas, Inc., hereinafter referred to as "CSI" or "grantee," is now and has been engaged in the business of providing cable service in the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "town" or "franchising authority," and in furtherance thereof has erected and maintained certain facilities in the streets, alleys, highways, public thoroughfares, public utility easements and public ways of the town pursuant to the franchise granted by the town for the term of years and under the conditions specified in ordinance No. 2-74 of the town, dated January 10, 1974; and 
Whereas, under the terms of said ordinance, the franchise granted by the town shall terminate on February 10, 1994; and 
Whereas, it is to the mutual advantage of both the town and CSI that CSI continue providing cable service in the town, and in furtherance thereof, that CSI continue to construct, operate and maintain its facilities in, on, under and over the thoroughfares of the town under the conditions herein set forth; and 
Whereas, the town and CSI have agreed that this ordinance, when adopted by the town and accepted by CSI, is in full compromise, settlement and release of all claims which have been or which might have been asserted under the previous ordinance dated January 10, 1974, as amended, or the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as amended; and 
Whereas, the town has determined that the financial, legal and technical abilities of CSI are reasonably sufficient to provide services, facilities and equipment necessary to meet the future cable-related needs of the town and its citizens; 
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, that: 
SECTION 1 
 
1.1. - Definition of terms. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
a.  Affiliate means an entity which owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership with grantee. 
b.  Basic cable is the tier of service regularly provided to all subscribers that includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals and public, educational and governmental (PEG) access channels. 
c.  Communications Act means the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as these acts may hereafter be further amended. 
d.  Cable service means (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service, and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or any other lawful communication service. 
e.  Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment or other communications equipment that is designed to provide cable service. 
f.  FCC means Federal Communications Commission or successor governmental entity thereto. 
g.  Franchise shall mean the initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, ordinance, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system for the purpose of offering cable service to subscribers. 
h.  Franchising authority means the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof. 
i.  Grantee means Communications Services, Inc., d/b/a TCI Cablevision of North Texas, Inc., or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof. 
j.  Gross revenues mean the monthly cable service revenues received by grantee from operation of the cable system; provided, however, that such phrase shall not include: (i) revenues received from any national advertising carried on the cable system or (ii) any taxes on cable service which are imposed directly or indirectly on any subscriber thereof by any government unit or agency, and which are collected by the grantee on behalf of such governmental unit or agency. 
k.  Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 
l.  Public way shall mean the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the franchising authority in the service area, which shall entitle the franchising authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the cable system. "Public way" shall also mean any casement now or hereafter held by the franchising authority within the service area for the purpose of public travel or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the franchising authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting grantee's cable service or other service over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system. 
m.  Service area means that area within the present municipal boundaries or corporate limits of the franchising authority, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means. 
n.  Service tier means a category of cable service or other services, provided by grantee and for which a separate charge is made by grantee. 
o.  Subscriber means a person or user of the cable system who lawfully receives cable services or other service therefrom with grantee's express permission. 
p.  Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
SECTION 2  
2.1. - Grant of franchise. 
The town hereby grants to grantee a nonexclusive franchise which authorizes the grantee to construct, operate and maintain a cable system and offer cable service and other services in, along, upon, across, above, over, under or in any manner connected with public ways within the service area and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across or along any public way and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other related property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system.  
2.2. - Term. 
The franchise granted pursuant to this ordinance shall take effect and continue and remain in full force and effect for a period of ten years from the effective date hereof (the "initial term"). The initial term of the agreement shall be renewed and extended for two additional successive five-year periods (each, a "renewal term"); provided, the grantee complies with the terms hereof during said initial term and subsequent renewal terms, and such franchise renewals are governed by and comply with federal laws and/or FCC regulations in effect at the time of the proposed renewal.  
2.3. - Acceptance and effective date. 
Grantee shall accept the franchise granted pursuant hereto by signing this ordinance and filing same with the town secretary within 30 days after the passage and final adoption of this ordinance. Subject to the acceptance by grantee, the effective date of this ordinance shall be the 30th day after its passage and final adoption.  
2.4. - Favored nations. 
In the event the franchising authority enters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization or other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity other than grantee to enter into the franchising authority's streets and public ways for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the service area, the material provisions thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those contained herein, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another. 
SECTION 3  
3.1. - Police power of town. 
Grantee shall at all times during the initial and any successive renewal term of the franchise granted by this ordinance be subject to all lawful exercise of police power by the town.  
3.2. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines and equipment installed or erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any of said public ways. The location, route and installation of all such transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines and equipment installed or erected by grantee within the service area shall be subject to the reasonable and proper regulation control and direction of the town manager or of any other town official to whom such duties have been or may be delegated.  
3.3. - Restoration of public ways. 
If during the course of grantee's construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system there occurs a disturbance of any public way by grantee, grantee shall, at its sole expense, replace and restore such public way to a condition that is as good as or better than the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to such disturbance. Furthermore, the franchise granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject to grantee's compliance with the following: 
a.  Grantee shall comply with all lawful rules, regulations and ordinances of the town relative to street and sidewalk cuts, bores or excavations. 
b.  No street, alley or other thoroughfare shall be cut, excavated, bored or otherwise disturbed by grantee for a longer period of time than shall be necessary to execute the work, and grantee shall pursue such work once commenced with diligence and as few interruptions as practicable. 
c.  When grantee undertakes any work or temporarily places any obstruction in any public way within the service area, grantee shall protect the public by installing or placing barriers, lights and other identifying markings, in accordance with town ordinances and federal safety regulations, to identify the work area or site to the public. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58.  
3.4. - Relocation at request of franchising authority. 
Upon its receipt of reasonable advance notice, not to be less than five business days, the grantee shall, at its own expense, protect support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way, any property of the grantee when lawfully required by the franchising authority by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the franchising authority; but, the grantee may with the consent of the franchising authority have the right of abandonment of its property. If public funds are available to any company using such street, easement or right of way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be made available to the grantee.  
3.5. - Relocation at request of third party. 
The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the franchising authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building, provided: (a) the expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person, including, if required by the grantee, making such payment in advance; and (b) the grantee is given not less than ten business days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.  
3.6. - Trimming of trees and shrubbery. 
The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its cable system in the service area so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with the grantee's wires, cables or other equipment. The grantee shall reasonably compensate the franchising authority, or property owner for any damages caused by such trimming or shall, in its sole discretion and at its own cost and expense, reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any construction of the cable system undertaken by grantee. Such replacement shall satisfy any and all obligations grantee may have to the franchising authority or property owner pursuant to the terms of this section. 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 94.  
3.7. - Use of grantee's equipment by franchising authority. 
Subject to any applicable state or federal regulations or tariffs, the franchising authority shall have the right to make additional use, for any public purpose, of any poles or conduits controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the grantee in any public way; provided that: (a) such use by the franchising authority does not interfere with a current or future use by the grantee; (b) to the extent permitted by law, the franchising authority holds the grantee harmless against and from all claims, demands, costs or liabilities of every kind and nature whatsoever arising out of such use of said poles or conduits, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees and costs; and (c) at grantee's sole discretion, the franchising authority may be required either to pay a reasonable rental fee or otherwise reasonably compensate grantee for the use of such poles, conduits or equipment; provided, however, that grantee agrees that such compensation or charge shall not exceed those paid by it to public utilities pursuant to the applicable pole attachment agreement, or other authorization, relating to the service area.  
3.8. - Safety requirements. 
Construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work shall be performed in accordance with applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations. The cable system shall not unreasonably endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the service area.  
3.9. - Aerial and underground construction. 
In those areas of the service area where all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. In those areas of the service area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are both aerial and underground, grantee shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing contained in this section 3.9 shall require grantee to construct, operate and maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices (splitters, directional couplers), amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals or other related equipment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section 3.9, in the event that all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are placed underground after the effective date of this ordinance, grantee shall only be required to construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground if it is given reasonable notice and access to the public utilities' facilities at the time that such are placed underground.  
3.10. - Required extensions of service during initial term. 
During the initial term of the franchise, grantee is hereby authorized and directed to extend the cable system within the service area, as required pursuant to the terms hereof. Whenever grantee shall receive a request for service from at least 20 subscribers within 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet (one cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable, it shall, as hereinafter provided, extend its cable system to such subscribers at no cost to said subscribers for system extension, other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers, provided that such extension is technically feasible: 
a.  Grantee shall immediately initiate the planning and budgetary process for such extension upon receiving a request for service from at least 20 subscribers within 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet (one cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable; and 
b.  Grantee shall initiate construction on such extension within 12 months of (a) above; and 
c.  Grantee shall complete construction within six months of commencing such construction in (b) above; and 
d.  Grantee shall provide written notification of the availability of cable service to all subscribers that can be served by such system extension within 30 days of completing such construction in (c) above.  
3.11. - Required extensions of service during renewal terms. 
After the initial term of the franchise and during any renewal term thereof, grantee shall be authorized and directed to extend the cable system within the service area, as required pursuant to the terms hereof. Whenever grantee shall receive a request for service from at least ten subscribers within 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet (one cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable, it shall as hereinafter provided, extend its cable system to such subscribers at no cost to said subscribers for system extension, other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers, provided that such extension is technically feasible: 
a.  Grantee shall immediately initiate the planning and budgetary process for such extension upon receiving a request for service from at least ten subscribers within 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet (one cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable; and 
b.  Grantee shall initiate construction on such extension within 12 months of (a) above; and 
c.  Grantee shall complete construction within six months of commencing such construction in (b) above; and 
d.  Grantee shall provide written notification of the availability of cable service to all subscribers that can be served by such system extension within 30 days of completing such construction in (c) above.  
3.12. - Subscriber charges for extensions of service. 
No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual circumstances, such as a subscriber's request to locate his cable drop underground where not otherwise required to be underground, the existence of more than 150 feet of distance from distribution or feeder cable to subscriber's service connection, a density of less than 20 subscribers per 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable during the initial term of this franchise, or a density of less than ten subscribers per 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable during any renewal term of this franchise, cable service or other service may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution in aid of construction, including cost of material, labor and easements. For the purpose of determining the amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to be borne by grantee and subscribers in the area in which cable service may be expanded, grantee will contribute an amount equal to the construction and other costs per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of potential subscribers per 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet of its trunk or distribution cable, and whose denominator equals 20 subscribers during the initial term of this franchise, and whose denominator equals ten subscribers during any renewal term of this franchise. Potential subscribers will bear the remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. Grantee may require that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance.  
3.13. - Service to public buildings. 
The grantee shall provide without charge one outlet of basic service to the franchising authority's office building(s), fire station(s), police station(s), and public school building(s) that are passed by its cable system. The outlets of basic service shall not be used to distribute or sell cable services in or throughout such buildings; nor shall such outlets be located in common or public areas. To the extent permitted by law, the franchising authority shall hold grantee harmless from any and all liability or claims arising out of the use of such outlets, including but not limited to, those arising from copyright liability. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section 3.13, the grantee shall not be required to provide an outlet to such buildings where the drop line from the feeder cable to said buildings or premises exceeds 300 cable feet, unless it is technically feasible and so long as it will not adversely affect the operation, financial condition or market development of the cable system to do so, or unless the appropriate governmental entity agrees to pay the incremental cost of such drop line in excess of 300 cable feet. In the event that additional outlets of basic service are provided to such buildings, the building owner shall pay the usual installation fees associated therewith, including, but not limited to, labor and materials. Upon request of grantee, the building owner may also be required to pay the service fees associated with the provision of basic service and the additional outlets relating thereto.  
3.14. - Emergency override. 
Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, install an emergency management interrupt system in the head-end for the benefit of the franchising authority. This system may be remotely activated by the franchising authority by installing a touch-tone telephone line, the cost of which is to be borne solely by the franchising authority. In the case of any emergency or disaster, the franchising authority would then be able to use the remote telephone to provide emergency information and instructions during the emergency or disaster period. To the extent permitted by law, the franchising authority shall hold the grantee, its agents, employees, officers and assigns hereunder, harmless from any claims arising out of the emergency use of its facilities by the franchising authority, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees and costs.  
3.15. - Performance evaluations. 
Under the direction of the franchising authority, the franchising authority and grantee shall jointly conduct scheduled performance evaluation sessions within 30 days of the second, fourth, sixth and eighth year anniversary dates of the effective date of this ordinance. All performance evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a local newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the meeting. Grantee shall submit to the franchising authority within 20 days of the performance evaluation, a written report identifying comments made by the public and grantee's responses.  
3.16. - Maps. 
Grantee shall file annually with the franchising authority current maps showing the location of grantee's cables.  
3.17. - Public, educational and governmental access. 
Within 30 days of the effective date of this franchise, grantee shall dedicate one channel to the town for public, educational and/or governmental (PEG) access programming. This PEG channel will be available to any public or non-profit group, pursuant to applicable provisions of the Communications Act. At such time as the cable system is expanded pursuant to section 3.19 hereof, grantee will dedicate two additional channels, for a total of three channels, to the town for public, educational and/or governmental (PEG) access programming. These PEG channels will be available to any governmental, educational, public or nonprofit group, pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Communications Act.  
3.18. - Public, educational and governmental access equipment. 
a.  Within 60 days of the effective date of the franchise, grantee shall provide and install at its own expense the following PEG access in the town's new town hall facility: 
1.  One VCR, Panasonic "Pro-Line" AG-1970 or its equivalent; 
2.  One "Portable" camera, Panasonic "Pro-Line" AG455 or its equivalent; 
3.  Two JVC Model TK 1280U fixed-mount cameras with Pelco remote control system or its equivalent; 
4.  One Videonics MX-1 Digital Video Mixer or its equivalent; 
5.  One Videonics TM-1 character generator or its equivalent; 
6.  Three Videonics TM-9U color monitors or its equivalent; 
7.  One Bogan tripod or its equivalent; and 
8.  One return system to the grantee's head-end for the direct live cable-cast of town meetings and functions held at the town hall facility. 
This equipment shall become the sole responsibility of the franchising authority subsequent to its installation in the town hall facility, including maintenance and replacement. 
b.  At the franchising authority's request, the cable operator will impose a surcharge on subscriber bills, not to exceed $.50 per month, for the production and/or cable-casting of PEG access programming, pursuant to applicable provisions of the communications act. Said surcharge, if imposed, shall be remitted to the franchising authority by grantee on an annual basis and in the same manner provided for grantee's annual payment of the franchise fee, as set forth in section 4.1 hereof. Grantee, at its option, may separately identify such surcharge, if imposed, on subscriber's monthly bills.  
3.19. - Programming services and system technology. 
Grantee's cable system shall be capable of delivering to subscribers a minimum of 58 full-time video programming services (channels) no later than three years from the effective date of this franchise ordinance. Exclusive of pilot tests and/or demonstration projects, "state of the art" broadcast, programming, transmission, security and other system technology, as defined, identified and installed by grantee in its other cable systems throughout the Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex, shall be installed and employed throughout the cable system at all times during the initial or any successor term of the franchise. Digital compression and fibre optic technology will be installed and employed throughout the cable system at such time that said technology is installed and employed by grantee in the first 50 percent of its other cable systems throughout the Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex. 
SECTION 4  
4.1. - Franchise fee. 
In consideration for the rights and privileges herein granted, the value of such rights and privileges, the administration of this franchise by the town, the usage and interference with the public's usage of public ways within the service area, and the costs and obligations undertaken by the franchising authority herein, grantee shall pay to the franchising authority an annual franchise fee equal to five percent of gross revenues, as defined in section 1.1 hereof, received by grantee from the operation of the cable system on an annual basis. 
a.  For the purpose of this section, the 12-month period applicable under the franchise for the computation of the franchise fee shall be a calendar year, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the franchising authority and grantee. 
b.  The annual franchise fee payment for the preceding calendar year shall be due and payable no later than April 1. Each such payment shall be accompanied by a financial report from grantee, prepared according to generally accepted accounting principles as applied in the cable industry, showing in reasonable detail the basis for the franchise fee computation. 
c.  To the extent consistent with [section] 5.2 herein, grantee shall maintain and shall make available for audit by the franchising authority, within a reasonable response time and upon reasonable notice, all non-proprietary and non-confidential financial and operating records reflecting the amounts of and basis for computation of all annual franchise fee payments to the franchising authority. All such accounts and records shall be kept according to generally accepted accounting principles as applied in the cable industry. 
d.  The period of limitation for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be five years from the date on which payment by the grantee is due. Unless within five years from and after said payment due date the franchising authority initiates a lawsuit for recovery of such franchise fees in a court of competent jurisdiction, such recovery shall be barred, and the franchising authority shall be estopped from asserting any claims whatsoever against the grantee relating to any such alleged deficiencies. 
e.  The franchising authority, with six months written notice to grantee, hereby reserves the right to increase the franchise fee provided for herein up to a maximum amount or percentage of gross revenues currently or in the future allowed by the communications act, not to exceed a maximum amount or percentage of seven and five-tenths percent of gross revenues. Grantee, at its option, may include such franchise fee increase as a surcharge to subscribers. 
f.  The franchise fee payments required herein to be paid by grantee shall be paid and received in lieu of any tax, license, charge, fee, street or alley rental or other character of charge for use and occupancy of the public ways of the franchising authority; in lieu of any pole tax or inspection fee tax; in lieu of any easement or franchise tax, whether levied as an ad valorem, special or other character of tax; and in lieu of any imposition other than the usual general or special ad valorem taxes and sales taxes now or hereafter levied, and the reasonable costs incurred by grantee or the franchising authority to restore that portion of a public way cut, excavated or damaged by the grantee. Should the franchising authority not have the legal power to agree that the payment of the foregoing franchise fee shall be in lieu of the taxes, licenses, charges, fees, rentals, and easement or franchise taxes aforesaid, then the franchising authority agrees that it will apply so much of said payment as may be necessary to the satisfaction of the grantee's obligation, if any, to pay any such taxes, licenses, charges, fees, rentals and easement or franchise taxes imposed by the franchising authority.  
4.2. - Rates and charges. 
The franchising authority may regulate rates to the maximum extent provided by the Communications Act, as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or by any subsequent or successor federal or state law or regulation determined to have preempted or superseded the Communications Act in this regard.  
4.3. - Renewal of franchise. 
The franchising authority and the grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the franchising authority that relate to the renewal of the grantee's franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Communications Act, as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended, unless the procedures and substantive provisions set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent or successor federal or state law or regulation.  
4.4. - Conditions of sale. 
Except to the extent expressly required by federal or state law, if a renewal or extension of grantee's franchise is denied or the franchise is lawfully terminated, and the franchising authority either lawfully acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at a fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as applied in the cable industry. Grantee and franchising authority agree that in the case of a lawful revocation of the franchise, at grantee's request, which shall be made in its sole discretion, grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified third party. The franchising authority further agrees that during such a period of time, it shall authorize the grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of time greater than six months from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of that time, grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its cable system which is reasonably acceptable to the franchising authority, grantee and franchising authority may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to federal or state law; it being further agreed that grantee's continued operation of its cable system during said six-month period shall not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights of either the franchising authority or the grantee. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, neither franchising authority nor grantee shall be required to violate federal or state law.  
4.5. - Transfer of franchise. 
Grantee's right, title or interest in the franchise shall not be sold, transferred, assigned or otherwise encumbered, other than to an affiliate, without franchising authority's express written consent.  
4.6. - Service offerings. 
In accordance with Section 623(f) of the Communications Act, grantee shall not charge a subscriber for any service or equipment that the subscriber has not affirmatively requested by name. For purposes of this subsection, a subscriber's failure to refuse a cable operator's proposal to provide such service or equipment shall not be deemed to be an affirmative request for such service or equipment.  
4.7. - Regulation by franchising authority. 
Nothing in this franchise shall prohibit the franchising authority from regulating any matter relative to the operation of the cable system and the offering of cable services by the grantee, the authority of which to regulate is recognized by any local, state or federal law.  
4.8. - Consumer protection. 
Customer service requirements of the grantee, consumer protection rights of subscribers, construction schedules and other construction-related requirements of the grantee, and other health, safety and welfare measures related to the grantee's operation of the cable system and its provision of cable services shall be in conformance with the requirements of the Communications Act and FCC regulations related thereto as they now exist or may hereafter be amended, specifically including 47 C.F.R. Part 76 (Subpart H), on file in the office of the town secretary as "Exhibit A" and incorporated herein by reference. 
SECTION 5  
5.1. - Testing for compliance. 
The franchising authority may perform technical tests of the cable system during reasonable times and in a manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of the grantee or the cable system in order to determine whether or not the grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof and applicable state or federal laws. Except in emergency circumstances, such tests may be undertaken only after giving grantee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than two business days, and providing a representative of grantee an opportunity to be present during such tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that the grantee has substantially failed to comply with a material requirement hereof, the reasonable costs of such tests shall be borne by the grantee. In the event that such testing demonstrates that grantee has substantially complied with such material provisions hereof, the cost of such testing shall be borne by the franchising authority. Except in emergency circumstances, the franchising authority agrees that such testing shall be undertaken no more than two times a year in the aggregate, and that the results thereof shall be made available to the grantee upon grantee's request.  
5.2. - Books and records. 
The grantee agrees that the franchising authority may review such of its books and records, during normal business hours and on a non-disruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public records required to be kept by the grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, grantee shall not be required to disclose information deemed confidential of proprietary by law. The franchising authority agrees to the extent allowed by law to treat any information disclosed to it by the grantee as confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. 
SECTION 6  
6.1. - Insurance requirements. 
Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term of the franchise, comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. Said insurance shall designate the franchising authority as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be noncancellable except upon 30 days prior written notice to the franchising authority.  
6.2. - Indemnification. 
The grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the franchising authority, its officers, boards and employees, from and against any liability for damages to persons or property and for any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death), which arise out of the grantee's construction, operation or maintenance of its cable system, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees and costs.  
6.3. - Bonds and other surety. 
Except as expressly provided herein, grantee shall not be required to obtain or maintain bonds or other surety as a condition of being awarded the franchise or continuing its existence. The franchising authority acknowledges that the legal, financial and technical qualifications of grantee are sufficient to afford compliance with the terms of the franchise and the enforcement thereof. Grantee and franchising authority recognize that the costs associated with bonds and other surety may ultimately be borne by the subscribers in the form of increased rates for cable services. In order to minimize such costs, the franchising authority agrees to require bonds and other surety only in such amounts and during such times as there is a reasonably demonstrated need therefor. The franchising authority agrees that in no event, however, shall it require a bond or other related surety in an aggregate amount greater than $10,000.00, conditioned upon the substantial performance of the material terms, covenants, and conditions of the franchise. Initially, no bond or other surety will be required. In the event that one is required in the future, the franchising authority agrees to give grantee at least 60 days prior written notice thereof stating the exact reason for the requirement. Such reason must demonstrate a change in the grantee's legal, financial or technical qualifications which would materially prohibit or impair its ability to comply with the terms of the franchise or afford compliance therewith. 
SECTION 7  
7.1. - Notice of franchise violation. 
In the event that the franchising authority believes that the grantee has not complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify grantee in writing of the exact name of the alleged noncompliance.  
7.2. - Grantee's right to cure or respond. 
Grantee shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice described in section 7.1: (a) to respond to the franchising authority contesting the assertion of noncompliance, or (b) to cure such default, or (c) in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the 30-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the franchising authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed.  
7.3. - Public hearing. 
In the event that grantee fails to respond to the notice described in section 7.1, pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 7.2, or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within 30 days after the grantee is notified of the alleged default pursuant to section 7.1, the franchising authority shall schedule a public meeting to investigate the default. Such public meeting shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the franchising authority which is no less than five business days therefrom. The franchising authority shall notify the grantee of the date, time and place of such meeting and provide the grantee with an opportunity to be heard.  
7.4. - Enforcement. 
Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the franchising authority, after such public hearing, determines that grantee is or remains in default of any material provision of the franchise, the franchising authority may: 
a.  Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided under this franchise, if any, including without limitation, any bonds or other surety; provided, however, the foreclosure shall only be in such a manner and in such amount as the franchising authority reasonably determines is necessary to remedy the default; 
b.  Pursuant to section 6.3 hereof, require the grantee to provide bonds or other surety in such amount as the franchising authority reasonably determines is necessary and sufficient to remedy the default. 
c.  Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; 
d.  Declare the franchise agreement to be revoked; or 
e.  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages. 
The grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with any provision of the franchise by reason of any failure of the franchising authority to enforce prompt compliance.  
7.5. - Acts of God. 
The grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control. 
SECTION 8  
8.1. - Unauthorized reception unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to create or make use of any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of the cable system without the express consent of the grantee. Further, without the express consent of grantee, it shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove or injure any property, equipment or part of the cable system or any means of receiving cable service or other services provided thereto. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1.06 of chapter 1 [section 1-13] of the town's code of ordinances. Each day any such violation or violations continue shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such. 
SECTION 9  
9.1. - Actions of franchising authority. 
In any action by the franchising authority or representative thereof mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.  
9.2. - Place of performance and venue. 
All rights, duties and obligations under this franchise ordinance are enforceable, and venue therefor shall reside in a court of competent jurisdiction in Denton County, Texas, or in the federal judicial district in which Denton County, Texas, is located.  
9.3. - Notice. 
Unless expressly agreed otherwise between the parties, every notice or response to be served upon the franchising authority or grantee shall be in writing and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party five business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested at a post office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the U.S. Postal Service. 
The notices or responses to the franchising authority shall be addressed as follows: 
Town Manager 
Town of Flower Mound 
2121 Cross Timbers Road 
Flower Mound, Texas 75028 
The notices or responses to the grantee shall be addressed as follows: 
General Manager 
Communications Services, Inc. 
d/b/a TCI Cablevision of North Texas, Inc. 
5200 Highway 423 
The Colony, Texas 75056 
Also, for the convenience of the parties and without legal significance or consequences, a copy of notice to the franchising authority will be sent to: 
Town Attorney 
Town of Flower Mound 
2121 Cross Timbers Road 
Flower Mound, Texas 75028 
a copy of notice to the grantee will be sent to: 
Communications Services, Inc. 
d/b/a TCI Cablevision of North Texas, Inc. 
Attention: Legal Department 
4643 South Ulster 
Denver, Colorado 80237 
Franchising authority and grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving written notice to the other.  
9.4. - Descriptive headings. 
The captions to sections contained herein are intended solely to facilitate the reading thereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of the text herein.  
9.5. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances, orders or resolutions heretofore passed and adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, are hereby repealed to the extent that said ordinances, orders or resolutions, or parts thereof, are in conflict herewith.  
9.6. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall to any extent be held by a court of competent jurisdiction or by any state or federal authority having jurisdiction thereof to be invalid, void or unconstitutional, the remaining sections, subsections, clauses, phrases and provisions of this ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall remain in full force and effect and shall in no way be affected, impaired or invalidated.  
9.7. - Effective date. 
Pursuant to section 2.3 hereof, the effective date of this franchise ordinance shall be the 30th day after its passage and final adoption on second reading, subject to the acceptance of the grantee.  
9.8. - Publication. 
Prior to the effective date of this franchise ordinance and agreement, the full text of same shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the town, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the grantee. 
Passed and approved on first reading this 15th day of November, 1993. 
Passed, approved and adopted on second and final reading this 6th day of December, 1993. 
;sigr;  \Larry W. Lipscomb, Mayor 
Town of Flower Mound, Texas 
ATTEST: 
;sigl;  \Ruth DeShaw, Town Secretary 
Town of Flower Mound[, Texas] 
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY: 
;sigl;  \Terrence Welch, Town Attorney 
Town of Flower Mound, Texas 
GRANTEE ACCEPTANCE 
Whereas, the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, did on the 6th day of December, 1993, enact on second and final reading an ordinance entitled: 
TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS 
ORDINANCE NO. 64-93 
An ordinance granting a nonexclusive franchise to Communications Services, Inc., d/b/a TCI Cablevision of North Texas, Inc., for the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable system in the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, and providing for all matters incident and related to the grant of said franchise; repealing conflicting ordinances; providing for severability; and providing an effective date. 
And whereas, said ordinance was on the 6th day of December, 1993, duly approved and executed by the Mayor of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, and the seal of said town was thereto affixed and attested by the town secretary: 
Now, therefore, in compliance with the terms of said ordinance as enacted, approved and attested, Communications Services, Inc., d/b/a TCI Cablevision of North Texas, Inc., hereby accepts said ordinance subject to applicable federal, state and local laws and files this its written acceptance with the Town Secretary of Flower Mound, Texas, in her office. 
Dated this 27th day of December, 1993. 
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES, INC. 
D/B/A TCI CABLEVISION OF NORTH TEXAS, INC. 
By: /s/ Scott E. Hilgel 
Its: Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer 
Acceptance filed in the office of the Town Secretary of Flower Mound, Texas, this 3rd day of January, 1994. 
;sigr;  \Ruth DeShaw 
Town Secretary 
TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS 
ORDINANCE NO. 08-00 
An ordinance of the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, establishing maximum rates that Communication Services, Inc. (formerly TCI Cablevision of North Texas, Inc.), may charge its Flower Mound cable television subscribers for programming costs and equipment and installation costs; and ordering refunds for any rates overcharged since June 1, 1999. 
Whereas, the Town of Flower Mound, Texas (the "town") is the grantor of a franchise ordinance adopted on or about December 6, 1993, by and between the Town of Flower Mound and Communications Services, Inc. ("CSI"); and 
Whereas, the town, pursuant to the Cable Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (the "cable act") and the rules and regulations adopted by the Federal Communications Commission (the "FCC"), is certified to regulate the rates for the basic cable service tier and related equipment; and 
Whereas, as local regulator of rates for the basic service tier, the town may, within one year of receipt of proposed rates, make a rate ruling on the proposed rates submitted by CSI to be charged to subscribers of the basic service tier; and 
Whereas, the town has reviewed the proposed rates submitted by CSI and desires to make a rate ruling; 
Now therefore, be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, that:  
Section 1. - Findings. 
The Town of Flower Mound, Texas finds as follows: 
1.1.  The town is the grantor of a franchise ordinance adopted on or about December 6, 1993, by and between the Town of Flower Mound and TCI Cablevision of North Texas, Inc., who assigned its interest to Communications Services, Inc. d/b/a AT&T Cable Services. 
1.2.  In accordance with applicable provisions of the Cable Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (hereinafter the "cable act") and rules adopted by the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC"), the town has undertaken all appropriate procedural steps to regulate the basic cable service tier and related equipment. 
1.3.  On or about March 1, 1999, the town received from CSI the FCC Form 1205, Form 1235, and Form 1240. 
1.4.  The town engaged the services of C2 Consulting Services, Inc., to provide assistance to the town for review of CSI's FCC Form 1205, Form 1235, and Form 1240. 
1.5.  On or about May 20, 1999, C2 Consulting Services, Inc., submitted a final report regarding a review of CSI's FCC Form 1205. 
1.6.  On or about May 23, 1999, C2 Consulting Services, Inc., submitted a final report regarding a review of CSI's FCC Form 1240. 
1.7.  On or about June 30, 1999, C2 Consulting Services, Inc., submitted an evaluation letter regarding a review of CSI's FCC Form 1235. 
1.8.  The town must act upon the pending rate request consistent with current FCC rate rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 08-00, § 1, 2-7-2000)  
Section 2. - Conclusions. 
The Town of Flower Mound, Texas concludes as follows: 
2.1.  Programming rates (Form 1240). The town concludes that the maximum permitted rate for the current basic service tier is $10.04. 
2.2.  Upgrade costs (Form 1235). The town concludes that the maximum permitted system upgrade rate increase (Form 1235 rate) is $1.02. 
2.3.  Installation and equipment rates (Form 1205). The town concludes that the permitted rate for hourly service charges and other installation and equipment rates shall be outlined in exhibit "D," attached hereto and incorporated herein for all purposes. 
2.4.  The town has an obligation to act in a timely manner upon the pending rate application consistent with the current FCC rules and regulations. However, if the FCC alters the benchmark calculations resulting in a lower reasonable rate for Flower Mound subscribers, the town has an obligation to area subscribers to reconsider the current analysis consistent with such changes the FCC may make in its regulations. 
2.5.  The town hereby adopts and makes a part of this ordinance the consultant's summary of findings in exhibits "A," "B" and "C" attached hereto. 
(Ord. No. 08-00, § 2, 2-7-2000)  
Section 3. - Orders. 
Based on the foregoing findings and conclusions, the town hereby enters the following orders: 
3.1.  Pursuant to current FCC regulations, from the date of this order and until further order of the town, CSI shall be permitted to charge an initial rate for the basic service tier, exclusive of any franchise fee, but inclusive of the FCC regulatory fee, of not more than $10.04. 
3.2.  Pursuant to current FCC regulations from the date of this order and until further order of the town, CSI shall be permitted to charge a rate for the upgrades of basic service tier of not more than $1.02. 
3.3.  Pursuant to current FCC regulations from the date of the order and until further order of the town, CSI shall be permitted to charge (exclusive of any franchise fee) an hourly service charge of not more than the amount set forth in exhibit "D," and CSI shall be permitted to charge for installation services and leased customer equipment the amounts set forth in exhibit "D" attached to this ordinance and incorporated as if fully set forth herein. 
3.4.  CSI shall refund the differences, if any, plus applicable interest, between charges actually made by CSI and the approved rates during the period of June 1, 1999, to May 31, 2000. 
3.5.  CSI shall submit a refund plan, as applicable, within 30 days of the effective date of this rate ordinance and such refunds shall be completed within 90 days of the effective date of this rate ordinance. 
3.6.  The town requests that CSI institute quality controls for consistency in the reporting data by the 40 sample systems, should CSI continue to employ this aggregated methodology. 
3.7.  Should the FCC rule that the computations of Form 1235 should reflect changes in subscriber numbers, upon request of the town, CSI will consider the impact of the ruling, along with adjustment for AFUDC and any other final numbers that also would be allowable in the context of the final filing. 
(Ord. No. 08-00, § 3, 2-7-2000)  
Section 4. - Liability. 
In adopting this ordinance, the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas is not approving or acquiescing in any way whatsoever to the cost data and/or methodologies not specifically addressed in this ordinance. Furthermore, the town council is not waiving any rights to which it is entitled. 
(Ord. No. 08-00, § 3, 2-7-2000)  
Section 5. - Validity. 
If any section, article, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word in this ordinance is held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance; and the town council hereby declares it would have passed such remaining portions of this ordinance despite such invalidity, which remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 08-00, § 3, 2-7-2000)  
Section 8[6]. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon passage and publication as required by law. 
Duly passed and approved by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, by a vote of 4 to 0, on this the 7th day of February, 2000. 
(Ord. No. 08-00, § 3, 2-7-2000) 
	APPROVED: 
	/s/  _____
Lori L. DeLuca, 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 	
/s/  _____
Paula J. Lawrence, CMC, Town Secretary 	
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY: 
/s/  _____
Terrence S. Welch, 
Town Attorney 	
  
DIVISION 2. - COSERV CABLE[3] 
An ordinance of the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, granting a nonexclusive franchise to CoServ, L.L.C., for the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable television system in the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, and providing for all matters incident and related to the grant of said franchise; repealing conflicting ordinances; providing a severability clause; and providing an effective date. 
Whereas, CoServ, L.L.C., hereinafter referred to as "CoServ" or "grantee," wishes to engage in the business of providing cable television service in the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "town" or "franchising authority," and in furtherance thereof wishes to erect and maintain certain facilities in the streets, alleys, highways, public thoroughfares, public utility easements and public ways of the town pursuant to a franchise granted by the town; and 
Whereas, it is to the mutual advantage of both the town and CoServ that CoServ provide cable television service in the town, and in furtherance thereof, that CoServ construct, operate and maintain its facilities in, on, under and over the thoroughfares of the town under the conditions herein set forth; and 
Whereas, the town has determined that the financial, legal and technical abilities of CoServ are reasonably sufficient to provide services, facilities and equipment necessary to meet the future cable-related needs of the town and its citizens; 
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, that: 
SECTION 1 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the cable television franchise with CoServ, L.L.C., as adopted by Ordinance Number 48-99 on August 16, 1999. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
1.1. - Definition of terms. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number: 
a.  Affiliate means each person who falls into one or more of the following categories: (i) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the grantee; (ii) each person in which the grantee has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (iii) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the grantee; provided that "affiliate" shall in no event mean any creditor of the grantee solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliate by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with, the grantee. 
b.  Basic cable is the tier of service regularly provided to all subscribers that includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals and public, educational and governmental (PEG) access channels. 
c.  Communications act means the Communication Act of 1934, as amended, including the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as these acts may hereafter be further amended. 
d.  Cable service means (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service, and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or any other lawful communication service. 
e.  Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (i) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; (iii) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers. 
f.  Channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum that is used in a cable system and is capable of delivering one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or other non-video signals, or some combination of such signals. 
g.  Control or controlling interest means actual working control in whatever manner exercised. 
h.  Converter means an electronic device which converts cable channel frequencies which are not normally receivable by some television sets to an appropriate channel which permits a subscriber to view signals included in the service being delivered, according to a designated tuning or channel selector dial. 
i.  Days means calendar days unless otherwise specified. 
j.  Direct cost means all expenses associated with a specific activity or function, excluding overhead. 
k.  FCC means Federal Communications Commission or successor governmental entity thereto. 
l.  Franchise shall mean the initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, ordinance, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system for the purpose of offering cable service to subscribers. 
m.  Franchising authority means the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof. 
n.  Grantee means CoServ, L.L.C., or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof. 
o.  Gross revenue means any and all consideration of any kind or nature, including without limitation, cash, credits, property and inkind contributions (services or goods) directly or indirectly received by grantee, which is derived from the provision of cable service to subscribers. Gross revenue includes, but is not limited to, basic cable service monthly fees, pay cable fees, installation and reconnection fees, equipment charges, franchise fees, leased channel fees and converter rentals. Gross revenue does not include any revenue not actually received, even if billed (e.g., bad debt). Gross revenue also includes an allocated portion of all revenue derived by grantee from advertising on system-originated programs. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the franchise area divided by the total number of subscribers on the system. 
p.  Information service means, to the extent not a cable service, the offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications, and includes electronic publishing, but does not include any use of any such capability for the management, control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a telecommunications service. 
q.  Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 
r.  Public way shall mean the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the franchising authority in the service area, which shall entitle the franchising authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the cable system. Public way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the franchising authority within the service area for the purpose of public travel or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the franchising authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting grantee's cable service or other service over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system. 
s.  Residential dwelling unit means each home, house, building, or other structure that normally accommodates the living quarters of one family in any multiple-unit building or complex or multiple-unit buildings; provided, however, that if the grantee has not been granted the authority by an owner or association of owners to extend its facilities to individual apartments, condominiums, and co-operative units within the interior of such multiple-unit buildings or complex of multiple-unit buildings, then any such multiple-unit building or complex of multiple-unit buildings shall be considered a single residential dwelling unit. 
t.  Service area means that area within the present municipal boundaries or corporate limits of the franchising authority, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means. 
u.  Service tier means a category of cable service or other services, provided by grantee and for which a separate charge is made by grantee. 
v.  Service interruption or outage is defined as being a cable system malfunction resulting in the loss of picture or sound on one or more channels affecting more than one subscriber. The definition of service interruption or outage affects the timing of when the grantee must respond to a service problem. 
w.  Standard drop means the cable up to a maximum length of 125 feet that connects the antenna terminal on a subscriber's radio or television set, computer terminal, or other terminal, to the nearest feeder cable of the cable system. 
x.  Subscriber means a person or user of the cable system who lawfully receives cable services or other service therefrom with grantee's express permission. 
y.  Transmission network means the set of transmission paths, property, facilities and associated transmission, reception, control and switching equipment within the public rights-of-way and used to provide services authorized by this franchise. 
z.  Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
SECTION 2  
2.1. - Grant of franchise. 
The town hereby grants to grantee a nonexclusive franchise which authorizes the grantee to construct, operate and maintain a cable system and offer cable service and other services in, along, upon, across, above, over, under or in any manner connected with public ways within the service area and to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across or along any public way and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other related property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system.  
2.2. - Term. 
The franchise granted pursuant to this ordinance shall take effect and continue and remain in full force and effect until January 5, 2004 (the "initial term"). The initial term of the agreement shall be renewed and extended for two additional successive five-year periods (each, a "renewal term"); provided, the grantee complies with the terms hereof during said initial term and subsequent renewal terms, and such franchise renewals are governed by and comply with federal laws and/or FCC regulation in effect at the time of the proposed renewal.  
2.3. - Acceptance and effective date. 
Grantee shall accept the franchise granted pursuant hereto by signing this ordinance and filing same with the town secretary within 30 days after the passage and final adoption of this ordinance. Subject to the acceptance by grantee, the effective date of this ordinance shall be the 30th day after its passage and final adoption.  
2.4. - Favored nations. 
In the event the franchising authority enters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization or other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity other than grantee to enter into the franchising authority's streets and public ways for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the service area, the material provisions thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those contained herein, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another. 
SECTION 3  
3.1. - Police power of town. 
Grantee shall at all times during the initial and any successive renewal term of the franchise granted by this ordinance be subject to all lawful exercise of police power by the town and all federal, state and local laws and further, grantee shall be subject to the town's lawful exercise of the right of eminent domain.  
3.2. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines and equipment installed or erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any of said public ways. The location, route and installation of all such transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines and equipment installed or erected by grantee within the service area shall be subject to the reasonable and proper regulation, control and direction of the town manager, or of any other town official to whom such duties have been or may be delegated.  
3.3. - Restoration of public ways. 
If during the course of grantee's construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system grantee disturbs any public way, grantee shall, at its sole expense, replace and restore such public way to a condition that is as good as or better than the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to such disturbance. Furthermore, the franchise granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject to grantee's compliance with the following: 
a.  Grantee shall comply with all lawful rules, regulations and ordinances of the town relative to street and sidewalk cuts, bores or excavations. 
b.  No street, alley or other thoroughfare shall be cut, excavated, bored or otherwise disturbed by grantee for a longer period of time than shall be necessary to execute the work, and grantee shall pursue such work once commenced with diligence and as few interruptions as practicable. 
c.  When grantee undertakes any work or temporarily places any obstruction in any public way within the service area, grantee shall protect the public by installing or placing barriers, lights and other identifying markings, in accordance with the town ordinances and federal safety regulations, to identify the work area or site to the public.  
3.4. - Relocation at request of franchising authority. 
Upon its receipt of reasonable advance notice, to be not less than five business days, grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way, any property of the grantee when lawfully required by the franchising authority by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the franchising authority. In the alternative, grantee may, with the consent of the franchising authority, abandon its property. If public funds are available to any company using such street, easement, or right-of-way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be made available to the grantee.  
3.5. - Relocation at request of third party. 
The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the franchising authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building, provided (a) the expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person, including, if required by the grantee, making such payment in advance; and (b) the grantee is given not less than ten business days' advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.  
3.6. - Trimming of trees and shrubbery. 
The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its cable system in the service area so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with the grantee's wires, cables or other equipment. The grantee shall reasonably compensate the franchising authority or property owner for any damages caused by such trimming or shall, in its sole discretion and at its own cost and expense, reasonably replace all trees or shrubs or other vegetation or landscaping elements damaged as a result of any construction of the cable system undertaken by grantee. Such replacement shall satisfy any and all obligations grantee may have to the franchising authority or property owner pursuant to the terms of this section.  
3.7. - Use of grantee's equipment by franchising authority. 
Subject to any applicable state or federal laws, regulations or tariffs, the franchising authority shall have the right to make additional use, for any public purpose, of any poles or conduits controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the grantee in any public way; provided that (a) such use by the franchising authority does not interfere with a current or future use by the grantee, and (b) at grantee's sole discretion, the franchising authority may be required either to pay a reasonable rental fee or otherwise reasonably compensate grantee for the use of such poles, conduits or equipment. Further provided; however, that grantee agrees that such compensation, or charge shall not exceed those paid by it to public utilities pursuant to the applicable pole attachment agreement, or other authorization, relating to the service area.  
3.8. - Safety requirements. 
Construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work shall be performed in accordance with applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations. The cable system shall not unreasonably endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the service area.  
3.9. - Aerial and underground construction. 
In those areas of the service area where all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are underground, grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. In those areas of the service area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are both aerial and underground, grantee shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing contained in this section shall require grantee to construct, operate and maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices (splitters, directional couplers), amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals or other related equipment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, in the event that all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are placed underground after the effective date of this ordinance, grantee shall only be required to construct, operate and maintain, all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground if it is given reasonable notice and access to the public utilities' facilities at the time that such are placed underground.  
3.10. - Required extensions of service during initial term. 
During the initial term of the franchise, grantee is hereby authorized and directed to extend the cable system within the service area, as required pursuant to the terms hereof. Grantee shall extend the cable system to all areas of new residential and commercial development. Whenever grantee receives a request for service from at least 20 subscribers within 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet (one cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable, it shall, as hereinafter provided, extend its cable system to such subscribers at no cost to said subscribers, other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers, provided that such extension is technically feasible: 
a.  Grantee shall immediately initiate the planning and budgetary process for such extension upon receiving a request for service from at least 20 subscribers within 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet (one cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable; and 
b.  Grantee shall initiate construction on such extension within 12 months of (a), above; and 
c.  Grantee shall complete construction within six months of commencing such construction in (b), above; and 
d.  Grantee shall provide written notification of the availability of cable service to all subscribers that can be served by such system extension within 30 days of completing such construction in (b), above.  
3.11. - Required extensions of service during renewal terms. 
After the initial term of the franchise and during any renewal term thereof, grantee shall be authorized and directed to extend the cable system within the service area, as required pursuant to the terms hereof. Grantee shall extend the cable system to all areas of new residential and commercial development. Whenever grantee shall receive a request for service from at least ten subscribers within 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet (one cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable, it shall, as hereinafter provided, extend its cable system to such subscribers at no cost to said subscribers for system extension, other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers, provided that such extension is technically feasible: 
a.  Grantee shall immediately initiate the planning and budgetary process for such extension upon receiving a request for service from at least ten subscribers within 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet (one cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable; and 
b.  Grantee shall initiate construction on such extension within 12 months of (a), above; and 
c.  Grantee shall complete construction within six months of commencing such construction in (b), above; and 
d.  Grantee shall provide written notification of the availability of cable service to all subscribers that can be served by such system extension within 30 days of completing such construction in (c), above.  
3.12. - Subscriber charges for extensions of service. 
No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual circumstances, such as (i) a subscriber's request to locate his cable drop underground where not otherwise required to be underground, (ii) the existence of more than 150 feet of distance from distribution or feeder cable to subscriber's service connection, (iii) a density of less than 20 subscribers per 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable during the initial term of this franchise, or (iv) a density of less than ten subscribers per 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable during any renewal term of this franchise, cable service or other service may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution in aid of construction, including cost of material, labor and easements. For the purpose of determining the amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to be borne by grantee and subscribers in the area in which cable service may be expanded, grantee will contribute an amount equal to the construction and other costs per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of potential subscribers per 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet of its trunk or distribution cable, and whose denominator equals 20 subscribers during the initial term of the franchise. Potential subscribers will bear the remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. Grantee may require that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance.  
3.13. - Service to community facilities. 
Subject to the provisions in this section, the outlets of basic service shall not be used to distribute or sell cable services in or throughout such community facilities nor shall such outlets be located in common or public areas. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section, the grantee shall not be required to provide an outlet to such buildings where the drop line from the feeder cable to said buildings or premises exceeds 300 cable feet, unless the appropriate governmental entity agrees to pay the incremental cost, or unless it is technically feasible and will not adversely affect the operation, financial condition or market development of the cable system to do so. In the event that additional outlets of basic service are provided to such buildings, the building owner shall pay the usual installation fees associated therewith, including, but not limited to, labor and materials. Upon request of grantee, the building owner may also be required to pay the service fees associated with the provision of basic service and the additional outlets relating thereto. 
a.  Public primary and secondary schools. Grantee shall provide without charge during the life of this franchise one free cable television service outlet at the most popular service level to each primary and secondary public school whose buildings are passed by its cable system. Grantee shall, at the school's request, provide an appropriate interface to any internal video distribution system in the school, so long as the school insures that such internal system complies with the FCC's signal leakage and signal quality standards and does not interfere with or adversely affect the system. There will be no charge for cable service on any additional outlets in the school except for a pass through of any charge imposed on grantee by a program supplier, and grantee may impose a charge for equipment for additional outlets. Grantee shall provide each connected school with a free connection to a Time Warner or similar on-line service for personal computers to the extent it is available on grantee's cable system and transmission network. Upon request each connected school will receive one free modem and free access to the Time Warner or similar on-line service for use during the school year. Additional modems shall be made available, upon request, at cost. Free access to the Time Warner or similar on-line service shall be provided through each such modem for use during the school year. In addition, grantee shall sponsor a workshop to educate teachers about the Time Warner or similar on-line service and to provide them with an opportunity for hands-on training. 
b.  Town facilities. Grantee shall provide one free cable television service outlet at the most popular service level during the life of this franchise to each municipal facility owned or operated by the town, served by public rights-of-way, and located within 1,000 feet of grantee's trunk or distribution cable. Each free outlet shall include, if necessary, a free converter and maintenance thereof by grantee. All additional cable television hardware and the installation thereof requested by town shall be provided by grantee, and the cost to the town shall not exceed grantee's direct cost. Grantee shall provide an appropriate interface to any internal video distribution system in the town's building, so long as the town insures that such internal system complies with the FCC's signal leakage and signal quality standards and does not interfere with or adversely affect the system. There will be no charge for cable service on any additional outlets in the town's facilities except for a pass through of any charge imposed on grantee by a program supplier, and grantee may impose a charge for equipment for additional outlets.  
3.14. - Emergency override. 
Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, install an emergency management interrupt system in the head-end for the benefit of the franchising authority. This system may be remotely activated by the franchising authority by installing a touch-tone telephone line, the cost of which is to be borne solely by the franchising authority. In the case of any emergency or disaster, the franchising authority would then be able to use the remote telephone to provide emergency information and instructions during the emergency or disaster period. To the extent permitted by law, the franchising authority shall hold the grantee, its agents, employees, officers and assign hereunder, harmless from any claims arising out of the emergency use of its facilities by the franchising authority, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees and costs.  
3.15. - Performance evaluations. 
Under the direction of the franchising authority, the franchising authority and grantee shall jointly conduct scheduled performance evaluation sessions within 30 days of the first and third year anniversary dates of the effective date of this ordinance. All performance evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a local newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the meeting. Such publication costs shall be borne by grantee. Grantee shall submit to the franchising authority a written report identifying comments made by the public and grantee's responses within 20 days of the performance evaluation.  
3.16. - Maps. 
Grantee shall file annually on the anniversary date of this franchise with the franchising authority current maps showing the location of grantee's cables.  
3.17. - Public, educational and governmental access. 
Within 30 days of the effective date of this franchise, grantee shall make available to the town two channels as public, educational and government access (PEG) channels. Educational access shall mean a channel time reserved for use by education institutions located wholly or partially within the Town of Flower Mound, for the noncommercial programming associated with their educational functions. 
Grantee shall initially provide two noncommercial access channels for the public, educational institutions and government use. Thereafter, on the one year anniversary date of this franchise, grantee shall provide one additional access channel.  
3.18. - Public, educational and governmental access equipment. 
a.  Within 60 days of the effective date of the franchise, grantee shall provide and install at its own cost the following PEG access equipment in the town hall facility: 
1.  Three Canon 3 chip CCD cameras or equivalent; 
2.  Two JVC VCR recorder/players or equivalent; 
3.  One Bogen tripod or equivalent; 
4.  One Videonics TM-9U color monitor or equivalent; and 
5.  One return system to the grantee's head-end for the direct live cablecast of town meetings and functions held at the town hall facility. 
In addition to the above, the vendor installing said equipment shall furnish design documentation of such installation. The maintenance of the equipment shall become the responsibility of the franchising authority. 
b.  At the franchising authority's request, the cable operator will impose a surcharge on subscriber bills, not to exceed $0.50 per month, for the production and/or cable-casting of PEG access programming, pursuant to applicable provisions of the Communications Act. Said surcharge, if imposed, shall be remitted to the franchising authority by grantee on an annual basis and in the same manner provided for grantee's annual payment of the franchise fee, as set forth in section 5.1 [4.1] hereof. Grantee, at its option, may separately identify such surcharge, if imposed, on subscriber's monthly bills.  
3.19. - Programming services and system technology. 
Grantee's cable system shall be capable of delivering to subscribers a minimum of 58 full-time video programming services (channels) no later than three years from the effective date of this franchise ordinance. Exclusive of pilot tests and/or demonstrations projects, "state of the art" broadcast, programming, transmission, security and other system technology, as defined, identified and installed by grantee in its other cable systems throughout the Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex, shall be installed and employed throughout the cable system at all times during the initial or any successor term of the franchise. Digital compression and fiber optic technology will be installed and employed throughout the cable system at such time that said technology is installed and employed by grantee in the first 50 percent of its other cable systems throughout the Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex.  
3.20. - Closed caption. 
Grantee shall retransmit all closed-captioned signals made available by programmers in conjunction with programming in its line-up and which are provided in order to facilitate viewing by handicapped persons. Grantee shall maintain the necessary head-end equipment to make such features available to subscribers. Grantee's obligations under this section do not include providing customer premises equipment. 
SECTION 4  
4.1. - Franchise fee. 
In consideration for the rights and privileges herein granted, the value of such rights and privileges, the administration of this franchise by the town, the usage and interference with the public's usage of public ways within the service area, and the costs and obligations undertaken by the franchising authority herein, grantee shall pay to the franchising authority an annual franchise fee equal to five percent of gross revenues, as defined in section 1.1 hereof, received by grantee from the operation of the cable system on an annual basis. 
a.  Grantee shall pay to the town for each quarter this franchise remains in effect an amount equal to five percent of gross revenue, referred to as the "quarterly payment." Grantee shall make this payment by the 45th day following the close of the calendar quarter for which the quarterly payment is calculated. Any necessary prorations shall be made. 
b.  Grantee shall file annually with the franchising authority no later than 120 days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year, a statement of gross revenue for that year within the franchise area pursuant to this franchise. This statement shall set forth the gross revenue for the year in a reasonable form prescribed by the town after consultation with grantee. 
c.  To the extent consistent with section 5.2 herein, grantee shall maintain and shall make available for audit by the franchising authority, within a reasonable response time and upon reasonable notice, all non-proprietary and non-confidential financial and operating records reflecting the amounts of and basis for computation of all annual franchise fee payments to the franchising authority. All such accounts and records shall be kept according to generally accepted accounting principles as applied in the cable industry. 
d.  The period of limitation from recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be five years from the date on which payment by the grantee is due. Unless within five years from and after said payment due date the franchising authority initiates a lawsuit for recovery of such franchise fees in a court of competent jurisdiction, such recovery shall be barred, and the franchising authority shall be stopped from asserting any claims whatsoever against the grantee relating to any such alleged deficiencies. 
e.  The franchising authority, with six months written notice to grantee, hereby reserves the right to increase the franchise fee provided for herein up to a maximum amount or percentage of gross revenues currently or in the future allowed by the Communication Act, not to exceed a maximum amount or percentage of seven and five-tenths percent of gross revenues. Grantee, at its option, may include such franchise fee increase as a surcharge to subscribers. 
f.  The franchise fee payments required herein to be paid by grantee shall be paid and received in lieu of any tax, license, charge, fee, street or alley rental or other character of charge for use and occupancy of the public ways of the franchising authority; in lieu of any pole tax or inspection fee tax; in lieu of any easement or local franchise tax, whether levied as an ad valorem, special or other character of tax; and in lieu of any imposition other than the usual general or special ad valorem taxes and sales taxes now or hereafter levied, and the reasonable costs incurred by grantee or the franchising authority to restore that portion of a public way cut, excavated or damaged by the grantee. Should the franchising authority not have the legal power to agree that the payment of the foregoing franchise fee shall be in lieu of the taxes, licenses, charges, fees, rentals, and easement or franchise taxes aforesaid, then the franchising authority agrees that it will apply so much of said payment as may be necessary to the satisfaction of the grantee's obligation, if any, to pay any such taxes, licenses, charges, fees, rentals and easement or franchise taxes imposed by the franchising authority.  
4.2. - Rates and charges. 
The franchising authority may regulate rates to the maximum extent provided by the Communications Act, as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or by any subsequent or successor federal or state law or regulation determined to have preempted or superseded the Communications Act in this regard.  
4.3. - Renewal of franchise. 
The franchising authority and the grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the franchising authority that relate to the renewal of the grantee's franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Communications Act, as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended, unless the procedures and substantive provisions set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent or successor federal or state law or regulation.  
4.4. - Conditions of sale. 
Except to the extent expressly required by federal or state law, if a renewal or extension of grantee's franchise is denied or the franchise is lawfully terminated, and the franchising authority either lawfully acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at a fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as applied in the cable industry. 
Grantee and franchising authority agree that in the case of a lawful revocation of the franchise, at grantee's request, which shall be made in its sole discretion, grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified third party. The franchising authority further agrees that during such a period of time, it shall authorize the grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of time greater than six months from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of that time, grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its cable system which is reasonably acceptable to the franchising authority, grantee and franchising authority may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to federal or state law; it being further agreed that grantee's continued operation of its cable system during said six-month period shall not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights of either the franchising authority or the grantee. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, neither franchising authority nor grantee shall be required to violate federal, state or local law.  
4.5. - Transfer of franchise. 
Grantee's right, title or interest in the franchise shall not be sold, transferred, assigned or otherwise encumbered, other than to an affiliate, without franchising authority's express written consent.  
4.6. - Service offerings. 
In accordance with Section 623(f) of the Communications Act, grantee shall not charge a subscriber for any service or equipment that the subscriber has not affirmatively requested by name. For purposes of this subsection, a subscriber's failure to refuse a cable operator's proposal to provide such service or equipment shall not be deemed to be an affirmative request for such service or equipment.  
4.7. - Regulation by franchising authority. 
Nothing in this franchise shall prohibit the franchising authority from regulating any matter relative to the operation of the cable system and the offering of cable services by the grantee, the authority of which to regulate is recognized by any local, state or federal law.  
4.8. - Consumer protection. 
Customer service requirements of the grantee, consumer protection rights of subscribers, construction schedules and other construction-related requirements of the grantee, and other health, safety and welfare measures related to the grantee's operation of the cable system and its provision of cable services shall be in conformance with the requirements of the Communications Act and FCC regulations related thereto as they now exist or may hereafter be amended, specifically including 47 C.F.R. Part 76, on file in the office of the town secretary as "exhibit A" and incorporated herein by reference. 
SECTION 5  
5.1. - Testing for compliance. 
The franchising authority may perform technical tests of the cable system during reasonable times and in a manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of the grantee or the cable system in order to determine whether or not the grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof and applicable state or federal laws. Except in emergency circumstances, such tests may be undertaken only after giving grantee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than one business day, and providing a representative of grantee an opportunity to be present during such tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that the grantee has failed to comply with a material requirement hereof, the reasonable costs of such tests shall be borne by the grantee. Except in emergency circumstances, the franchising authority agrees that such testing shall be undertaken no more than five times per calendar year in the aggregate, and the results thereof shall be made available to the grantee upon grantee's request.  
5.2. - Books and records. 
The grantee agrees that the franchising authority may review such of its books and records, during normal business hours and on a non-disruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public records required to be kept by the grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, grantee shall not be required to disclose information deemed confidential or proprietary by law. The franchising authority agrees to the extent allowed by law to treat any information disclosed to it by the grantee as confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. 
SECTION 6  
6.1. - Insurance requirements. 
Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term of the franchise, comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. Said insurance shall designate the franchising authority as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be noncancellable except upon 30 days prior written notice to the franchising authority.  
6.2. - Indemnification. 
The grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the franchising authority, its officers, boards and employees, from and against any liability for damage or bodily injury (including accidental death), which arise out of the grantee's construction, operation or maintenance of its cable system, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees and costs. Such indemnification shall be construed as broadly as possible under applicable Texas law.  
6.3. - Bonds and other surety. 
Except as expressly provided herein, grantee shall not be required to obtain or maintain bonds or other surety as a condition of being awarded the franchise or continuing its existence. The franchising authority acknowledges that the legal, financial and technical qualifications of grantee are sufficient to afford compliance with the terms of the franchise and the enforcement thereof. Grantee and franchising authority recognize that the costs associated with the bonds and other surety may ultimately be borne by the subscribers in the form of increased rates for cable services. In order to minimize such costs, the franchising authority agrees to require bonds and other surety only in such amounts and during such times as there is a reasonably demonstrated need therefor. The franchising authority agrees that in no event, however, shall it require a bond or other related surety in an aggregate amount greater than $10,000.00, conditioned upon the substantial performance of the material terms, covenants, and conditions of the franchise. Initially, no bonds or other surety will be required. In the event that one is required in the future, the franchising authority agrees to give grantee at least 60 days prior written notice thereof stating the exact reason for the requirements. Such reason must demonstrate a change in the grantee's legal, financial or technical qualifications which would materially prohibit or impair its ability to comply with the terms of the franchise or afford compliance therewith. 
SECTION 7  
7.1. - Notice of franchise violation. 
In the event that the franchising authority believes that the grantee has not complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify grantee in writing of the alleged noncompliance.  
7.2. - Grantee's right to cure or respond. 
Grantee shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice described in section 7.1: (a) to respond to the franchising authority contesting the assertion of noncompliance, or (b) to cure such default, or (c) in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the 30-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the franchising authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed.  
7.3. - Public hearing. 
In the event that grantee fails to respond to the notice described in section 7.1, pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 7.2, or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within 30 days after the grantee is notified of the alleged default pursuant to section 7.1, the franchising authority shall schedule a public meeting to investigate the default. Such public meeting shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the franchising authority which is no less than three business days therefrom. The franchising authority shall notify the grantee of the date, time and place of such meeting and provide the grantee with an opportunity to be heard.  
7.4. - Enforcement. 
Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the franchising authority, after such public hearing, determines that grantee is or remains in default of any material provision of the franchise, the franchising authority may: 
a.  Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided under this franchise, if any, including without limitation, any bonds or other surety; provided, however, the foreclosure shall only be in such a manner and in such amount as the franchising authority reasonably determines is necessary to remedy the default; 
b.  Pursuant to section 6.3 hereof, require the grantee to provide bonds or other surety, in such amount as the franchising authority reasonably determines is necessary and sufficient to remedy the default. 
c.  Commence an action at law for damages or seek other equitable relief; 
d.  Declare the franchise agreement to be revoked; or 
e.  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages. 
The grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with any provision of the franchise by reason of any failure of the franchising authority to enforce prompt compliance.  
7.5. - Acts of God. 
The grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control. 
SECTION 8  
8.1. - Unauthorized reception unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to create or make use of any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of the cable system without the express consent of the grantee. Further, without the express consent of grantee, it shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove or injure any property, equipment or part of the cable system or any means of receiving cable service or other services provided thereto. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1.06 of chapter 1 [section 1-13] of the town's Code of Ordinances. Each day any such violation or violations continue shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such. 
SECTION 9  
9.1. - Actions of franchising authority. 
In any action by the franchising authority or representative thereof mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.  
9.2. - Place of performance and venue. 
All rights, duties and obligations under this franchise ordinance are enforceable, and venue therefor shall reside in a court of competent jurisdiction in Denton County, Texas, or in the federal judicial district in which Denton County, Texas, is located.  
9.3. - Notice. 
Unless expressly agreed otherwise between the parties, every notice or response to be served upon the franchising authority or grantee shall be in writing and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party five business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, at a post office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the U.S. Postal Service. 
The notices or responses to the franchising authority shall be addressed as follows: 
Town Manager 
Town of Flower Mound 
2121 Cross Timbers Road 
Flower Mound, TX 75028 
The notices or responses to the grantee shall be addressed as follows: 
General Manager 
_____
_____
_____
Also, for the convenience of the parties and without legal significance or consequences, a copy of notice to the franchising authority shall be sent to: 
Town Attorney 
Town of Flower Mound 
2121 Cross Timbers Road 
Flower Mound, TX 75028 
and a copy of notice to the grantee will be sent to: 
_____
_____
_____
Franchising authority and grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving written notice to the other.  
9.4. - Descriptive headings. 
The captions to sections contained herein are intended solely to facilitate the reading thereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of the text herein.  
9.5. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances, orders or resolutions heretofore passed and adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, are hereby repealed to the extent that said ordinances, orders or resolutions, or parts thereof, are in conflict herewith.  
9.6. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall to any extent be held by a court of competent jurisdiction or by any state or federal authority having jurisdiction thereof to be invalid, void or unconstitutional, the remaining sections, subsections, clauses, phrases and provisions of this ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall remain in full force and effect and shall in no way be affected, impaired or invalidated.  
9.7. - Effective date. 
Pursuant to section 2.3 hereof, the effective date of this franchise ordinance shall be the 30th day after its passage and final adoption on second reading, subject to the acceptance of the grantee.  
9.8. - Publication. 
Prior to the effective date of this franchise ordinance and agreement, the full text of same shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the town, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the grantee. 
Duly passed and approved by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, by a vote of 5 to 0 on first reading on this the 2nd day of August, 1999. 
Duly passed and approved by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, by a vote of 5 to 0, and adopted on second and final reading on this the 16th day of August, 1999. 
	APPROVED: 
	/s/  _____
Lori L. DeLuca, 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 	
/s/  _____
Paula Lawrence, CMC, Town Secretary 	
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY: 	
/s/  _____
Terrence S. Welch, 
Town Attorney 		
 
GRANTEE ACCEPTANCE 
Whereas, the Town of Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, did on the 16th day of August, 1999, enact on second and final reading an ordinance entitled: 
TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS 
ORDINANCE NO. 48-99 
An ordinance of the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, granting a nonexclusive franchise to CoServ, L.L.C., for the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable television system in the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, and providing for all matters incident and related to the grant of said franchise; repealing conflicting ordinances; providing a severability clause; and providing an effective date. 
And whereas, said ordinance was on the 16th day of August, 1999, duly approved and executed by the Mayor of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, and the Seal of said Town was thereto affixed and attested by the Town Secretary: 
Now, therefore, in compliance with the terms of said ordinance as enacted, approved and attested, CoServ, L.L.C., hereby accepts said ordinance subject to applicable federal, state and local laws and files this its written acceptance with the Town Secretary of Flower Mound, Texas, in her office. 
Dated this 29th day of October, 1999. 
COSERV, L.L.C. 
By: /s/ _____
Jim Chism 
Its: Senior Vice President 
_____ 
Acceptance filed in the office of the Town Secretary of Flower Mound, Texas, this _____ day of ________ 1999. 
	_____
Town Secretary 
  
DIVISION 3. - COMCAST CABLE OF CALIFORNIA/COLORADO/ ILLINOIS/INDIANA/TEXAS[4] 
Whereas, by Ordinance No. 64-93 passed and approved on December 6, 1994, the Town of Flower Mound, Texas ("Town"), granted to Communication Services, Inc., now Comcast of California/Colorado/Illinois/Indiana/Texas, Inc., d/b/a Comcast Cable of California/Colorado/Illinois/Indiana/Texas, Inc. ("grantee"), the right, privilege, and franchise to erect, maintain, and operate, for a term of ten years, a cable system in said town; and 
Whereas, grantee has provided cable services within the town under such franchise; and 
Whereas, grantee has requested a renewal of the franchise in accordance with section 626 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, to allow continued operation of a cable system in the town; and 
Whereas, the town council finds from all the evidence that grantee meets the legal, character, financial, and technical qualifications, as well as other qualifications necessary to assure that the residents of the town receive the best available cable service if provided in accordance with this franchise; and 
Whereas, following proper notice, the town council of the town held a public hearing on grantee's request for renewal, at which time representatives of grantee and interested citizens were heard in a full public proceeding affording opportunity for comment by any and all persons desiring to be heard; and 
Whereas, from information presented at such public hearing, from facts and circumstances developed or discovered through independent study and investigation, the town council now deems it appropriate and in the best interest of the town and its inhabitants that the cable service franchise be renewed with grantee. 
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas: 
SECTION 1 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the cable television franchise with Comcast Cable of California/Colorado/Illinois/Indian/Texas as adopted by Ordinance No. 68-04 on Aug. 2, 2004. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are included in brackets. 
 
1.0. - Enactment. 
1.01  Recitals. The facts and recitations set forth in the preamble of this ordinance are hereby adopted, ratified, and confirmed. 
1.02  Short title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "the Town of Flower Mound Cable Service Franchise Ordinance." Within this document, it is referred to as the "franchise." 
SECTION 2  
2.0. - Definitions. 
2.01  Terms. The following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meanings hereafter set forth. Terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with the Communications Act of 1934 (the Communications Act), as amended, and if not therein defined, then in accordance with the ordinances of the town or their customary usage and meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular shall include the plural, words in the plural shall include the singular, and words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses or derivative forms. The headings contained in this franchise are to facilitate reference only, do not form a part of this franchise, and shall not in any way affect the construction or interpretation hereof. The words "shall," "will," and "must" are mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive or directory. 
A.  Affiliate. A person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the grantee, provided that "affiliate" shall in no event mean any limited partner holding an interest of less than five percent of the grantee, or any creditor of the grantee solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliate by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with, the grantee. 
B.  Basic cable service. The lowest priced cable service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals as well as the PEG channels required by this franchise. 
C.  Communications Act. Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and as may be amended from time to time during the term of this franchise (47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as amended). 
D.  Cable operator. Any person or group of persons (i) who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in the cable system, or (ii) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
E.  Cable service. (A) The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and (B) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
F.  Cable system. A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes, but is not limited to, video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include facilities that qualify under the exceptions put forth in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7). Unless otherwise specified, "cable system" is used in this franchise to refer to the particular cable system authorized under the franchise and operated by the grantee within the franchise area. 
G.  Channels. A portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, which is capable of delivering a video signal, an audio signal, a voice signal or a data signal. A channel can be either "downstream," in which case the signal is transmitted by grantee from grantee's facilities to subscriber premises, or "upstream," in which case the signal is transmitted in the reverse direction from subscriber premises to grantee's facilities. For purposes of rate regulation, the town retains all lawful authority, and grantee retains any lawful rights, to interpret the definition of "channels" in a manner consistent with this franchise and regulations promulgated by the FCC. 
H.  Control. The actual working control of a grantee in whatever manner exercised. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, for the purposes hereof, a change in control shall be deemed to have occurred at any point in time when there is: 
(i)  A change in working or effective voting control, in whatever manner effectuated, of the grantee; 
(ii)  An agreement of the holders of voting stock or rights of the grantee which effectively vests or assigns policy decision-making in any person other than the grantee; or 
(iii)  A sale, assignment or transfer of more than 35 percent of the shares or interest in the grantee. 
I.  Days. Calendar days unless otherwise specified. 
J.  Drop. An aerial or underground portion of the cable system, which extends from the tap to the demarcation point of the subscriber's residence or business. 
K.  Educational access channel. The noncommercial channel(s) on the cable system which are reserved for educational users and used in accordance with the rules and procedures established by the town or its designee. 
L.  Expanded basic cable service. One or more clusters of cable programming services which may or may not be offered for an additional monthly charge over and above the charge for basic cable service. 
M.  Federal Communications Commission or FCC. The agency as presently constituted by the United Stated Congress or any successor agency with jurisdiction over cable service matters. 
N.  Franchise area. The incorporated area of the town and such additional contiguous areas as may be included in the corporate limits of the town during the term of this franchise. 
O.  Government access channel. The noncommercial channel(s) on the cable system reserved for government users and used in accordance with the rules and procedures established by the town or its designee. 
P.  Grantee. Comcast of California/Colorado/Illinois/Indiana/ Texas, Inc., d/b/a Comcast Cable of California/Colorado/Illinois/ Indiana/Texas, Inc. 
Q.  Gross revenue. Any and all revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, received by grantee, its affiliates who are cable operators (as defined by section 602(5) of the Communications Act) of the cable system, or other persons providing cable service over the cable system that are classified as cable operators pursuant to section 602(5) of the Communications Act, which is derived from or attributable to the operation of the grantee's cable system to provide cable services, regardless of whether the grantee or other third-party provider actually bills for the cable service. By way of illustration and not limitation, gross revenue includes all fees charged subscribers for any and all cable services provided by grantee over the cable system such as basic cable service revenues, expanded basic cable service revenues, pay cable service revenues, revenues resulting from connection or reconnection to the cable system in order to receive cable services, revenues resulting from the lease, rental, use, repair, or servicing of cable system equipment used to receive cable service, revenues from late, delinquent, or other administrative fees applied to cable services, and franchise fees assessed on cable services which are collected from subscribers. Gross revenues shall also include advertising revenues received by the grantee which are attributable to cable services delivered over the cable system in the town, revenues resulting from the lease, use or rental of channels or channel capacity to provide cable services, revenues received by the grantee from commissions on sales from shopping cable services, and revenues received from programmers providing cable service programming over the cable system. Gross revenues shall not include those payments described in subsection 14.10 of this franchise. 
(i)  The town recognizes that, in the future, grantee may allocate revenue between cable services (which are subject to the franchise fee) and non-cable services (which are not subject to the franchise fee but may be subject to other fees and/or taxes), when these two types of service are bundled together in a discounted package offered to subscribers. Due to the uncertainties that currently exist, both in the business and regulatory environment on this issue, the town and the grantee hereby reserve all rights, claims, defenses and remedies regarding the town's authority to impose and/or enforce requirements related to the revenue allocation methodology to be used when cable services and noncable services are offered to subscribers in a discounted package, for the purpose of calculating franchise fee payments. 
(ii)  In the event that the town believes that grantee has unlawfully or unfairly allocated revenue between cable services and noncable services for the purpose of calculating franchise fee payments, the town and the grantee shall meet upon advance notice from the town to discuss the allocation methodology. If the town and the grantee cannot agree on the matter within a reasonable period of time, the town and grantee may submit the matter to a mutually agreeable third party for mediation. The cost of the mediation shall be shared equally between the town and the grantee. At any time, either the town or the grantee can bring the matter to a court of competent jurisdiction, or pursue any other remedies available to them in this franchise or by law. Unless otherwise approved by the town, the venue for any judicial dispute between the town and grantee arising out of this provision shall be the Civil District Court, Denton County, Texas, or the United States District Court, Northern District of Texas. If the court determines that the allocation of revenue to cable services violates this franchise, then the town would be entitled to the benefits of such a decision. 
(iii)  The parties intend for the definition of gross revenue to be as inclusive as possibly consistent with existing applicable law. If there is a change in federal law subsequent to the effective date of this franchise, such change shall not impact this gross revenues definition in such a way to reduce gross revenues unless the change specifically preempts the affected portion of the definition above. 
R.  Institutional network. A portion of the cable system constructed and maintained by grantee and which is only available for private, noncommercial use by governmental and/or educational entities pursuant to agreement between the grantee and the town. 
S.  Pay cable services. The delivery over the cable system of cable service programming to subscribers for a fee or charge over and above the charge for basic cable service or expanded basic cable service on a per-program, per-channel, per-connection or per-time period of connection basis. 
T.  PEG channels. All public access channels, educational access channels and government access channels, collectively. 
U.  PEG programming. Programming produced for and exhibited over the PEG channels. 
V.  Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
W.  Public access channel. The noncommercial channel(s) on the cable system reserved for public users and used in accordance with the rules and procedures established by the town, or its designee. 
X.  Public rights-of-way. The surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, easement or similar property in which the town holds any property interest or exercises any rights of management or control and which, consistent with the purposes for which it was acquired or dedicated, may be used for the installation and maintenance of a cable system. No reference in this franchise to a public right-of-way shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the town that its interests or other rights in such property are sufficient to permit its use for the installation and maintenance of a cable system, and the grantee shall be deemed to gain only those rights which the town has the undisputed right and power to give. 
Y.  Subscriber. Any person lawfully receiving cable service delivered by means of the grantee's cable system. 
SECTION 3  
3.0. - Grant of authority. 
3.01  Use of public rights-of-way. There is hereby granted to grantee the right, privilege, and franchise to have, acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain, use, and operate in the town a cable system, and to have, acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain, use, and operate in, over, under, and along the present and future public rights-of-way of the town all necessary or desirable poles, towers, anchors, wires, cables, electronic conductors, underground conduits, manholes, and other structures and appurtenances necessary for the construction, maintenance, and operation of a cable system in the franchise area. Grantee or affiliates shall not install or construct facilities within the town's public rights-of-way which are not authorized by this franchise or lawfully allowed by applicable state or federal law. 
3.02  Use, rental, or lease of utility poles and facilities. There is hereby granted to grantee the authority to contract with the town or with the holder or owner of any utility franchise in the town for the use, rental, or lease of its or their poles, underground conduits, and other structures and facilities for the purpose of extending, carrying, or laying grantee's wires, cables, electronic conductors, and other facilities and appurtenances necessary or desirable in conjunction with the operation of its cable system. The town agrees that any public utility owning or controlling such poles or underground conduits may, without amendment to its franchise, allow, and is encouraged to allow, grantee to make such use thereof pursuant to any agreement reached between such utility and grantee. Nothing in this franchise shall authorize grantee to attach any part of its cable system to any town-owned conduits or facilities until grantee has entered into a separate agreement with the town, supported by independent consideration, for such rights of attachment or use. 
3.03  Additional services. By granting this franchise, the town does not waive, and specifically retains, any right to regulate and receive compensation as allowed by law for services offered over the cable system which are not cable services. Upon request, grantee shall inform the town of any non-cable service offered over the cable system of which grantee is aware. Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to limit any lawful authority of the town to impose a tax, fee, or other assessment of any kind on any person (other than the grantee, its affiliates, or other persons which are cable operators of the cable system pursuant to section 602(5) of the Communications Act), with respect to cable service or other communications service provided by such person over the cable system for which charges are assessed to subscribers but not received by the grantee, its affiliates or other persons who are cable operators of the cable system pursuant to section 602(5). Upon request, grantee shall inform the town of any uses of which grantee is aware of the cable system by persons who are not cable operators. 
3.04  Right of condemnation reserved. Nothing in this franchise shall limit or expand any right the town may have to acquire by eminent domain any property of the grantee. 
3.05  Responsibility for costs. Except as expressly provided otherwise, any act that grantee is required to perform under this franchise shall be performed at its cost. If grantee fails to perform work that it is required to perform within the time provided for performance, the town may perform the work and bill the grantee for documented costs. The grantee shall pay the amounts billed within 30 days. The parties agree that any amounts paid pursuant to this subsection are not franchise fees and fall within one or more of the exceptions to the definition of franchise fee under federal law. Nothing in this subsection is intended to affect in any way (by expansion or contraction) grantee's rights under applicable law governing rates. 
SECTION 4  
4.0. - Term, evaluation, and renewal. 
4.01  Term of franchise. This franchise shall be in full force and effect for a term and period of ten years commencing after passage and approval by the town, assuming that the grantee files the written acceptance as required herein. 
4.02  Annual meeting with town. Upon request by the town, grantee shall meet no less than annually with the town council and make a verbal report of the character, quality, and efficiency of service it has rendered since the prior meeting. Grantee shall be available at this meeting to address any questions or concerns presented by its customers, the town council, and residents of the town. The town shall notify the grantee of the date, time, and location of the meeting. 
4.03.  Performance evaluations. In order to assure that the grantee is complying with the terms of this franchise and with the character, quality, and efficiency of service to be rendered, given, performed, and furnished under this franchise, and in order to promote a sharing of information between the town council and the grantee, a performance evaluation may be held every three years of the franchise, subject to paragraph F below, in accordance with the following process: 
A.  At least 90 days prior to each performance evaluation, the town shall notify the grantee of the date, time and location of the evaluation. Such notice shall include specification of any additional information to be provided by the grantee pursuant to paragraph B (vii) below. Unless specifically waived by the town council, attendance of grantee's duly authorized representative at these meetings shall be mandatory. 
B.  Within 60 days from receipt of such notification, the grantee shall file a report with the town that is certified by a representative of the grantee knowledgeable of the operations of grantee within the town, in reasonable detail, specifically addressing, at a minimum, the following areas: 
(i)  Compliance with the requirements specified in subsection 10.04 of the franchise; 
(ii)  Compliance with the requirements regarding technical performance and testing, as provided in subsection 12.02 of this franchise; 
(iii)  Compliance with the PEG channel requirements, as provided in subsections 14.01 and 14.02; 
(iv)  Compliance with institutional network ("I-Net") requirements, as provided in exhibit B; 
(v)  Compliance with the customer service standards, as provided in exhibit A of this franchise; 
(vi)  A summary of the development of new cable services and the use of new technologies, subject to subsection 19.04; 
(vii)  A comparison of rates to any benchmarks or standards set by federal, state, or local agencies having jurisdiction; and 
(viii)  Any other topic deemed material or relevant by the town for its enforcement of this franchise. 
C.  All reports to be prepared under this subsection and submitted by grantee shall be based on information since the previous performance evaluation up to and inclusive of the most current quarter available and not data that ends more than six months before the time of the performance evaluation. 
D.  Following receipt of the report, but not less then 30 days prior to the performance evaluation, the town may request additional information, clarification or detailed documentation concerning those topics identified for inclusion in the performance evaluation. Grantee shall make reasonable effort to provide such additional information to the town prior to the meeting. In the event that the information cannot be made available prior to the performance evaluation, grantee shall notify the town in writing explaining the reasons for such delay. 
E.  The town council may hear any interested persons during such performance evaluation. The grantee shall be entitled to all the rights of due process consistent with the town proceedings, including but not limited to, the right to present evidence and the right to be represented by counsel. 
F.  The foregoing notwithstanding, the town council may initiate and conduct such additional performance evaluations regarding grantee's performance under this franchise as the town council, in its sole discretion, may deem justified or necessary under the circumstances. Grantee shall be given reasonable notice of the date, time, and location of any such additional performance evaluations. 
G.  Upon request of the town, grantee shall assist the town in notifying subscribers of the triennial evaluation sessions. Nominal costs associated with the notification, in an amount not to exceed $1,500.00, shall be borne by the grantee. 
4.04  Renewal. Grantee and town agree that franchise renewal proceedings shall be governed by the Communications Act, or other law applicable at the time of renewal. 
SECTION 5  
5.0. - Recoupment of costs by town. 
5.01  Publication costs. Any and all costs of publication of this franchise which may be required by law or action of town council shall be borne by grantee. Any payments made by the town under this provision are to be reimbursed to the town within 30 days of grantee's receipt of the invoice. 
SECTION 6  
6.0. - Compliance with town, state, and federal laws. 
6.01  Compliance with applicable laws. Grantee shall at all times comply with all generally applicable laws, rules, and regulations of the town, state and federal governments and any administrative agencies thereof. 
6.02  Subject to police power of the town. The construction, maintenance, and operation of grantee's cable system and all property of grantee subject to the provisions of this franchise shall be subject to all lawful police powers, rules, and regulations of the town. The town shall have the power at any time to order and require grantee to remove or abate any pole, line, tower, wire, cable, guy, conduit, electric conductor, or any other structure or facility that is dangerous to life or property. In the event grantee, after written notice, fails or refuses to act within 15 days of such written notice, town shall have the power to remove or abate the same at the expense of grantee, all without compensation or liability for damages to grantee except in instances where the damage was caused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the town or its agents. 
6.03  Notification in the event of pre-emptive law. Grantee shall use its best efforts to notify the town in the event of any change in law that materially affects grantee's rights or obligations under this franchise. 
SECTION 7  
7.0. - Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy. 
7.01  Use. All structures, wires, cables, equipment, and facilities erected or maintained by grantee within the town shall be located as to cause minimum interference with the proper and intended use of the public rights-of-way and with the rights or reasonable convenience of the owners or occupants of property which adjoins any of such public rights-of-way. The location of all poles, towers, anchors, wires, cables, electronic conductors, conduits, manholes and other structures and appurtenances in, over, under, along, and across the present and future public rights-of-way in the town shall be fixed under the supervision of the town or an authorized agent appointed by the town. Grantee agrees to comply with all other town laws, rules, or ordinances that govern the use of public rights-of-way that currently exist or may be applicable during the term of this franchise, provided that such are promulgated under the town's lawful police powers. In the event that there is conflict between requirements of this franchise and other generally applicable and lawful town ordinances governing grantee's ability to use the public rights-of-way, the stricter provisions shall apply. 
7.02  Excavation. Grantee may excavate only for the construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, and maintenance of all or a portion of its facilities used to provide cable service under this franchise. Except in the case of emergency maintenance, grantee shall provide the town written notice within 15 days of any proposed disturbance to any public rights-of-way prior to the commencement thereof. Grantee shall provide the town with notice within 24 hours following any emergency maintenance that disturbed the public rights-of-way. Owners or occupants of adjoining property shall be given reasonable notice. When the grantee shall make or cause to be made excavations or shall place obstructions in any public rights-of-way, the public shall be protected by barriers and lights placed, erected, and maintained by the grantee in accordance with any existing or future town, state, or federal requirements. No public rights-of-way shall be encumbered by construction, maintenance, removal, restoration, or repair work by grantee for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute such work. 
7.03  Restoration. The surface of any public rights-of-way disturbed by grantee in laying, constructing, maintaining, operating, using, extending, removing, replacing, or repairing its cable system shall be restored by grantee as soon as reasonably possible, but in no instance greater than 30 days after the completion of the work under normal operating conditions, at its cost and expense, to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work. The 30 day period shall be extended for days that the grantee is unable to perform the work due to unfavorable weather conditions. In the event restoration is scheduled to take longer than 30 days for any other reason, grantee shall provide the town with written notice as to the reason(s) for the delay. Such restoration shall be maintained by grantee to the satisfaction of the town for one year from the date of completion of such restoration work. If there is an unreasonable delay by grantee in restoring and maintaining public rights-of-way after such excavations or repairs have been made, town shall have the right, following written notice to grantee to which grantee has 48 hours in which to respond, to restore or repair the same and to require grantee to pay to the town the reasonable cost of such restoration or repair all without compensation or liability for damages to the grantee unless such damage was caused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the town or its agents. In the event town determines that grantee's use of any of town's public rights-of-way as set forth in this franchise poses an immediate danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public, town shall have the right to restore or repair same and shall require grantee to pay to the town the reasonable costs incurred regarding same, all without compensation or liability for damages to the grantee unless the damage was caused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the town or its agents. 
7.04  Relocation. Whenever by reason of the construction, repair, maintenance, relocation, widening, raising, or lowering of the grade of any public rights-of-way by the town or by the location or manner of construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of any public property, structure, or facility by the town, it shall be deemed necessary by the town for grantee to move, relocate, change, alter, or modify any of its facilities or structures, such change, relocation, alteration, or modification shall be promptly made by grantee, when directed in writing to do so by the town. Grantee shall pay the cost of such relocation unless there are funds allocated to affected users of the public right-of-way, including grantee, for the reimbursement of such costs. If the funds are controlled by another governmental entity, the town shall make application for such funds on behalf of the grantee, upon request of grantee, if grantee cannot make such application itself. In the event grantee, after such notice, fails or refuses to commence, pursue, or complete such relocation work within a reasonable time, the town shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to remove or abate such structures or facilities and to require grantee to pay to the town the reasonable cost of such removal or abatement, all without compensation or liability for damages to grantee unless such damage was caused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the town or its agents. 
7.05  Temporary removal of wire for building moving. Upon written request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the town, grantee shall remove, raise, or lower its wires and cables temporarily to permit the moving of houses, buildings, or other bulky structures. The reasonable expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering shall be paid by the benefited person, and grantee may require such payment in advance, grantee being without obligation to remove, raise, or lower its wires and cables until such payment shall have been made. Grantee shall be given not less than 72 hours' advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire and cable adjustments. 
7.06  Tree trimming. From time to time, the town council may pass ordinances regulating the trimming or removal of trees on or along town property, and grantee shall comply with these ordinances. 
7.07  Placement of fixtures. Grantee shall not place poles, towers, or similar fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telecommunications, water hydrant, water main, drainage, sanitary sewer or other facilities located within the town's public rights-of-way as authorized by the town, and all such poles, towers, and similar facilities shall be placed as directed by the town and in such manner as not to interfere with the usual travel or use or visibility of the public rights-of-way. 
7.08  Removal of fixtures. Grantee shall remove its structures, wires, cables, equipment, and facilities of any and all kinds from the public rights-of-way within 30 days following the non-use or cessation of use of such structures, wires, cables, equipment, and facilities. 
7.09  Approval of plans and specifications. With the exception of installation of individual drops and/or emergency repairs, grantee shall provide complete plans and specifications for all construction within public rights-of-way to the town for its review in accordance with applicable town ordinances and permit application procedures. Approval of plans and specifications shall not be unreasonably delayed or denied. In the event of rejection, grantee shall submit revised plans and specifications for approval. This provision shall apply to each construction sequence if the construction is accomplished in phases. 
7.10  Underground installation. In those portions of the town having telephone lines and electric utility lines underground, whether required by ordinance or not, any and all of grantee's lines, cables, and wires shall also be underground. Grantee's lines, cables, wires, and similar facilities located above ground prior to the effective date of this franchise shall be relocated underground by grantee at the same time that other above-ground utility lines (e.g., electric and telecommunications lines) located within the immediate vicinity of grantee's facilities are placed underground. Grantee shall pay the cost of such relocation unless there are funds allocated to affected users of the public right-of-way, including grantee, for the reimbursement of such costs. If the funds are controlled by another governmental entity, the town shall make application for such funds on behalf of the grantee upon request of grantee if grantee cannot make such application itself. It shall be the policy of the town that existing poles for electric and communications purposes be utilized by grantee whenever possible and that underground installation, even when not required, is preferable to the placing of additional poles. 
7.11  Facilities location. From time to time, the town or its representatives, may request identification of the specific location of certain grantee cable system facilities. The grantee agrees to respond to such request within 48 hours of the receipt of the request. In the event that grantee fails to provide the necessary information, and damage is caused to grantee facilities as a direct result of withholding said information, the grantee shall hold the town harmless from all liability, damage, cost or expense resulting from any town action in this regard unless such damage was caused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the town or its agents. 
The town shall have the right to be informed as to matters in connection with or affecting the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, operations, and repair of the cable system facilities of the grantee within the public rights-of-way including, but not necessarily limited to, the identification and location of the grantee's cable system facilities within the public rights-of-way and to updates of such information as changes regarding same occur. At a minimum, this requires grantee to maintain on file with the town a current set of strand and trench drawings of the cable system. Such strand and trench maps shall be updated as changes occur in the cable system, and shall provide, as follows: 
A.  CAD drawings must be submitted in .dxf (drawing exchange file) format or other mutually agreeable format. 
B.  Drawings must be submitted digitally on either CD ROM or floppy diskette. 
C.  Drawings must be referenced in real world coordinates: 
(i)  North Central Texas State Plane; 
(ii)  Zone 5351; 
(iii)  NAD 83 datum; 
(iv)  Units feet. 
In addition to providing the location of grantee's facilities, grantee agrees to obtain facilities location information from other users of the public rights-of-way prior to grantee's construction, reconstruction, maintenance, operations and repair of the cable system facilities. 
Upon request by the town, the grantee shall furnish the town information relevant to such matters, which is prepared, maintained, and available in the ordinary course of business. 
SECTION 8  
8.0. - Indemnification and liability. 
8.01  Grantee's obligation. Grantee shall pay, and by the acceptance of this franchise specifically agrees that it will pay, the following: 
A.  Damages and penalties. All damages or penalties which the town, its officers, agents, employees, or contractors may legally be required to pay as a result of damages arising out of copyright infringements and all other damages arising out of the installation, maintenance, or operation of the cable system by the grantee, its affiliates, contractors, subcontractors or agents, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this franchise. 
B.  Expenses. If any action or proceeding is brought against the town or any of its officers, agents, employees, or contractors with respect to which payment may be sought for claims for damages or penalties described in this section, the grantee, upon written notice from the town, shall assume the investigation or defense and fully control any resolution or compromise thereof, including the employment of counsel and the payment of all expenses including the reasonable value of any services rendered by any officers, agents, employees or contractors of the town which are not unreasonably duplicative of services provided by grantee and its representatives. The town shall fully cooperate with the grantee. 
C.  Separate counsel. The town shall have the right to employ separate counsel in any action or proceeding and to participate in the investigation and defense thereof, and the grantee shall pay the reasonable fees and expenses of such separate counsel if employed with the approval and consent of the grantee if representation of both the grantee and the town by the same attorney would be inconsistent with accepted canons of professional ethics. 
D.  Indemnification. It is the intent of this section and by its acceptance of this franchise, grantee specifically agrees that grantee, for itself and its agents, employees, subcontractors, and the agents and employees of said subcontractors, shall indemnify and hold the town, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, elected officials, successors and assigns harmless from all liability actions, causes of action, lawsuits, judgments, claims, damages, penalties, costs or fees, including attorney's fees and costs of defense, for any injury to or the death of any person or damage to or destruction of any property arising out of, resulting from or based upon, in whole or in part, any act or omission of grantee, its officers, employees, contractors, subcontractors, and agents under this franchise, including without limitation the construction, operation, or maintenance of its cable system. In the event that any action, suit or proceeding is brought or claim is made against the town based upon or arising out of any such act or omission of the grantee under this franchise, the town shall give notice in writing of such action, suit, proceeding or claim to the grantee. However, the failure of the town to promptly provide such notice in writing to grantee shall not relieve grantee of its duties and obligations under this section. The town shall not and does not by reason of this granting of this franchise, or any failure to act by the town which may impact the grantee's performance under this franchise, assume any liability of grantee whatsoever for injury to persons, damage to property, or penalties of any kind whatsoever. The provisions of this section shall survive the expiration or earlier termination of this franchise. 
SECTION 9  
9.0. - Insurance requirements. 
9.01  Minimum coverage. Grantee, for itself, its contractors, and subcontractors, shall maintain throughout the term of this franchise: 
A.  A commercial general liability insurance policy issued by a company duly authorized to do business in the State of Texas (and acceptable to the town) insuring the grantee, its contractors, and its subcontractors with respect to the installation, maintenance, and operation of grantee's cable system in the following minimum amounts: 
(i)  One person: One million dollars for bodily injury or death to any one person. 
(ii)  One accident: One million dollars for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident. 
(iii)  Property damage: One million dollars for property damage resulting from any one occurrence. 
(iv)  All other types of liability: Two million dollars for all other types of liability per occurrence. 
B.  An automobile liability insurance policy and, if necessary, a commercial umbrella liability insurance policy with a limit of not less than $1,000,000.00 for each accident. Such insurance shall cover liability arising out of any motor vehicle (including owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles). 
9.02  Increased coverage. The town council reserves the right to require grantee to increase the minimum amounts of liability insurance coverage up to $4,000,000.00 per incident if such increased coverage is deemed by town council to be reasonably based on changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the grantee. Such requirement shall be expressed by resolution or ordinance. 
9.03  Endorsements. Grantee agrees that with respect to the insurance requirements contained in subsection 9.01, all insurance certificates will contain the following required provisions: 
A.  Name the Town of Flower Mound and its officers, employees, and elected representatives as additional insured. 
B.  Provide for 30 days' notice to the town for cancellation, non-renewal or material change. 
C.  Shall be on an occurrence basis and shall be primary coverage of all losses resulting from grantee's operations covered by the policies. 
9.04  Workers' compensation. The grantee, its contractors, and its subcontractors shall maintain throughout the term of this franchise workers' compensation within statutory limits and employers liability insurance in the amount of a) by accident, $100,000.00 per each accident, and b) by disease, $100,000.00 per employee with a policy aggregate or $500,000.00, or an amount which is required by applicable state or federal law, whichever is greater. 
9.05  Certificate of insurance. Within 30 days after the effective date of this franchise, grantee shall provide to the town and maintain on file throughout the term of the franchise a certificate of insurance evidencing coverage as required in this section. At the town's request, such request to be based only on evidence which suggests that the certificates supplied are incorrect, a true and correct copy of the insurance policies shall be made available for the town's review at grantee's offices. If grantee elects to make such policies available for review outside of the Dallas/Fort Worth, Texas, metropolitan area, grantee shall pay the travel costs for a town representative to review such policies. The town will not be allowed to make copies of the insurance policies. 
9.06  Term. The insurance required by subsection 9.01 shall be kept in full force and effect by grantee during the existence of this franchise and thereafter until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of grantee's cable system, should such removal be required by town council or undertaken by grantee. 
9.07  Issuing companies. Companies issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse against the town for payment of any premiums or assessments which all are set at the sole risk of the grantee. Insurance policies obtained by grantee shall provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the town in connection with any damage covered by these policies. 
SECTION 10  
10.0. - Cable system characteristics. 
10.01  Channel capacity. As of the effective date of this franchise, the cable system shall have the potential of providing no fewer than 74 channels. At no time during the term of this franchise shall grantee offer fewer than 68 channels to subscribers. All channels being offered to subscribers within the franchise area will adhere to the technical standards set forth in section 12. 
10.02  New construction. Any areas of the town where grantee constructs new cable system facilities shall be built, at a minimum, to the same technical specifications as the cable system existing in the town as of the effective date of this franchise. The cable system shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner so as to provide high quality and reliable service. The system shall meet or exceed any technical performance standards required by the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. 
10.03  Cable system capabilities. The cable system will have the following attributes during the term of this franchise: 
A.  Activated return capability from subscriber locations. 
B.  Emergency standby power rated at a minimum of 12 hours at the headend, four hours at each fiber optic node located throughout the cable system, and one and one-half hours at any other power supply on the distribution portion of the cable system. 
10.04  Comparability of town cable system to others in metroplex. Grantee's cable system in the town shall be capable of offering cable services that are comparable to other similar cable systems owned or operated by the grantee or an affiliate of the grantee in the Dallas/Fort Worth metropolitan area ("comparable systems") pursuant to the terms of this subsection. If the town believes that there are comparable systems providing more advanced cable services than those offered in the town, the town may send a written request to grantee, not to exceed one notice every three years, requesting information on the cable services offered by the comparable systems. Within 60 days of receiving the request, grantee shall provide the town with information on any cable services that are offered in the comparable systems, but not being offered in the town. If the identified cable services are being offered by grantee or its affiliates to at least 50 percent of the total subscribers in the comparable systems, the town may request that grantee make available such cable services on the cable system in the town. Grantee shall inform the town within 60 days whether it intends to provide the requested cable service and to state a time frame for doing so. The parties recognize that grantee's refusal to provide a requested cable service may be a factor considered at renewal. The parties agree that, as of the effective date of this franchise, the town is not permitted to require the provision of specific video programming services pursuant to this subsection. 
10.05  Future upgrades. In the event grantee, either voluntarily, or under the terms of subsection 10.04, undertakes an upgrade or rebuild of the cable system during the term of this franchise, at least 30 days prior to the implementation of any upgrade and/or replacement activities, grantee shall provide to the town a written plan which shall include general information as to the construction necessary for the project, and the procedure or method grantee will employ to ensure minimal interruption of cable service. All construction and technical specifications included in the plan(s) submitted by grantee shall be in conformity with the provisions of this franchise, including any lawful and generally applicable town permitting process. Grantee shall meet with the town to discuss the status and progress of the construction upon request. 
10.06  I-Net. Grantee shall, upon the request of the town, provide I-Net facilities and capacity according to a design and functionality to be specified by town and the grantee which, at the town's discretion, may be used for non-commercial, non-profit applications, by the town, its agencies, other governments and their agencies, K-12 schools, libraries, public corporations created by the town, and other non-profit institutions to the extent that such non-profit institutions provide public services. The town shall be required to reimburse grantee based on grantee's incremental cost as defined in exhibit B. Grantee agrees that the town may utilize fibers within the grantee's fiber sheath as may be agreed upon for I-Net capacity in order to maximize the cost savings to be realized through paying incremental costs only, but no event will any part of the subscriber network distribution system be utilized to I-Net capacity. 
SECTION 11  
11.0. - Performance bonding. 
11.01  Amount. Within 30 days of the effective date of this franchise, the grantee shall furnish and keep in full force during the term of the franchise and file with the town a performance bond in the amount of $50,000.00. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the grantee of all terms and conditions of the franchise. Such performance bond will be in addition to any construction bonding requirements of other lawful and generally applicable town ordinances. 
11.02  Reservation of rights. The rights reserved by the town with respect to the bond are in addition to all other rights the town may have under the franchise or any other law. 
11.03  Endorsement. The bond shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be changed or cancelled without advance notice to the Town. The Town will be given 30 days written notice by registered mail, return receipt requested, of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
11.04  Evidence. Grantee shall maintain a copy of the bond on file with the town during the term of this franchise. 
SECTION 12  
12.0. - Operational standards. 
12.01  Compliance with FCC rules. At a minimum, grantee shall comply with present and future rules and regulations of the FCC, including but not limited to, technical standards, testing requirements, consumer protection standards and consumer electronics compatibility regulations and all other present and future rules and regulations of the FCC in connection with and relating to the operation of grantee's cable system. Such compliance will not negate or replace any additional requirements identified in this franchise. 
12.02  Technical performance. 
A.  Grantee's cable system within the town shall meet all FCC and other applicable federal technical and signal quality standards for cable systems, including any such standards or regulations as hereinafter may be amended or adopted to the extent that compliance with such amended standards is mandated by federal law or regulation. In the event that such amended standards are not mandated by federal law or regulation, and provide for a less strict performance standard and/or less frequent testing requirements, such modifications will not be included as a part of this franchise unless the town chooses to incorporate by means of a resolution or amendment hereto. 
B.  Antennas, supporting structures, headend and associated equipment, and outside plant used in the cable system shall comply with any applicable federal, state, county, or generally applicable town laws. 
C.  Grantee shall not design, install or operate its facilities in a manner that will interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the electrical or telephone system located in any building, the cable system of another franchisee, or individual or master antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast signals. 
D.  If the town contacts grantee prior to the next FCC required test period (i.e., before December 15 and June 15 of each year), a town representative may be present during the testing. Upon request, grantee shall provide summary written reports of the results of such tests to the town. 
E.  Grantee shall maintain all of its real property, headend facilities and outside plant in a safe condition. Upon request by the town, grantee shall provide copies of the detailed maintenance procedure manuals in existence at the time of the request. 
F.  Grantee shall keep and maintain a proper and adequate inventory of maintenance and repair parts for the cable system. Grantee shall maintain or otherwise have available a work force of skilled technicians for cable system repair and maintenance. 
G.  Upon request, grantee shall provide copies of all correspondence with the FCC related to technical performance of the cable system. In the event that any complaints are filed with the FCC related to the cable system operations, grantee shall provide copies of such complaints as well as the resolution thereof to the town upon request. 
12.03  Parental guidance control. Upon request of a subscriber, grantee shall provide by sale and/or lease a device by which the subscriber can prohibit viewing or use of a particular cable service(s) during periods selected by that subscriber. Subscribers shall be notified individually, in writing, by the grantee of the availability of the device no less frequently than annually. 
12.04  Customer service. The grantee shall provide customer service in accordance with the town's customer service standards set forth in exhibit A. Such standards shall apply to all affiliates that provide cable services to subscribers and any other company that provides cable services under written agreement with the grantee. 
12.05  Quality of service. Throughout the term of this franchise, the grantee shall maintain the quality of service and meet operational standards in the maintenance and operation of its cable system as are required herein. 
Should the town find that the grantee has failed to maintain such quality of service or operational standards, the town may notify the grantee in writing and specifically set forth therein the improvements required to rectify such deficiencies. 
SECTION 13  
13.0. - Signals to be carried. 
13.01  Required programming categories. Grantee shall, at a minimum, carry programming classified under each of the following broad categories so long as such programming remains commercially and reasonably available: 
A.  News and information; 
B.  Arts, culture, performing arts; 
C.  Movies; 
D.  Sports; 
E.  General entertainment; 
F.  Children and family; 
G.  Science; 
H.  Religious; 
I.  Educational; 
J.  Governmental; 
K.  Ethnic; 
L.  Weather; 
M.  Music. 
13.02  Service for the hearing impaired. Grantee shall comply with any FCC or other lawful and applicable federal, state or local requirements regarding altering or adapting programming for the hearing impaired. Grantee shall not take any action to remove or alter closed captioning provided for the hearing impaired as a part of any programming. Grantee shall deliver intact such closed captioning in the manner in which it arrives at the headend or from another origination source to the cable system. 
13.03  Interconnection. Grantee's subscriber cable system in the town may be interconnected with contiguous cable systems that are owned and operated by grantee or an affiliate, provided that such systems are served by the same headend that serves the town. 
SECTION 14  
14.0. - Public, educational, and government (PEG) access. 
14.01  Initial channels. As of the effective date of this franchise, grantee shall dedicate three channels for the carriage of PEG programming. The grantee shall ensure that such channels are of a technical quality comparable to any other channel offered over the cable system. 
14.02  Additional channels. Grantee shall make available up to one additional PEG channel (for a total of four PEG channels) under the procedures below. Grantee shall make available up to four additional PEG channels (for a total of eight PEG channels) under the procedures detailed in this section if all the video programming services offered by grantee on the cable system are in a digital format. 
If the town or one of its PEG channel designees believes that additional channel capacity is needed for PEG programming, the interested party may file a request with the town manager. In his/her deliberations, the town manager will consider supply and demand, and, in particular, the ability and resources to produce additional PEG programming, the interest of the community in the additional PEG programming as measured through a survey methodology that is mutually acceptable between the town and the grantee, consideration of the programming that would be displaced, how much programming is produced on the existing PEG channels, how much programming on the existing PEG channels is repeated, how much programming on the existing PEG channels is character-generated, whether it is feasible to cluster PEG programming into blocks of time such that the channel space can be compatibly shared between multiple PEG programming providers, and if several PEG programming providers should combine their programming onto a single PEG channel. 
Should the town manager find that the evidence exists to support the activation of an additional channel for PEG programming, then the town manager shall provide his/her decision in writing and grantee shall provide the channel within 90 days of receiving the request. Grantee may appeal the decision of the town manager to the town council. 
14.03  Underutilized PEG channels. Grantee and the town agree that it is their mutual goal to fully and efficiently use the channel capacity of the cable system, which may include allowing the grantee to use underutilized time on the PEG channels. If grantee believes that any PEG channel has underutilized time, grantee may file a request with the town manager to use that time. In response to the request, the town manager will consider a combination of factors, including, but not limited to, the community's needs and interests, and the source, quantity, type and schedule of the programming carried on the channel. The town manager will also consider, taking into account the mission of the PEG programming, whether it is feasible to cluster PEG programming into blocks of time such that the channel space can be compatibly shared between the peg programming provider and the grantee and/or if several PEG programming providers can combine their programming onto a single PEG channel. The town manager shall render his/her decision regarding the matter within 60 days of receiving the request. Should the town manager find that the PEG channel or portion of the channel may be used by the grantee, then grantee may begin using such time 90 days after receipt of the decision. The grantee's request shall not be unreasonably denied. Any permission granted pursuant to this subsection for use of a PEG channel or a portion thereof shall be considered temporary. 
At such time as a PEG programming provider believes that it has the resources and ability to utilize any PEG channel currently used by the grantee pursuant to this subsection, the PEG programming provider may request that the town return such PEG channel or portion of a PEG channel being used by the grantee to the PEG programming provider. In response to the request, the town will consider a combination of factors, including but not limited to, the community's needs and interests, the quantity and schedule of the programming the applicant proposes to carry on the PEG channel, and the applicant's ability and resources to acquire or produce the proposed PEG channel programming. The town will also consider whether it is feasible for the PEG programming provider to cluster programming into blocks of time such that the PEG channel can be compatibly shared between the PEG programming provider and the grantee and/or if several PEG programming providers can combine their programming onto a single PEG channel. The town shall render its decision regarding the matter within 90 days of receiving the request. Should the town find that the evidence exists to support the return of a PEG channel or portion of a PEG channel to the PEG programming provider, then the grantee shall surrender the requested time on the PEG channel within 90 days of receiving the decision. 
14.04  Delivery of PEG programming. PEG programming shall be produced, recorded and transmitted in a format which is compatible with the technology used by the cable system, whether audio, video, or other information (including, by way of example and not limitation, secondary audio, text, digital information, high definition signals and compressed signals). Such uses must be in furtherance of PEG programming uses. 
14.05  Management and control of PEG channels. The town or its designee shall at its discretion manage the use of all PEG channels and facilities and allocate and reallocate the PEG channels amongst public, educational and government access programming. The town may authorize a third party(ies) to control and manage the use of any or all PEG channels and related facilities provided by grantee under this franchise. The town or its designee may formulate rules for the operation of PEG channels consistent with this franchise and federal law. 
14.06  Routing of PEG channel content. Grantee shall continue to provide the necessary upstream channel capacity and equipment to originate PEG channel content from town hall for dissemination over the cable system to subscribers. Grantee shall provide the necessary upstream channel capacity and equipment to route PEG channel content from additional sites as identified by the town within 120 days of said request, provided that the town is responsible for the costs of all construction and equipment. Grantee shall provide the town with an estimate of the construction and equipment costs prior to beginning construction of any new return line. Grantee shall not be responsible for constructing any new return line until the town has approved such costs in writing. 
14.07  Relocation of access channels. Grantee will use reasonable efforts to minimize the movement of PEG channel assignments. Grantee shall provide the town with a minimum of 60 days' notice, and use its best efforts to provide 120 days' notice, prior to the time any PEG channel designation is changed, unless the change is required by federal law, in which case grantee shall give the town the maximum notice possible. In addition, grantee shall pay to the town an amount equal to the town's costs in remarketing the location of the PEG channels and managing the relocation administratively and technologically, up to a maximum of $0.50 per subscriber. Grantee shall only be allowed to recover such amounts paid to town as "external costs" (as that term is used in 47 C.F.R. section 76.922) if the movement of channels is required by federal, state or local law. Grantee, at grantee's expense, will place the town's notices of the channel change on or with one regular monthly billing, upon the town's request. Any new channel designations for the PEG channels provided pursuant to this franchise shall be in full compliance with FCC signal quality and proof-of-performance standards. 
14.08  Reception of PEG access signals. All PEG access channels provided for under this section shall be a part of the basic cable service. 
14.09  Technical assistance. Within one hour of a request from the town and/or its designee, identifying a problem and requesting assistance from the grantee regarding a PEG channel, grantee will respond by telephone to address the problem. Within four hours, grantee shall provide technical assistance or diagnostic services to determine whether or not a problem with a PEG channel is the result of matters for which grantee is responsible and, if so, grantee will take prompt corrective action. Such assistance will be at no charge to the town. 
14.10  PEG support. 
A.  [PEG, I-Net capital.] Grantee shall provide the town with a grant of $50,000.00 at such time as the town requests it during the first year of this franchise for PEG and I-Net capital. The town shall give grantee at least 90 days' advance written notice to submit payment of the grant. Grantee shall be allowed to pass-through this payment to subscribers over the term of this franchise. 
B.  [Additional capital support.] Upon at least 90 days' advance written notice the town may require the grantee to provide an additional amount each month not to exceed $0.50 per month, per residential subscriber, as additional capital support for PEG programming or as capital support for the I-Net so long as the I-Net capability is provided by the grantee. Grantee shall be allowed to pass-through these payments to subscribers. 
C.  [PEG capital fee collection.] Grantee shall not be responsible for collecting or paying the PEG capital fee described in subsection 14.10, paragraph B or C on gratis accounts or for subscribers covered by bulk agreements. Each payment shall be due and payable no later than 30 days following the end of the quarter from when the PEG capital fee takes effect. The town may adjust the amount of the PEG capital fee on an annual basis (not to exceed the sum of the amounts specified in subsection 14.10, paragraphs B and C. 
D.  [Advertisements prohibited.] No PEG access channel may be used for the exhibition of any advertisement. For purposes of this section "advertisement" is defined as a message, announcement, or other programming material which is exhibited or otherwise transmitted in exchange for any remuneration and which is intended to (1) promote any service, facility, or product offered by any person who is engaged in such offering for profit; (2) to express the views of any person with respect to any matter of public importance or interest; or (3) to support or oppose any candidate for political office. 
E.  Current PEG equipment. Equipment that is currently provided to the town for PEG channel programming shall become the property of the town at no charge to the town or its subscribers. Equipment which is currently used to provide programming for the public access channel, will also become the property of the town, at no charge to the town or the subscribers. This equipment is listed on exhibit B. 
F.  Late payment. Grantee shall pay a late charge in an amount which is the greater of $100.00 or ten percent per annum, compounded daily, on PEG capital fee payments, or portions thereof, that are paid subsequent to the payment dates specified above. 
G.  The town shall have the authority to distribute and re-distribute the PEG capital fee in a manner that is deemed by the town to be in the best interest of the subscribers with respect to PEG programming and/or I-Net operations, in accordance with applicable law. 
SECTION 15  
15.0. - Emergency use of the cable system. 
15.01  Emergency or disaster. In accordance with and at the time required by the provisions of FCC regulations part 11, subpart D, section 11, and as such provisions may from time to time be amended, grantee shall install and maintain an emergency alert system (EAS) for use in transmitting pursuant to such regulations in the event of an emergency. Grantee shall provide the town with the ability to activate the EAS from multiple locations to override both audio and video of all programming services simultaneously during a period of emergency or disaster. Such emergency alert capability shall be operational throughout the term of this franchise. Grantee shall provide the appropriate training to town personnel as may be necessary to operate the equipment and facilities necessary to satisfy this provision of the franchise. 
15.02  Interconnection of EAS. In the event that the town enters into franchise agreements with other cable service providers, to the extent technically and legally feasible, grantee shall cooperate with the town to create a system and/or procedure to simultaneously activate the EAS over all cable systems operating in the town. The cost of such interconnection shall be borne by the other cable operators connecting to the grantee's facilities. Grantee assumes no liability for the failure of other cable service providers to provide EAS services. 
SECTION 16  
16.0. - Employment requirements. 
16.01  Equal opportunity in employment. Grantee shall afford equal opportunity in employment to all qualified persons. No person shall be discriminated against in employment because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. 
SECTION 17  
17.0. - Other business activity. 
17.01  Limitations and restrictions. Subject to applicable state and federal law, this franchise only authorizes the grantee to provide those services or engage in business activities specifically identified herein. Such limitation is not a prohibition on grantee from providing services or engaging in business activities which the town cannot lawfully restrict or condition. 
SECTION 18  
18.0 - Payment to town. 
18.01  Amount and time. As compensation for the right, privilege, and franchise herein conferred, grantee shall pay to the town each year during the term of this franchise a sum equal to five percent of the grantee's gross revenue. Such payments shall be made quarterly within 45 days after the expiration of each calendar quarter. Accompanying the payment, grantee shall file a financial statement prepared according to generally accepted accounting practice showing in detail the gross revenues used in the computation of said payment. Such statement shall be signed by an officer or certified public accountant of the grantee. 
18.02  Right of inspection of records. The town shall have the right to inspect grantee's records showing the gross revenues from which payments to the town are computed and to audit and re-compute any and all amounts paid under this franchise. The town's right to audit and the grantee's obligation to retain records related to a franchise fee audit shall expire three years after each franchise fee payment has been made to the town. Pursuant to subsection 2.01, paragraph Q, subparagraph (i), as part of any franchise fee audit, the town shall specifically have the right to review records related to the allocation of revenue to cable services in the event grantee offers cable services bundled with non-cable services. 
18.03  Late payment charge. Grantee shall pay a late charge in an amount which is the greater of $100.00 or ten percent per annum, compounded daily, on franchise fee payments, or portions thereof, that are paid subsequent to the payment dates specified in subsection 18.01. The town shall provide written notice to the grantee that such payments have not been received in accordance with the dates specified in subsection 18.01, but such notice does not negate any late charge owed to the town beginning on the day following the required date of receipt under subsection 18.01. In the event the town identifies, as a result of an audit, amounts owed by the grantee from prior periods, the grantee shall pay a late charge of eight percent per annum, compounded quarterly, on the amounts identified, calculated from the date each portion of the underpayment was originally due until the date grantee remits the underpayment to the town. In the event that any audit or re-computation of fees results in an underpayment of greater than five percent (prior to the late charge) for the audit period, grantee shall reimburse the town for its costs to conduct the audit or re-computation. 
18.04  Acceptance. Payments received from the grantee under this section shall not in any way limit or impair any of the privileges or rights of the town, whether under this franchise or otherwise. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is the correct amount, nor shall acceptance be construed as a release of any claim that the town may have for additional amounts payable under the provisions of this section, subject to the limitations in subsection 18.02. 
18.05  Evasion of franchise fees. Any transaction or arrangement made for the purpose of or knowingly results in the evasion of franchise fees payable under this franchise is prohibited. 
18.06  Additional commitments not franchise fees. The franchise fee payable hereunder shall be exclusive of and in addition to all ad valorem taxes, special assessments, fees for municipal improvements, the PEG capital fee, and other lawful obligations of grantee to town. Although the total sum of franchise fee payments and additional commitments set forth elsewhere in this franchise may total more than five percent of grantee's gross revenues in any annual period, grantee agrees that the additional commitments herein are neither franchise fees as defined under any federal law in effect as of the effective date of this franchise, nor are the additional payments to be offset or credited against any franchise fee payments due to the town, nor do they represent an increase in franchise fees to be passed through to subscribers. 
SECTION 19  
19.0. - Records and reports. 
19.01  Notice. Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response required by the franchise to be served upon the town or the grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party when hand delivered, or five business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope sent by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid. 
The notices or responses to the town shall be addressed as follows: 
Town of Flower Mound 
Attention: Town Manager 
2121 Cross Timbers Road 
Flower Mound, Texas 75028 
The notices or responses to the grantee shall be addressed as follows: 
Comcast of California/Colorado/Illinois/Indiana/Texas, Inc. 
Attention: Executive Director of Franchising and Government Affairs 
2951 Kinwest Parkway 
Irving, Texas 75063 
With a copy to: 
Comcast Cable Communications, Inc. 
Attention: Senior Director of Regulatory Affairs for the Atlantic Division 
8098 Sandpiper Circle 
Baltimore, Maryland 21236 
The town and the grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other. 
19.02  Books of account. The town, through its duly designated officers, agents, or representatives shall have access to all books of accounts and records of grantee which are reasonably related to the enforcement of this franchise. Grantee shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of its business and operations under and in connection with this franchise. All such books of accounts and records reasonably related to the enforcement of this franchise shall be made available for inspection by the town at an office of the grantee located within the Dallas metropolitan area during normal business hours upon reasonable advance notice. In the alternative, and at grantee's discretion, grantee may make books available in other locations, but must pay the travel costs for a town representative to visit this site if such review is requested by the town. Grantee shall maintain the books and records for franchise compliance purposes for a period of three years. 
19.03  Quarterly reports. A report shall be filed by grantee with the town within 30 days following the end of each calendar quarter, or portion thereof during which the franchise is in effect. The material substance of the report shall be in a form reasonably acceptable to the town. The information contained within the quarterly report shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  A summary of complaints received by grantee from the town during the quarter identifying the number and nature of the complaints. 
B.  A summary of the extent to which grantee has met the customer service standards included in exhibit A of this franchise. 
The quarterly reports may be submitted in conjunction with the payments to the town as required in subsection 18.01. 
19.04  Confidentiality. The town agrees to treat as confidential any books or records that constitute proprietary or confidential information under federal or state law, to the extent grantee makes the town aware of such confidentiality. Grantee shall be responsible for clearly and conspicuously stamping the word "Confidential" on each page that contains confidential or proprietary information, and shall provide a brief written explanation as to why such information is confidential under state or federal law. If the town believes it must release any such confidential books and records in the course of enforcing this franchise, or for any other reason, it shall advise grantee in advance so that grantee may take appropriate steps to protect its interests. If the town receives a demand from any person for disclosure of any information designated by grantee as confidential, the town shall, so far as consistent with applicable law, advise grantee and provide grantee with a copy of any written request by the party demanding access to such information within a reasonable time. Until otherwise ordered by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the town agrees that, to the extent permitted by state and federal law, it shall deny access to any of grantee's books and records marked confidential as set forth above to any person. 
SECTION 20  
20.0. - Regulation of rates. 
20.01  Town regulation of grantee's rates. The town council shall regulate, by ordinance, the rates for any and all of those cable services and related installations and equipment of grantee subject to regulation by the town, consistent with FCC rules and provisions of the Communications Act governing rate regulation. In such event the town council shall first prescribe by ordinance the procedure and standards to be followed and the extent and scope of such rate regulations, all of which matters shall be consistent with due process and shall conform to any and all of those federal and state laws, rules, and regulations then applicable. Subject to its authority to regulate rates the town shall have access to all books and records related to grantee's rates including bulk contract rate information, subject to applicable law. 
20.02  Notice of rates. Grantee shall provide written notice of its then current rates and charges for any and all of its cable services in the town in compliance with any timing requirements prescribed in FCC regulations. 
SECTION 21  
21.0. - Free drops and service. 
21.01  Free drops and service. Grantee shall, at no cost, continue to provide one outlet of basic cable service and expanded basic cable service to all town-owned and occupied buildings, schools, and public libraries where such service is provided as of the effective date of this franchise. For purposes of this subsection, "school" means all state-accredited K-12 public and private schools. In addition, grantee shall provide, at no cost, one outlet of basic cable service and expanded basic cable service to new or relocated, owned or leased and occupied town buildings, schools, and libraries where service is not being provided as of the effective date of this franchise upon request, and if the drop line from the feeder cable to such building does not exceed 150 feet, or if the town, school, or library agrees to pay the incremental cost of such drop line in excess of 150 feet, including the cost of such excess labor and materials. Such obligation to provide free cable service shall not extend to areas of town buildings where the grantee would normally enter into a commercial contract to provide such cable service (e.g., golf courses, airport restaurants and concourses, and recreation center work out facilities). Outlets of basic cable service and expanded basic cable service provided in accordance with this subsection may only be used to distribute cable services throughout such buildings upon the express agreement of the grantee. Any cable service provided under this subsection may only be used for lawful purposes. 
SECTION 22  
22.0. - Prohibition of discriminatory or preferential practices. 
22.01  Rates, charges, and services. In its rates or charges, or in making available cable or in its rules or regulations, or in any other respect, grantee shall not make or grant preference or advantage to any subscriber or potential subscriber and shall not subject any such person to any prejudice or disadvantage. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns to stimulate subscriptions to the cable system or other legitimate uses thereof. 
SECTION 23  
23.0. - Non-exclusive franchise. 
23.01  Franchise non-exclusive. The rights, privileges, and franchise granted hereby are not exclusive and nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent town from granting any like or similar rights, privileges, and franchise to any other person within all or any portion of town. The town shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that any person providing video programming services and/or cable services does not enter into the public rights-of-way in the franchise area on terms or conditions materially more favorable or less burdensome to such person than those applied to the grantee pursuant to this franchise. 
23.02  Disputes. In the event that the town grants a franchise to another person to provide video programming and/or cable services in the town, grantee shall have no longer than three months from the date grantee receives a copy of such franchise to notify the town, in writing, of any alleged discrimination between this franchise and the burdens and rights provided in such other franchise. Failure to notify the town shall estop grantee from any further action related to allegations of discrimination regarding the granting of such franchise. This subsection is not intended to prevent grantee from any action related to the town's actual administration of such franchise that the grantee believes is discriminatory. 
SECTION 24  
24.0. - Material breach of franchise, notice and liquidated damages. 
24.01  Notice of default; opportunity to cure; public hearing. 
A.  Notice of default. The town shall notify the grantee, in writing, of an alleged failure to comply with a provision of this franchise, which notice shall specify the alleged failure with reasonable particularity. The grantee shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to: 
(i)  Correct the violation before the town may take further action or with respect to any such violation, if by reason of the nature thereof such violation cannot with due diligence be wholly cured within such period of 30 days, then the 30-day period shall be extended for such period of time as may be necessary to complete the correction of the same with all due diligence, but in no event longer than 90 days unless a further extension of time is approved by the town council; or 
(ii)  Provide a written response to the town, presenting facts and arguments in refutation or excuse of such alleged failure. 
B.  [Public hearing.] If the town is unsatisfied with the grantee's response under subsection 24.01, paragraph A; the town shall hold a public hearing on the matter. Grantee must be given at least ten days' notice of the hearing. At the hearing, the grantee shall be entitled to all the rights of due process consistent with the town procedures including but not limited to, the right to present evidence and the right to be represented by counsel. The grantee shall make available to the town, if requested, any records, documents or other information reasonably necessary to its consideration of the matter. Following the public hearing, the town may determine: 
(i)  Whether a failure to comply with a franchise provision has occurred; 
(ii)  Whether such failure is excusable; and 
(iii)  Whether such failure has been cured or will be cured by the grantee. After the hearing, grantee will be provided with a written copy of any action taken by the town council, along with supporting documents. 
C.  [Town options.] If the town determines that a failure to comply with a provision of the franchise has occurred and that such failure is not excusable and has not been or will not be cured by the grantee in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the town, then the town may take any actions provided in subsection 24.02. 
D.  In the event grantee fails to make a franchise fee payment as require by subsection 18.01, fails to make the PEG payments specified in subsection 14.10, paragraphs A through E, or fails to maintain insurance in accordance with section 9, the town is not required to conduct the public hearing identified in paragraph A above, but may proceed directly to subsection 24.02 for the procedures in paragraph A above. 
24.02  Town action in event of breach. In the event that grounds exist which give the town reason to believe that the grantee failed to comply with a material provision of this franchise, then the town may, at any time during the term of this franchise, to the extent lawful: 
A.  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; 
B.  Commence an action at law for monetary damages from the grantee as compensation for such material breach; 
C.  Seek liquidated damages pursuant to subsection 24.03; and/or 
D.  In the case of breach of a material provision of the franchise or other material violation as set forth in subsections 25.01 and 25.02, seek to revoke the franchise pursuant to subsection 25.03. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town may not pursue monetary damages or liquidated damages for late payment of franchise fees in addition to the interest specified in subsection 18.03, or for late payment of the PEG capital fee in addition to the interest specified in subsection 14.10, paragraph F. 
24.03  Liquidated damages. In the event the town's selected course of action following the process set forth in subsections 24.01 and 24.02 is to impose liquidated damages, the town shall give grantee written notice of its intent, and a reasonable period of time following receipt of the notice, not less than 30 days and not more than 90 days unless a longer period is approved by the town council, to cure the alleged violation. If grantee remains in violation of the franchise following this cure period, the town may charge to and collect from the grantee the liquidated damages set forth below, with the liquidated damages beginning to accrue no earlier than the day following the end of the cure periods. The parties agree that actual damages that might be sustained by the town by reason of the breach by grantee of the provisions of this franchise set forth below, are uncertain and difficult of ascertainment, and that the sums set forth below would be reasonable compensation for such breach, and grantee promises to pay, and the town agrees to accept, such sums as liquidated damages, and not as a penalty, in the event of such breach. Additionally such sums of money shall be considered liquidated damages due the town by grantee by reason of inconvenience to the public and because of public works supervision and maintenance and other town administrative time and involvement which resulted in the expenditure of public funds due to grantee's failure to comply with certain provisions in this franchise. Grantee covenants that any such sums paid to the town under this provision of the franchise shall not be included in the development of any rate, change, or price for services charged to subscribers. 
A.  For failure of grantee to provide any report, certificate or map to the town as required by this franchise, $50.00 per day. 
B.  For failure of grantee to respond, restore or repair the public rights-of-way within 48 hours of notice by town under subsection 7.03, $250.00 per day for every day following 48 hours after grantee's receipt of the notice. Should the town adopt any lawful and generally applicable ordinance governing the public rights-of-way which includes administrative fees for failure to restore the public rights-of-way, such fees in the ordinance shall apply to the grantee and supersede the ability of the town to collect liquidated damages under this provision of the franchise. 
C.  If town is required to relocate grantee's facilities under subsection 7.04, grantee shall pay $1,000.00 to the town in addition to reimbursement of the costs incurred by the town in relocating the facilities. Should the town adopt any lawful and generally applicable ordinance governing the public rights-of-way which includes administrative fees for town-performed relocation of grantee facilities, such fees in the ordinance shall apply to the grantee and supersede the ability of the town to collect liquidated damages under this provision of the franchise. 
D.  For failure of grantee to provide the PEG channels as required by subsections 14.01, 14.02, or 14.08, $100.00 per day. 
E.  For failure of grantee to provide the return lines required by subsection 14.06, $100.00 per day. 
F.  For failure of grantee to provide the town the ability to activate the EAS as required by subsection 15.01, $500.00 per day. 
G.  For failure of grantee to provide the notice of rates as required by subsection 20.02, $50.00 per day. 
H.  For failure to comply with the service extension requirements set forth in section 28, the greater of $250.00 per day or $1.00 per day per impacted subscriber. 
24.04  Force majeure. Other than its failure, refusal, or inability to pay its debts and obligations, including, specifically, the payments to town required by this franchise, grantee shall not be declared in default or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this franchise in those cases in which performance of such provision is prevented by reasons beyond its control. 
24.05  Reservation of rights. The rights reserved to the town under this section are in addition to all other rights of the town whether reserved by this franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right shall affect any other right the town may have. 
SECTION 25  
25.0. - Revocation of franchise. 
25.01  General. In addition to all rights and powers of the town by virtue of this franchise or otherwise, the town reserves, as an additional and as a separate and distinct power, the right to revoke the franchise in accordance with the procedures specified herein if any of the following events occur or for any of the following reasons: 
A.  Grantee by act or omission substantially violates any material term, condition, or provision of this franchise and shall fail or refuse to effect material compliance following the notice and opportunity to cure specified under subsection 24.01; or 
B.  Grantee knowingly or willingly attempts to evade any material provision of this franchise; or 
C.  Repeated and substantial violation or willful disregard of: 
(i)  Town's lawful ordinances and regulations related to the public rights-of-way; or 
(ii)  The customer service standards in exhibit A; or 
(iii)  The cable system technical performance requirements in subsections 12.01 and 12.02. 
D.  The occurrence of any event which may reasonably lead to the foreclosure or other similar judicial or non-judicial sale of all or any material part of the cable system; or 
E.  Grantee becomes insolvent or is adjudged bankrupt or all or any part of grantee's facilities are sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by grantee within 30 days from the date of such sale; provided, however, this shall not be an event of termination or cancellation in the event of bankruptcy proceeding and the trustee, receiver, or debtor in possession agrees in writing to be bound by the terms of this franchise; or 
F.  Grantee has been found by a court of law to have practiced any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under this franchise with the town, subscribers or potential subscribers. 
25.02  Material provisions. Material terms of this franchise include, but are not limited to: 
A.  The indemnification required by section 8. 
B.  The insurance required by subsection 9.01. 
C.  The channel capacity required by subsection 10.01. 
D.  The emergency standby power required by subsection 10.03, paragraph B. 
E.  The I-Net required in exhibit B. 
F.  The PEG channels as required by subsections 14.01 and 14.02. 
G.  The PEG capital fee required by subsection 14.10, paragraph b. 
H.  The EAS required by subsection 15.01. 
I.  Payment of franchise fees as required by subsection 18.01. 
J.  Nondiscrimination in rates and services as required by section 22. 
K.  Town approval of transfers and changes of control as required by subsections 26.01 and 26.02. 
25.03  Method of revocation. Should the town council determine, following the process set forth in subsections 24.01 and 24.02, that its selected course of action shall be to seek revocation of the franchise, the town shall give grantee written notice of such intent. The notice shall set forth the causes and reasons for the proposed revocation, shall advise grantee that it will be provided an opportunity to be heard by town regarding such proposed action before any such action is taken, and shall set forth the time, date, and place of the hearing. In no event shall such hearing be held less than 30 days following delivery of such notice to grantee. At the hearing, the grantee shall be entitled to all rights of due process consistent with the town procedures, including but not limited to the right to present evidence and the right to be represented by counsel. Any such revocation of this franchise shall be by ordinance. 
25.04  Grantee may appeal town's decision. The grantee may appeal the town's decision to revoke the franchise to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the town's decision de novo and to modify or reverse such decision as justice may require. Such appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within 60 days of the issuance of the determination of the town. 
SECTION 26  
26.0. - Assignment of franchise. 
26.01  Town approval of assignment required. This franchise shall be a privilege personal to the grantee and shall not be assigned or transferred, or otherwise encumbered, without the prior consent of the town. Two exceptions to the requirement of town consent are: 
A.  If such assignment or transfer is to an affiliate of comparable technical and financial capability as well as proven experience in managing and operating cable systems; or 
B.  For a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the grantee in the franchise or cable system in order to secure indebtedness. Transfer to an affiliate shall mandate notification from grantee concerning the transfer or assignment. 
C.  For all other requests by grantee to assign or transfer this franchise, grantee shall provide appropriate written notification pursuant to FCC regulations. Within 30 days of receiving the request for transfer, the town shall notify the grantee in writing of the information it requires to determine the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the transferee. If the town has not taken action on the grantee's request for transfer within 120 days after receiving such request, and provided the town has promptly received from grantee the information it requested in connection with the request, consent by the town shall be deemed given. The town may condition its consent to the transfer upon such terms and conditions reasonably related to the legal, technical and financial qualifications of the transferee. No assignment to any person shall be effective until the transferee has filed with the town an instrument in writing, duly executed, reciting the fact of such assignment, accepting the terms of this franchise, and agreeing to comply with all of the provisions hereof, subject to applicable law. 
26.02  Town approval of transfer of control required. The grantee shall promptly notify the town of any actual or proposed change in, or transfer of, or disposition or acquisition by any other person in control of the grantee. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the town shall have consented thereto provided that the town has acted within the time constraints required by law. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, disposition, or acquisition of control, the town may inquire into the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the prospective controlling party, but shall do so within 30 days of receipt of the requested transfer from the grantee. Grantee shall assist the town in such inquiry and will respond within ten days unless a longer time is reasonably necessary or allowed by law. 
SECTION 27  
27.0. - Failure of town to enforce franchise. 
27.01  No waiver of terms. The grantee shall not be excused from complying with each and all of the terms, conditions, and provisions of this franchise even though the town should upon one or more occasions fail to insist upon, require, or seek compliance with any such term, condition, or provision. 
SECTION 28  
28.0. - Service availability. 
28.01  Service availability. The grantee shall provide cable service throughout the entire franchise area, subject to the provisions below. 
28.02  Annexations. If the town annexes any contiguous territory which is being provided cable service by the grantee or its affiliates, the annexed area will be subject to the provisions of this franchise upon the effective date of the annexation; provided, however, that grantee shall be allowed a reasonable time under the circumstances to make any required modifications to the cable system, cable services, billing system, etc., as may be required to accommodate such change, and provided that if the area is serviced by an affiliate, a transfer of ownership of the cable system in that area to the grantee shall not be required by the town. If the annexed area is being provided comparable cable service by another provider, grantee shall have the right, but not the requirement, to extend its cable system to the annexed area. In the event that the annexed territory is contiguous and not being provided cable service by any provider, grantee agrees that it shall within 12 months extend its cable system into the newly annexed territory under the terms of subsection 28.03. In the event that the annexed area is not contiguous to the franchise area existing as of the effective date of this franchise, grantee shall not have the obligation to extend to such area. 
28.03  Extension policy. Within six months of a qualified request as described herein, grantee must extend and make cable service available to every lot or tract of land for which the owner or occupant thereof has requested cable service in all unserved areas having at least ten dwelling units constructed or planned for construction per 1,320 cable bearing strand feet or 25 dwelling units per cable bearing strand mile, as measured from the portion of the existing cable system which is to be extended. Extensions shall be at grantee's cost. For purposes of this section, "planned for construction" shall have the meaning of fully prepared lots. 
If more than 150 feet of distance lies between the nearest distribution cable and the point of connection of service to the property for which service is requested, the grantee may charge the potential subscriber non-standard installation charges as permitted by federal law. 
If the unserved area is a new underground development, grantee shall participate in joint trenching with the utilities installing service to the area, provided grantee is provided adequate notice and access to the trenches and is not otherwise prevented from participating due to conditions beyond its control. The ability of the grantee to participate in joint trenching shall not impact the grantee's requirement to provide extensions pursuant to this subsection. 
28.04  Contributions in aid of construction. In the event that potential subscribers request cable service in an area that does not meet the density requirements of subsection 28.03, the subscriber(s) will be given the alternative to provide a contribution in aid of construction of the cable system extension equal to three-fourths of the grantee's actual out-of-pocket costs to provide extension less than 1,320 cable bearing strand feet. That portion of any extension greater than 1,320 cable bearing feet shall be paid by the subscriber(s) at the grantee's actual out-of-pocket cost. In the event that any portion of the extension for which a subscriber has provided contribution in aid of construction ultimately meets the extension requirements in subsection 28.03, grantee shall reimburse all subscribers that have made such contributions in aid of construction, provided that such subscribers provide proof of the contribution in aid of construction to grantee. 
SECTION 29  
29.0. - Valuation. 
29.01  Purchase price of cable system. If the franchise is revoked for cause and the parties agree that the town may purchase the cable system, the town may purchase the cable system at an equitable price. If renewal of the franchise is lawfully denied and the parties agree that the town may purchase the cable system, the town may purchase the cable system at fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. Should the parties fail to agree upon the then current fair market value, the same shall be determined in an appropriate proceeding filed in any court having jurisdiction. 
SECTION 30  
30.0. - Recourse, understanding, and construction. 
30.01  Requirements and enforcement. Except as expressly provided herein, grantee shall have no monetary recourse whatsoever against town of any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of this franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by town or because of the lack of town's authority to grant all or any part of this franchise. 
30.02  Grantee's understanding. Grantee expressly acknowledges that in accepting this franchise, it relied solely upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of town to grant this franchise and that grantee was not induced to accept this franchise by any understanding, promise, or other statement, verbal or written, by or on behalf of town or by any third person concerning any term or condition not expressed herein. 
30.03  Construction of franchise. By acceptance of this franchise, grantee acknowledges that it has carefully read the provisions hereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meanings of such. 
SECTION 31  
31.0. - Acceptance of franchise. 
31.01  Method of acceptance. Within 30 days from the effective date of this franchise, grantee shall file with the town secretary a written statement in the following form signed in its name and behalf: 
"To the Honorable Mayor and Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas: For itself, its successors, and assigns, Comcast of California/Colorado/Illinois/Indiana/Texas, Inc., D/B/A Comcast Cable of California/Colorado/Illinois/Indiana/Texas, Inc., duly authorized to do business in the State of Texas, hereby accepts the attached Franchise and agrees to be bound by all of its terms, conditions, and provisions, subject to applicable law. 
COMCAST OF CALIFORNIA/COLORADO/ ILLINOIS/INDIANA/TEXAS, INC., D/B/A COMCAST CABLE OF CALIFORNIA/COLORADO/ ILLINOIS/INDIANA/TEXAS, INC. 
By: ___________ 
Its: ___________ 
Dated this the ________ day of ________, 2004." 
31.02  Acceptance of franchise not a waiver. Acceptance of this franchise by grantee shall not constitute a waiver by it of any of its rights.  
32.0. - Severability. 
32.01  Provisions severable. If any provision, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this franchise is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this franchise. It is the intent of town in adopting this franchise that no portion or provision thereof shall become inoperative or fail by reason of any invalidity or unconstitutionality of any other portion or provision, and to this end all provisions; of this franchise are declared to be severable. 
SECTION 33  
33.0. - Conflicts. 
33.01  Conflicts. All ordinances and provisions of the town that are in conflict with this franchise shall be and same are hereby repealed, and all ordinances and provisions of ordinances of said town not so repealed are retained in full force and effect. 
PASSED, APPROVED, AND ADOPTED ON FIRST READING THE 19TH DAY OF JULY, 2004. 
PASSED, APPROVED, AND ADOPTED ON SECOND READING THE 2ND DAY OF AUGUST, 2004. 
APPROVED: ___________ Jody A. Smith, Mayor 
ATTEST: Paula Lawrence, Town Secretary  
EXHIBIT A 
 
1.1.A. - Customer service standards. 
1)  Section 1: Definitions. 
A.  Normal operating conditions: Those service conditions which are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, labor strikes or slowdowns, telephone network outages, interruption of electric power service which is not a direct result of the grantee's actions, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which ordinarily are within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate adjustments, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, backup power during power outages, changes in billing cycles, changes in channel line-ups that are within grantee's control, construction, rebuilds, maintenance (including repairs related thereto) and/or upgrade of the cable system. 
B.  Outage: A service interruption affecting multiple subscribers in a contiguous area that has the same source problem. 
C.  Service call: The action taken by the grantee to correct a service interruption affecting an individual subscriber. 
D.  Service interruption: The loss of picture or sound on one or more channels. 
E.  Standard installation: Installations where the length of the drop is up to 150 feet.  
Section 2. - Telephone availability. 
A.  The grantee shall maintain a toll-free number to respond to all calls and inquiries from subscribers in the franchise area and/or town residents regarding cable service. Grantee representatives trained and qualified to answer questions related to cable service in the franchise area must be available to receive requests for service calls or report outages 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and other inquiries at least 45 hours per week, including some evening and weekend hours. Grantee representatives shall identify themselves by name when answering this number. 
B.  The grantee's telephone numbers shall be listed, with appropriate description (e.g. administration, customer service, billing, repair, etc.), in the directory published by the local telephone company or companies serving the franchise area. 
C.  In the event that the grantee chooses to use an automated response unit ("ARU") or a voice response unit ("VRU") to distribute calls, the system shall have as a first tier menu option (not including a routing option for foreign language), an option "for all other inquiries." If a foreign language routing option is provided, and the subscriber does not enter an option, the menu will default to the first tier menu of English options. 
After the first tier menu (not including a foreign language routing option) has run through twice, if customers do not select any option, the ARU or VRU will forward the call to a queue for a live representative. The grantee may reasonably substitute this requirement with another method of handling calls from customers who do not have touch-tone telephones. 
The total elapsed time between when a subscriber's call is first answered by an ARU or VRU to the end of the last tier menu shall not be longer than 90 seconds. For purposes of this subsection, the "last tier menu" is the last tier before the subscriber is routed to a live representative, or specific information is given to the subscriber, such as instructions for troubleshooting or directions to an office. 
The town may review the options provided to callers and recommend to the grantee that additional options be provided. The grantee shall consider the town's recommendations. 
D.  Under normal operating conditions, calls received by the grantee shall be answered within 30 seconds after the subscriber has selected their final menu option. The grantee shall meet this standard for 90 percent of the calls it receives, as measured on a calendar quarter basis. Measurement of this standard shall include all calls received by the grantee, whether they are answered by a live representative, automated attendant, or abandoned before completion. 
If the grantee does not meet the 90 percent standard described in this paragraph D. during any calendar quarter, liquidated damages may be assessed by the town against the grantee as follows: 
• Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 85 percent and less than 90 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $250.00. 
• Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 75 percent and less than 85 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $750.00. 
• Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 65 percent and less than 75 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $2,500.00. 
• Any quarter where the grantee performs less than 65 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $5,000.00. 
For any consecutive quarter(s) in which the grantee performs at a level below 90 percent, the grantee shall pay the town the amount listed above for the most recent quarter, plus the amount paid to the town for the previous quarter. For example, if the grantee performs at 79 percent one quarter and 60 percent in the next quarter, the grantee shall pay the town $2,500.00 for the first quarter and $7,500.00 [$5,000.00 for the most recent quarter plus $2,500.00 for the previous quarter] for the second quarter. 
E.  Under normal operating conditions, callers to the grantee shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time during any calendar quarter. 
F.  Not more than 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter, the grantee shall report to the town the following for all call centers receiving calls from subscribers except for temporary telephone numbers set up for national promotions: 
• Total number of calls received by the grantee 
• Number of calls answered by these categories: live representative, automated attendant, and abandoned 
• Number of calls answered within 30 seconds 
• Percentage of calls answered within 30 seconds 
• Percentage of time all trunks were busy 
The material substance of the report shall be in a form reasonably acceptable to the town. 
If the town does not receive the quarterly calls report when due, the town shall give notice to the grantee. The grantee shall be assessed liquidated damages in the amount of $50.00 per day for every day following receipt of the notice that the report is not provided to the town. The grantee shall not be assessed liquidated damages for failure to report on statistics which cannot be produced for reasons outside of its control, provided that the grantee supplies an explanation to the town as to why the statistics required herein could not be produced. 
G.  The grantee shall notify the town's designee as promptly as possible, by any available means, whenever there is a situation that prevents all subscribers from being able to reach the grantee by telephone. 
H.  At the grantee's option, the measurements and reporting above may be changed from calendar quarters to billing or accounting quarters. The grantee shall notify the town of such a change at least 30 days in advance of any implementation.  
Section 3. - Service centers. 
A.  The grantee shall provide the town with a written list of service centers and hours of operation for each location that subscribers can visit for any of the following functions, and notify the town of any subsequent changes in either location or hours 30 days in advance. Such locations shall be open at least 40 hours during the week, including some evening and weekend hours. 
• To accept payments 
• To exchange or accept return of grantee-provided equipment 
• To schedule technical calls and delivery and pick up of converter boxes, remotes and similar grantee-supplied equipment from subscribers 
• To answer subscriber inquiries  
Section 4. - Installations and service appointments. 
A.  All installations will be in accordance with FCC rules, including but not limited to, appropriate grounding, connection of equipment to ensure reception of cable service, and the provision of required consumer information and literature to adequately inform the subscriber about the utilization of the grantee-supplied equipment and cable services. 
B.  Under normal operating conditions, standard installations shall be performed within seven days after an order has been placed, except for those subscribers who specifically request an installation date later than seven days after order placement. 
The company shall meet this standard for 90 percent of the standard installations it performs, as measured on a calendar quarter basis, excepting out customer requests for connection later than seven days after order placement. 
If the grantee does not meet the 90 percent standard described in this paragraph B. during any calendar quarter, liquidated damages may be assessed by the town against the grantee as follows: 
• Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 85 percent and less than 90 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $250.00. 
• Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 75 percent and less than 85 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $750.00. 
• Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 65 percent and less than 75 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $2,500.00. 
• Any quarter where the grantee performs less than 65 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $5,000.00. 
For any consecutive quarter(s) in which the grantee performs at a level below 90 percent, the grantee shall pay the town the amount listed above for the most recent quarter, plus the amount paid to the town for the previous quarter. For example, if the grantee performs at 79 percent one quarter and 60 percent in the next quarter, the grantee shall pay the town $2,500.00 for the first quarter and $7,500.00 [$5,000.00 for the most recent quarter plus $2,500.00 for the previous quarter] for the second quarter. 
In addition, any individual subscriber who does not have their standard installation completed within the seven-day period shall be entitled to receive a free standard installation upon request, except for those subscribers who request installation later than seven days after order placement. 
C.  The grantee shall provide the town with a report within 30 days following the end of each calendar quarter, noting the following: 
• Number of total standard installations completed for the quarter, excluding those requested outside of the seven-day period by the subscriber. 
• Number of standard installations completed within the seven-day period. 
• Number of standard installations not completed within the seven-day period. 
• Percentage of standard installations completed within the seven-day period, excluding those requested outside of the seven-day period by the subscriber. 
At the grantee's option, the measurements and reporting above may be changed from calendar quarters to billing or accounting quarters. The grantee shall notify the town of such a change not less than 30 days in advance. 
D.  The grantee will offer subscribers "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities of a maximum four-hour scheduled time block between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. except during months where available light does not permit appointments after 6:00 p.m. At the grantee's discretion, the grantee may offer subscribers appointments other than these four-hour time blocks if agreeable to the subscriber. The grantee may offer to schedule subscriber appointments for a specific time and shall schedule the subscriber to be the first call of the day or last call of the day if requested by the subscriber and warranted by the circumstances. The grantee shall also perform some service calls outside of the hours specified above in the evenings and on weekends. 
E.  At the request of the subscriber, the grantee will call the subscriber prior to an installation or service call appointment. The call shall be made by the grantee at the approximate time and to the telephone number requested by the subscriber. 
F.  At the time this franchise was entered into, grantee was voluntarily participating in the industry "on-time guarantee" program. Under the terms of that program, if the grantee does not arrive for an installation or service call appointment within the scheduled time frame agreed to with the subscriber, the subscriber is entitled to receive either a free standard installation in the event of an installation appointment, or a $20.00 credit in the event of a missed service call appointment. Calling a subscriber during the appointment window does not negate the subscriber's entitlement to credit for a missed appointment. The grantee will participate in this program and reserves the right to substitute another customer service program for the "on-time guarantee" at its discretion, provided that the subscriber benefits are reasonably comparable to those provided by the current program. 
G.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after 6:00 p.m. on the business day prior to the day of the scheduled appointment. 
H.  If the grantee's representative is running late for an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the grantee will document an effort to contact the subscriber directly. If, however, the subscriber is unavailable at the time the contact attempt is made, the grantee will attempt at least a second documented contact during the previously agreed upon appointment window or before the specifically scheduled time. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is mutually agreeable. 
I.  If it is necessary to place a temporary drop on the ground, the grantee shall bury the temporary drop within ten business days, under normal operating conditions. The ten-day period shall be extended for days that the grantee is unable to bury the drop due to unfavorable weather conditions or is unable to gain access to a temporary drop located on private property. If grantee fails to bury the drop within this authorized time period, grantee shall pay the town $100.00 a day for each day that a drop remains on the ground.  
Section 5. - Service interruptions and outages. 
A.  The grantee shall make repairs promptly, and interrupt cable service only as necessary and for the shortest time period possible. Unless otherwise required by law or approved by the town, the grantee will not schedule routine testing or maintenance which would cause a service interruption or outage on Friday, Saturday or Sunday night. 
B.  The grantee shall promptly notify the town of any significant outage of the cable system. For the purposes of this section, a significant outage of the cable system shall mean any service interruption lasting at least four continuous hours that affects at least ten percent of the subscribers in the franchise area. 
C.  The grantee shall exercise its best efforts to limit any outage for the purpose of maintaining, repairing, or constructing the cable system. Except in an emergency or other situation necessitating a more expedited or alternative notification procedure, the grantee may schedule an outage for a period of more than four hours during any 24-hour period only after the town and each affected subscriber in the town have been given 15 days' prior notice of the proposed outage. 
D.  Technicians employed by the grantee who are capable of responding to outages must be available to respond 24 hours a day, seven days per week. 
E.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee must respond to a call or written notice from a subscriber regarding a service interruption within 24 hours. The grantee must begin actions to correct all other cable service problems the next business day after notification by the subscriber or the town of a cable service problem. 
F.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee shall complete service calls within 72 hours after being notified of a service interruption, not including situations where the subscriber is not reasonably available for a service call to correct the service interruption within the 72-hour period. 
G.  The grantee shall meet the standard in paragraph F. of this section for 90 percent of the service calls it completes, as measured on a quarterly basis. 
If the grantee fails to meet this standard during any calendar quarter, liquidated damages may be assessed by the town against the grantee as follows: 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 85 [percent] and less than 90 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $250.00. 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 75 percent and less than 85 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $750.00. 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 65 percent and less than 75 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $2,500.00. 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs less than 65 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $5,000.00. 
For any consecutive quarter(s) in which the grantee performs at a level below 90 percent, the grantee shall pay the town the amount listed above for the most recent quarter, plus the amount paid to the town for the previous quarter. For example, if the grantee performs at 79 percent one quarter and 60 percent in the next quarter, the grantee shall pay the town $2,500.00 for the first quarter and $7,500.00 [$5,000.00 for the most recent quarter plus $2,500.00 for the previous quarter] for the second quarter. 
H.  The grantee shall provide the town with a report within 30 days following the end of each calendar quarter, noting the following: 
• Number of total service calls completed for the quarter, not including service calls where the subscriber was reasonably unavailable for a service call within the 72-hour period. 
• Number of service calls completed within the 72-hour period. 
• Percentage of service calls completed within the 72-hour period, not including service calls where the subscriber was reasonably unavailable for a service call within the 72-hour period 
• At the grantee's option, the measurements and reporting above may be changed from calendar quarters to billing or accounting quarters. The grantee shall notify the town of such a change at least 30 days in advance. 
I.  Within 30 days following the end of each calendar year, grantee shall provide a report of all service calls for the year by category. 
J.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee shall provide credit upon subscriber request to affected subscriber(s) when there is an outage or service interruption of all channels for a period of four consecutive hours or more. The credit for such an outage shall equal, at a minimum, a proportionate amount of the affected subscriber(s) current monthly bill. In order to qualify for the credit, the subscriber must promptly report the problem and allow the grantee to verify the outage if requested by the grantee. 
K.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee shall provide a credit upon subscriber request to any subscriber experiencing an outage or service interruption of any specific cable service or channel for a period of four consecutive hours or more. The credit shall equal, at a minimum, a proportionate amount of the affected cable services. In order to qualify for the credit, the subscriber must promptly report the problem and allow the grantee to verify the outage if requested by the grantee. 
L.  Under normal operating conditions, if an outage affects all video programming cable services in an area which serves more than ten percent of total grantee subscribers in the franchise area, for more than 24 consecutive hours, the grantee shall issue an automatic credit to the affected subscribers in the amount of the value of basic plus expanded basic service for the proportionate time the cable service was out. Such credit will be reflected on subscriber billing statements within 45 days following the outage. Such credit under this provision does not negate the subscriber's right to request additional credit under items J. and K. herein.  
Section 6. - Customer complaints. 
A.  The grantee shall maintain a written log or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction in printed form, of all cable-related subscriber contacts which result in a service call. Such log shall, at a minimum, list the date and time of such contact, the nature of the complaint, and when and what actions were taken by the grantee in response thereto. Such log shall be kept at the grantee's office in or near the franchise area, for a period of at least three years and shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by town upon request, subject to section 631 of the Cable Act regarding subscriber privacy. 
Additionally, the grantee shall maintain a written or electronic log of every subscriber complaint referred by the town, including the dates, times and detailed information related to the complaint and resolution. 
If the town receives a pattern of complaints from subscribers which indicates a recurring problem, town may require the grantee to maintain a manual or electronic log of the problem being tracked until such time as the calls to the town are reasonably reduced. 
B.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee shall resolve subscriber complaints referred by the town within 72 hours. The grantee shall notify the town of those matters that necessitate an excess of 72 hours to resolve, but those matters must be finally resolved within ten days of the initial complaint. The town may require reasonable documentation to be provided by the grantee to substantiate the request for additional time to resolve the problem. If the grantee fails to resolve a complaint within the required 72 hours (or extended period), the grantee shall pay to the town $100.00 dollars per day for each day the complaint is not resolved within the specified time frame. 
For purposes of this subsection, "resolve" means that the grantee shall perform those actions which, in the normal course of business, are necessary to respond to the subscriber's problem. 
C.  The grantee's customer service representatives shall have the authority to provide credit for interrupted cable service or any of the other credits, to waive fees, and to schedule service appointments. Any difficulties that cannot be resolved by the customer service representative shall be referred to the appropriate supervisor who shall contact the customer within four hours and resolve in accordance with this section.  
Section 7. - Billing. 
A.  Subscriber bills must be itemized, in accordance with cable services purchased by subscribers and related equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, credits, and late charges. If the grantee chooses to itemize franchise fees and/or other governmentally imposed fees as a separate line item(s), such fees must be shown in accordance with applicable law. The grantee shall maintain records of the date and place of mailing of bills and upon request shall certify in writing to town the date of mailing of each group of bills. 
B.  Every subscriber with a current account balance sending payment directly to grantee shall be given at least 20 days from the date statements are mailed to the subscriber until the payment due date. Automatic withdrawals for payment shall be performed in accordance with Uniform Commercial Code. 
C.  Within one year of the effective date of the franchise, to the extent that the grantee chooses to bill in advance for cable services, every subscriber with a current account balance sending payment directly to the grantee shall be given at least 15 days from the first day of the billing period until the payment due date. The billing period is the time period for which cable services are being billed. For example, if the customer's billing period is from the first to the thirty-first of the month, the due date shall not be earlier than the fifteenth day of the month. 
D.  A specific due date shall be listed on the bill of every subscriber whose account is current. Delinquent accounts may receive a bill that lists the due date as "upon receipt"; however, the current portion of that bill shall not be considered past due except in accordance with B. and C. above. 
E.  Any subscriber who, in good faith, disputes all or part of any bill shall have the option of withholding the disputed amount without disconnect or late fees being assessed until the dispute is resolved, provided that: 
* The subscriber pays all undisputed charges; 
* The subscriber provides notification of the dispute to grantee within five days of the due date; and 
* The subscriber cooperates in determining the accuracy and/or appropriateness of the charges in dispute. 
It shall be within the grantee's sole discretion to determine when the dispute has been resolved; however, the town has the right to determine if the grantee has met its obligations to the subscriber under this subsection. 
F.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee shall investigate and resolve all billing complaints received from subscribers within five business days of receipt of the complaint if the dispute is regarding charges that are no greater than six months old, or within 15 business days if the dispute involves charges that are more than six months old. 
G.  Subscriber bills from the grantee shall include the name, address and telephone number of the appropriate regulatory agencies, including the town. The town shall have the opportunity to approve the name, address and telephone number of the town that appears on the bills. 
H.  The grantee shall provide a telephone number and address on the bill for subscribers to contact the grantee. 
I.  The grantee shall forward a copy of any billing inserts or other mailing sent to subscribers to the town upon request. 
J.  The grantee shall provide all subscribers with the option of paying for cable service by (1) cash, (2) check, (3) an automatic payment plan, where the amount of the bill is automatically deducted from a checking account designated by the subscriber, or (4) by using a major credit card, as determined by the grantee, on a preauthorized basis. 
The town recognizes that only option (4) above is available as of the effective date of this franchise for subscription to the grantee's cable internet service, but that the grantee is taking steps to make options (1) through (3) available in the near future. The town reserves the right to enforce the requirement above for the cable internet service if the grantee has not voluntarily made available the other payment options within 18 months of the effective date of this franchise.  
Section 8. - Deposits, refunds and credits. 
A.  The grantee may require refundable deposits from subscribers with (1) a poor credit or poor payment history, (2) who refuse to provide credit history information to the grantee, or (3) who rent subscriber equipment from the grantee, so long as such deposits are applied on a nondiscriminatory basis. The maximum deposit the grantee may charge subscribers with poor credit or poor payment history or who refuse to provide credit information is the average of a typical subscriber's bill over the most recent six-month period. The maximum deposit the grantee may charge for subscriber equipment is the cost (not depreciated value) of the equipment that the grantee would need to purchase to replace the equipment rented to the subscriber. 
B.  The grantee shall pay simple annual interest at five percent on deposits collected for equipment that are unrelated to poor credit or poor payment history if the deposit is held by the grantee for a period in excess of one year, and the subscriber's account is current at the time the deposit is refunded. The grantee shall pay interest on other deposits if required by state law or other generally applicable law. 
C.  Under normal operating conditions, refund checks will be issued within 45 days following the resolution of the event giving rise to the refund. 
D.  Credits for cable service will be issued no later than the subscriber's next bill which is printed following the determination that a credit is warranted, and the credit is approved and processed. Such approval and processing shall not be unreasonably delayed. 
E.  Bills shall be considered paid when appropriate payment is received by the grantee or its authorized agent. Appropriate time considerations shall be included in the grantee's collection procedures to assure that payments due have been received before late notices or termination notices are sent.  
Section 9. - Rates, fees and charges. 
A.  The grantee shall not, except to the extent expressly permitted by law, impose any fee or charge for service calls to a subscriber's premises to perform any repair or maintenance work related to grantee equipment necessary to receive cable service, except where any such problem which was caused by a negligent or wrongful act of the subscriber (including, but not limited to a situation in which the subscriber reconnects grantee equipment incorrectly), or by the failure of the subscriber to take reasonable precautions to protect the grantee's equipment (for example, a dog chew). 
B.  Any late fee that grantee assesses on subscribers in the town for delinquent payment shall not exceed the prevailing late fee assessed by grantee or its affiliates on cable service within the entire Dallas/Fort Worth, Texas, metropolitan area. The grantee shall provide written advance notice to subscribers of the possible assessment of a late fee, including the amount of the late fee, on bills or by separate notice, and upon request by the town the grantee will provide to the Town written explanation of any change to the late fee. 
C.  No late fee may be assessed on cable services until one month following the date of the bill on which the charges first appeared. The amount of the late fee shall be subject to any applicable federal, state or local consumer protection laws or other lawful and applicable regulations.  
Section 10. - Disconnection /denial of service. 
A.  The grantee shall not terminate cable service for nonpayment of a delinquent account unless the grantee provides a notice of the delinquency and impending termination at least 15 days prior to the proposed termination. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the subscriber to whom the cable service is billed. This notice shall not be given until five days after the original due date for the charges. The notice of delinquency and impending termination may be part of a billing statement. 
B.  In the event that cable service is terminated pursuant to a bulk contract and the grantee is permitted to enter into cable service arrangements with individual dwellings previously serviced under such contract, the grantee shall not hold such individual subscriber(s) liable for any nonpayment or underpayments related specifically to the contract. Subscribers may be held accountable for payment for cable services subscribed to during the period of the contract, which were in addition to the cable services provided pursuant to the contract. 
C.  Cable service terminated in error must be restored without charge within 24 hours of notice. If subscriber was billed for the period during which cable Service was terminated in error, an automatic credit shall be issued to subscriber if the service interruption was reported by the subscriber. The amount of the automatic credit shall be in accordance with section 5, paragraph J. of these customer service standards. 
D.  Subject to section 23 of this franchise, the grantee shall furnish and maintain cable services to each person who makes a request to receive any grantee-offered cable service. Nothing in these standards shall limit the right of the grantee to deny cable service for nonpayment of previously provided cable services, refusal to pay any required deposit, theft of cable service, damage to the grantee's equipment, or abusive and/or threatening behavior toward the grantee's employees or representatives. 
E.  No period of notice prior to requested termination of service can be required of subscribers by the grantee. No charge shall be imposed upon the subscriber for or related to total disconnection of cable service, or for any cable service delivered after the effective date of the disconnect request (unless there is a delay in returning grantee equipment). If the subscriber fails to specify an effective date for disconnection, the subscriber shall not be responsible for cable service received after the day following the date the disconnect request is received by the grantee. For purposes of this subsection, the term "disconnect" shall include subscribers who elect to cease receiving cable service from the grantee and to receive cable service or other multichannel video service from another person or entity. 
F.  Upon the termination of cable service and upon request by the subscriber, the grantee shall either entirely remove its drop or secure the drop in a method reasonably acceptable to town.  
Section 11. - Communications with subscribers. 
A.  All grantee personnel, contractors and subcontractors contacting subscribers or potential subscribers outside of the office of the grantee shall wear a clearly visible identification card bearing their name and photograph. The grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. In addition, all grantee representatives shall wear appropriate clothing while working at a customer's premises. Every service vehicle of the grantee, its contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly identified as such to the public. Specifically, grantee vehicles shall have the grantee's logo and phone number plainly visible; those of contractors and subcontractors working for the grantee shall have the contractor's/subcontractor's name and phone number plus markings (such as a magnetic door sign) indicating they are under contract to the grantee. 
B.  All contact with a subscriber or potential subscriber by a person representing the grantee shall be conducted in a courteous manner. 
C.  The grantee shall send annual written notices to all subscribers informing them that any complaints or inquiries not satisfactorily handled by the grantee may be referred to the town. Such notification shall be either: 
* A separate document included with a billing statement; 
* Included on the portion of the monthly bill that is to be retained by the subscriber; or 
* A separate mailing. 
D.  The grantee shall notify subscribers in writing and as soon as possible of any pricing changes or additional charges (excluding temporary marketing on sales discounts or offers) and/or any changes in cable services, including channel line-ups. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if within the control of the grantee, and the grantee shall provide a copy of the notice to the town including how and when the notice was given to subscribers. 
E.  The grantee shall provide written information to all subscribers about each of the following areas at the time of installation of cable service, and thereafter at least annually to all subscribers, at any time upon request, and at least 30 days prior to making significant changes in the information required by this subsection, if within the control of the grantee: 
* Products and cable service offered. 
* Prices and options for cable services and conditions of subscription to cable services. Prices shall include those for cable service options, equipment rental, program guides, installation, downgrades, late fees and other fees charged by the grantee related to cable service. 
* Installation and maintenance policies including, when applicable, information regarding the subscriber's in-home wiring and/or home run wiring rights during the period cable service is being provided. 
* Instructions about how to use the cable services, including procedures and options for ordering pay-per-view services, if offered. 
* Channel positions of cable services offered on the cable system. 
* Complaint procedures, including the name, address and telephone number of the town, but with a notice advising the subscriber to initially contact the grantee about all complaints and questions. 
* Procedures for requesting cable service credit. 
* The availability of a parental control device. 
* Grantee practices and procedures for protecting against invasions of privacy. 
* The telephone number of the grantee's service center to which complaints may be reported. 
* When applicable, the grantee's community unit identifier as specified by the FCC. 
* Other information relating to the provision of cable services pursuant to this franchise in format and substance as from time to time requested by the town and agreed to by the grantee. The grantee shall promptly notify the town if they are unable to agree and shall propose viable alternatives. 
A copy of notices required in this paragraph E. will be given to the town at least 15 days prior to distribution to subscribers if the reason for notice is due to a change that is within the control of grantee and as soon as possible if not within the control of grantee. 
F.  Notices of changes in rates shall indicate the new rate and the amount the rate has increased or decreased from the current rate. Specific words such as "increase" or "decrease" must be used to describe the changes. 
G.  Notices of changes of cable services and/or channel locations shall include a description of the new cable service, the specific dial location, and the hours of operation of that cable service if the cable service is only offered on a part-time basis. In addition, should the dial location, hours of operation, or existence of other cable services be affected by the introduction of a new cable service, such information must be included in the notice. 
H.  Every notice of termination of cable service shall include all of the following information: 
* The name and address of the subscriber whose account is delinquent. 
* The amount of the delinquency. 
* The date by which payment is required in order to avoid termination of cable service. 
* The telephone number for the grantee where the subscriber can receive additional information about their account and discuss the pending termination. 
I.  The grantee shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that employees that speak Spanish and English are available to assist subscribers and potential subscribers as requested.  
Section 12. - Protection of subscriber privacy. 
A.  The grantee shall comply fully with all applicable state and federal laws relating to the protection of subscriber privacy.  
Section 13. - Handicapped access. 
A.  The grantee shall comply with all rules and regulations pertaining to the Americans with Disabilities Act.  
Section 14. - Amendments. 
A.  These standards may be amended from time to time upon mutual agreement of the town and the grantee. 
Exhibit B 
OPTICAL FIBER CABLE PLANT AGREEMENT 
This optical fiber cable plant agreement ("agreement") is made and entered into by and between the Town of Flower Mound, Texas ("town"), a home-rule municipality, and Comcast of California/Colorado/Illinois/Indiana/Texas, Inc., d/b/a Comcast Cable of California/Colorado/Illinois/Indiana/Texas, Inc. ("company"). 
Section 1. Construction of optical fiber cable plant. In accordance with the CATV franchise agreement, herein incorporated by reference, between the town and the company, company shall construct an optical fiber cable plant according to the specifications set forth in this agreement and attachment A of this agreement. Company shall construct this cable plant in accordance with generally accepted industry standards to include, but not limited to, underground cable depth, protection, handhold access and service loops; aerial cable height, pole attachment, protection, and service loops; and end to end testing of each strand of optical fiber cable in both directions for minimal noise and loss characteristics. Company shall deliver to town a written documentation consisting of, but not limited to, detailed as-built cable route drawings and per strand optical test results. 
Section 2. Ownership of optical fiber cable plant. All optical fiber cabling and equipment supplied by the company under this agreement shall constitute the town's optical fiber cable Plant and shall remain the property of the town. The town shall maintain, at the town's cost and expense, any equipment, which is part of the town's optical fiber cable plant. The town reserves the right to upgrade any or all of the town's optical fiber cable plant at the town's cost, and the company shall be responsive and timely in providing support to the town for such upgrades. 
Section 3. Company's cable facilities. Exclusive of any fiber currently being provided or used in connection with the existing cable television franchise between the parties, company shall dedicate one strand of single mode optical fiber for the purpose of providing the connections and interconnections contemplated by this agreement. Company's single strand of single mode optical fiber cable interconnecting the company's network nodes specified in attachment A shall constitute the company's cable facilities. Company hereby grants the town the right to use the company's cable facilities herein described at mutually agreeable fees to the town. 
Section 4. Maintenance of optical fiber. Company shall repair, restore, reconstruct, move or in any and all other ways maintain at no cost to the town all aspects of the town's optical fiber cable plant herein described, including the optical fiber cable part of the company's cable facilities. Company shall perform such maintenance and repair of the optical fiber cable portion of the company's cable facilities upon request by the town. Company shall perform, without request from the town, the maintenance and repair of the optical fiber cable portion of the company's cable facilities as necessary to conform to any federal or state technical and non-technical requirements. At a minimum, company shall respond to town requests for repair or maintenance within 24 hours and shall use best efforts to complete the required repair or maintenance within 48 hours after receipt of the request from the town. Under catastrophic circumstances affecting the town's optical fiber cable plant, the company's cable facilities and the residential cable system, company shall restore the optical fiber cable portion of the company's cable facilities and the town's optical fiber cable plant within 24 hours of restoring the same area of the affected residential cable system. The system shall be deemed restored when signal quality parameters and signal amplitude loss measurements in both directions for each strand of optical fiber cable have been demonstrated to be within generally accepted optical fiber cable industry standards and available in writing upon request by the town. 
Section 5. Removal/disconnection/reconnection of town equipment. The town reserves the right to disconnect any or all of the town's optical fiber cable plant from the company's cable facilities at any time and for any reason. The town reserves the right to operate independently any or all portions of the town's optical fiber cable plant from the company's cable facilities. The town reserves the rights to extend, interconnect, or in any way use the town's optical fiber cable plant including, but not limited to, interconnect to any or all other Town of Flower Mound facilities. If the town chooses to disconnect any or all of the town's optical fiber cable plant from company's cable facilities, company's obligation to provide the company's cable facilities shall continue, and the town may reconnect any or all of the town's optical fiber cable plant to company's cable facilities at any time. The town reserves the right to disconnect permanently any or all of the town's optical fiber cable plant from the company's cable facilities, at which time the town shall no longer be obligated to pay the recurring monthly fee for the company's cable facilities from which the town has disconnected. 
Section 6. Time for completion of construction and installation. The construction and installation specified herein to be performed by company shall be completed by company within 120 days after receipt of any required construction or other permits. It shall be the obligation of the company to obtain any permits necessary to perform its obligations under this agreement. The company shall provide and construct the facilities described in attachment A. All such facilities shall become the property of the town. 
Section 7. Use of company's cable facilities. The town's exclusive right to use the company's cable facilities required by this agreement shall exist at any time the company, or any successor or transferee, is providing cable television services within the town whether under the current franchise, a renewal or otherwise. 
Section 8. Liability for damages. Neither party shall be responsible for damages to or maintenance of the fiber and equipment of the other, unless the damage is caused or the maintenance necessitated by the action of the other party. 
Section 9. Application to successors and assigns. all of the provisions of this agreement shall apply to the company, its successors, and assigns. 
Section 10. Remedies for breach of agreement. In the event either party materially breaches any term or condition of this agreement, which has not been cured within 30 days after written notice of same from the aggrieved party, each party shall have the right at that party's option, to pursue any and all remedies available to it by law or in equity. 
Section 11. Address for notices. Any notice required or desired to be given from one party to the other party to this agreement shall be in writing and shall be given and shall be deemed to have been served and received (whether actually received or not) if (i) delivered in person to the address set forth below; (ii) deposited in an official depository under the regular care and custody of the United States Postal Service located within the confines of the United States of America and sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, and addressed to such party at the address hereinafter specified; or (iii) delivered to such party by courier receipted delivery. Either party may designate another address within the confines of the continental United States of America for notice, but until written notice of such change is actually received by the other party, the last address of such party designated for notice shall remain such party's address for notice. 
The notices or responses to the town shall be addressed as follows: 
Town Manager 
Town Of Flower Mound 
2121 Cross Timbers Road 
Town of Flower Mound, Texas 75028 
The notices or responses to the company shall be addressed as follows: 
Comcast of California/Colorado/Illinois/Indiana/Texas, Inc., d/b/a Comcast Cable of California/Colorado/Illinois/Indiana/Texas, Inc. 
2951 Kinwest Pkwy. 
Irving, Texas 75063 
Attn: Franchising & Government Affairs 
Section 12. Duty to act in a timely manner. In any action by the town or the company that is mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious, and timely manner. 
Section 13. Attorney's fees. Should either party to this agreement commence legal proceedings against the other to enforce the terms and provisions of this agreement, the party losing in such legal proceedings shall pay the reasonable attorneys' fees and expenses (including, but not limited to expert witness fees and deposition expenses) of the party prevailing in such legal proceedings. 
Section 14. No assignment. Neither party shall have the right to assign that party's interest in this agreement without the prior written consent of the other party. Any approval by the town of a transfer or change of control under the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement shall constitute such written consent. 
Section 15. Severability. If any term or provision of this agreement is held to be illegal, invalid or unenforceable, the legality, validity or enforceability of the remaining terms or provisions of this agreement shall not be affected thereby. 
Section 16. Waiver. Either town or the company shall have the right to waive any requirement contained in this agreement, which is intended for the waiving party's benefit, but, except as otherwise provided herein, such waiver shall be effective only if in writing executed by the party for whose benefit such requirement is intended. No waiver of any breach or violation of any term of this agreement shall be deemed or construed to constitute a waiver of any other breach or violation, whether concurrent or subsequent, and whether of the same or of a different type of breach or violation. 
Section 17. Governing law; venue. This agreement and all of the transactions contemplated herein shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas. The provisions and obligations of this agreement are performable in Denton County, Texas, such that exclusive venue for any action arising out of this agreement shall be in Dallas County, Texas. 
Section 18. Paragraph headings; construction. The paragraph headings contained in this agreement are for convenience only and shall in no way enlarge or limit the scope or meaning of the various and several paragraphs hereof. Both parties have participated in the negotiation and preparation of this agreement and this agreement shall not be construed either more or less strongly against or for either party. 
Section 19. Binding effect. Except as limited herein, the terms and provisions of this agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto and their respective heirs, devisees, personal and legal representatives, successors and assigns. 
Section 20. Gender. Within this agreement, words of any gender shall be held and construed to include any other gender, and words in the singular number shall be held and construed to include the plural, unless the context otherwise requires. 
Section 21. Counterparts. This agreement may be executed in multiple counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original, and all of which shall constitute but one and the same instrument. 
Section 22. Attachments. All attachments to this agreement are incorporated herein by reference for all purposes wherever reference is made to the same. 
Section 23. Entire agreement. It is understood and agreed that this agreement contains the entire agreement between the parties and supersedes any and all prior agreements, arrangements or understandings between the parties relating to the subject matter. No oral understandings, statements, promises or inducements contrary to the terms of this agreement exist. This agreement cannot be changed or terminated orally and no written modification of this agreement shall be effective unless executed by both parties. 
Section 24. Relationship of parties; no third-party beneficiaries. Nothing contained in this agreement shall be deemed or construed by the parties hereto or by any third party to create the relationship of principal and agent or of partnership or of joint venture or of any association whatsoever between the parties, it being expressly understood and agreed that no provision contained in this agreement nor any act or acts of the parties hereto shall be deemed to create any relationship between the parties other than the relationship of independent parties contracting with each other solely for the purpose of effecting the provisions of this agreement. There are no third-party beneficiaries to this agreement and no third-party beneficiaries are intended by implication or otherwise. 
Section 25. Use of company's cable facilities. It is expressly understood and agreed that the town may use the company's cable facilities for any lawful purpose, for transmission of voice, data and video over the fiber. 
Section 26. Term of this optical fiber cable plant agreement. The term of this agreement shall be concurrent with that of the CATV franchise agreement. Company shall procure all pole attachment agreements, rights of way agreements, building permits, and all other such agreements at no cost to the town and shall maintain all agreements throughout the term of this the optical fiber cable plant agreement. 
Section 27. Compensation. Company shall supply all equipment and perform all installation, construction, and testing activities necessary to complete the optical fiber cable plant as described herein on a turn-key basis. Completion of the optical fiber cable plant shall be at the point in time that the cable plant, in its entirety, is available for use and in all aspects clear of liens. Upon completion, town agrees to pay company one payment in the amount of $426,705.00. Upon completion, town agrees to pay company each month, on a monthly basis in arrears, from then until the end of the term of this optical fiber cable plant agreement the amount of $675.00. 
EXECUTED on the ________ day of ________, 2004. 
TOWN: 	Comcast of California/Colorado/Illinois/ Indiana/Texas, Inc., d/b/a Comcast Cable of California/Colorado/Illinois/ Indiana/Texas, Inc. 
By: _____ 	By: _____ 
Name: _____ 	Name: _____ 
Title: _____ 	Title: _____ 
Date: _____ 	Date: _____ 
 
Attachment A 
Company shall construct an optical fiber cabling system as follows: 
1.  Fire station #2 site to network node 3B507. 
a.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. 
b.  The company shall supply as required single mode optical fiber cable ("SM-6 cable") of sufficient length consisting of six strands of single mode optical fiber, or equivalent. 
c.  The town shall install a fiber panel in fire station #2 site located at 4401 Shiloh Road. 
d.  The company shall prepare six strands of an SM-6 cable and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
e.  The town shall supply a conduit, or specify an equivalent routing, from within the building to a point outside of the building. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the fiber panel through the building to the inside end of this conduit then through this conduit to its outside end. 
f.  The company shall supply as required in-ground handhold enclosure ("handhold") of a size to accommodate approximately ten feet of SM-6 cable. The company shall install this handhold adjacent to the company's network node 3B508. 
g.  The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the outside end of this conduit to the town's handhold adjacent to the company's network node 3B508 in accordance with town's existing zoning and easement requirements. The company shall provide a service loop of approximately ten feet of SM-6 cable within the handhold. 
h.  The company shall allocate for exclusive use by the town one strand of single mode optical fiber cable between network nodes (sic) 3B508 and node 3B507. The company shall prepare five strands as spares and splice one strand of the SM-6 cable to this one strand of single mode optical fiber cable at its network node 3B508 end. 
i.  The network node 3B507 end of to this one strand of single mode optical fiber cable shall be prepared for subsequent splice and shall be referred to as the fire station #2 strand. 
2.  Library site to network node 3B507. 
a.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. 
b.  The company shall supply as required single mode optical fiber cable ("SM-6 cable") of sufficient length consisting of six strands of single mode optical fiber, or equivalent. 
c.  The town shall install a fiber panel in the town library site located at 3030 Broadmoor Lane. 
d.  The company shall prepare six strands of an SM-6 cable and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
e.  The town shall supply a conduit, or specify an equivalent routing, from within the building to a point outside of the building. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the fiber panel through the building to the inside end of this conduit then through this conduit to its outside end. 
f.  The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the outside end of this conduit to the company's network node 3B507 in accordance with town's existing zoning and easement requirements. 
g.  The company shall prepare five strands as spares and splice one strand of the SM-6 cable to the aforementioned fire station #2 strand at the company's network node 3B507. 
3.  Fire station #3 site to network node 3B406. 
a.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. 
b.  The company shall supply as required single mode optical fiber cable ("SM-6 cable") of sufficient length consisting of six strands of single mode optical fiber, or equivalent. 
c.  The town shall install a fiber panel in fire station #3 site located [at] 2020 Woodhill Drive. 
d.  The company shall prepare six strands of an SM-6 cable and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
e.  The town shall supply a conduit, or specify an equivalent routing, from within the building to a point outside of the building. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the fiber panel through the building to the inside end of this conduit then through this conduit to its outside end. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the outside end of this conduit to the company's network node 3B406 in accordance with town's existing zoning and easement requirements. 
f.  The company shall allocate for exclusive use by the town one strand of single mode optical fiber cable between network nodes (sic) 3B406 and Node 3B403. The company shall prepare five strands as spares and splice one strand of the SM-6 cable to this one strand of single mode optical fiber cable at its network node 3B406 end. 
g.  The network node 3B403 end of to this one strand of single mode optical fiber cable shall be prepared for subsequent splice and shall be referred to as the fire station #3 strand. 
4.  Library site to network node 3B403. 
a.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. 
b.  The company shall supply as required single mode optical fiber cable ("SM-6 cable") of sufficient length consisting of six strands of single mode optical fiber, or equivalent. 
c.  The town shall install a fiber panel in the town library site located at 3030 Broadmoor Lane. 
d.  The company shall prepare six strands of an SM-6 cable and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
e.  The town shall supply a conduit, or specify an equivalent routing, from within the building to a point outside of the building. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the fiber panel through the building to the inside end of this conduit then through this conduit to its outside end. 
f.  The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the outside end of this conduit to the company's network node 3B403 in accordance with town's existing zoning and easement requirements. 
g.  The company shall prepare five strands as spares and splice one strand of the SM-6 cable to the aforementioned fire station #3 strand at the company's network node 3B403. 
5.  Town library site to town hall site. 
a.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. 
b.  The company shall supply as required single mode optical fiber cable ("SM-6 cable") of sufficient length consisting of six strands of single mode optical fiber, or equivalent. 
c.  The town shall install a fiber panel in the town library site located at 3030 Broadmoor Lane. 
d.  The company shall prepare six strands of an SM-6 cable and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
e.  The town shall supply a conduit, or specify an equivalent routing, from within the building to a point outside of the building. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the fiber panel through the building to the inside end of this conduit then through this conduit to its outside end. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the outside end of this conduit to the town hall site in accordance with town's existing zoning and easement requirements. 
f.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. The town shall install this fiber panel in the town hall site located at 2121 Cross Timbers Road. 
g.  The company shall prepare the six strands of the SM-6 cable from the library site and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel at the town hall site providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
6.  Central fire station site to town hall site. 
a.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. 
b.  The company shall supply as required single mode optical fiber cable ("SM-6 cable") of sufficient length consisting of six strands of single mode optical fiber, or equivalent. 
c.  The town shall install a fiber panel in the central fire station site located at 3838 Forums Drive. 
d.  The company shall prepare six strands of an SM-6 cable and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
e.  The town shall supply a conduit, or specify an equivalent routing, from within the building to a point outside of the building. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the fiber panel through the building to the inside end of this conduit then through this conduit to its outside end. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the outside end of this conduit to the town hall site in accordance with town's existing zoning and easement requirements. 
f.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. The town shall install this fiber panel in the town hall site located at 2121 Cross Timbers Road. 
g.  The company shall prepare the six strands of the sm-6 cable from the central fire station site and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel at the town hall site providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
7.  Service center site to network node 3B14. 
a.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. 
b.  The company shall supply as required single mode optical fiber cable ("SM-6 cable") of sufficient length consisting of six strands of single mode optical fiber, or equivalent. 
c.  The town shall install a fiber panel in town service center site located 1105 Duncan Road. 
d.  The company shall prepare six strands of an SM-6 cable and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
e.  The town shall supply a conduit, or specify an equivalent routing, from within the building to a point outside of the building. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the fiber panel through the building to the inside end of this conduit then through this conduit to its outside end. 
f.  The company shall supply as required in-ground handhold enclosure ("handhold") of a size to accommodate approximately 20 feet of SM-6 cable. The company shall install this handhold adjacent to the company's network node 3B14. 
g.  The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the outside end of this conduit to the town's handhold adjacent to the company's network node 3B14 in accordance with town's existing zoning and easement requirements. The company shall provide a service loop of approximately ten feet of SM-6 cable within the handhold. 
h.  The company shall prepare two strands as spares, two strands for subsequent splice which shall be referred to as the Gerault Park strands, and two strands for subsequent splice which shall be referred to as the town hall #1 strands. 
8.  Gerault Park site to network node 3B14. 
a.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. 
b.  The company shall supply as required single mode optical fiber cable ("SM-6 cable") of sufficient length consisting of six strands of single mode optical fiber, or equivalent. 
c.  The town shall install a fiber panel in Gerault Park Site located 1200 Gerault Road. 
d.  The company shall prepare six strands of an SM-6 cable and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
e.  The town shall supply a conduit, or specify an equivalent routing, from within the building to a point outside of the building. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the fiber panel through the building to the inside end of this conduit then through this conduit to its outside end. 
f.  The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the outside end of this conduit to the town's handhold adjacent to the company's network node 3B14 in accordance with town's existing zoning and easement requirements. The company shall provide a service loop of approximately ten feet of SM-6 cable within the handhold. 
g.  The company shall prepare two strands as spares, splice two strands to the aforementioned Gerault Park strands, and prepare two strands for subsequent splice which shall be referred to as the town hall #2 strands 
9.  Network node 3B14 to network node 3B09. 
a.  The company shall supply as required single mode optical fiber cable ("SM-6 cable") of sufficient length consisting of six strands of single mode optical fiber, or equivalent. 
b.  The company shall prepare two strands as spares and splice two strands to the aforementioned town hall #1 strands and splice two strands to the aforementioned town hall #2 strands at the town's handhold adjacent to the company's network node 3B14. 
c.  The company shall route this SM-6 cable from network node 3B14 to the company's network node 3B12 in accordance with town's existing zoning and easement requirements. 
d.  The company shall allocate for exclusive use by the town one strand of single mode optical fiber cable between network nodes (sic) 3B12 and node 3B09. The company shall prepare five strands as spares and splice one strand of the SM-6 cable to this one strand of single mode optical fiber cable at its network node 3B12 end. 
e.  The network node 3B09 end of to this one strand of single mode optical fiber cable shall be prepared for subsequent splice and shall be referred to as the service center strand. 
10.  Town hall site to network node 3B09. 
a.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. 
b.  The company shall supply as required single mode optical fiber cable ("SM-6 cable") of sufficient length consisting of six strands of single mode optical fiber, or equivalent. 
c.  The town shall install a fiber panel in the town library site located at 3030 Broadmoor Lane. 
d.  The company shall prepare six strands of an SM-6 cable and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
e.  The town shall supply a conduit, or specify an equivalent routing, from within the building to a point outside of the building. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the fiber panel through the building to the inside end of this conduit then through this conduit to its outside end. 
f.  The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the outside end of this conduit to the company's network node 3B09 in accordance with town's existing zoning and easement requirements. 
g.  The company shall prepare five strands as spares and splice one strand of the SM-6 cable to the aforementioned service center strand at the company's network node 3B09. 
11.  Development and environmental site to police and courts site. 
a.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. 
b.  The company shall supply as required single mode optical fiber cable ("SM-6 cable") of sufficient length consisting of six strands of single mode optical fiber, or equivalent. 
c.  The town shall install a fiber panel in the development and environmental site located at 1001 Cross Timbers Road, Suite 2330. 
d.  The company shall prepare six strands of an SM-6 cable and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
e.  The town shall supply a conduit, or specify an equivalent routing, from within suite 2330 on the second floor of the building to designated equipment room on the first floor of this building. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the fiber panel through the suite 2330 to the second floor end of this conduit then through this conduit to its first floor end. 
f.  The town shall supply a conduit, or specify an equivalent routing, from the inside of equipment room on the first floor this building to a point outside of the building. The company shall route this SM-6 cable through the equipment room to the inside end of this conduit then through this conduit to its outside end. 
g.  The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the outside end of this conduit to the outside end of a town-supplied conduit, or specified equivalent routing, for entry into the police and courts site in accordance with town's existing zoning and easement requirements. 
h.  The company shall then route the SM-6 to the inside end of this police and courts conduit. 
i.  The town shall install a fiber panel in police and courts site located at 4150 Kirkpatrick Lane. 
j.  The company shall prepare six strands of this SM-6 cable and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
12.  Police and courts site to town hall site. 
a.  The company shall supply as required optical fiber termination panels ("fiber panel") including six single mode type SC bulkhead fiber connectors and a fiber strand service loop storage area. 
b.  The company shall supply as required single mode optical fiber cable ("SM-6 cable") of sufficient length consisting of six strands of single mode optical fiber, or equivalent. 
c.  The town shall install a fiber panel in police and courts site located at 4150 Kirkpatrick Lane. 
d.  The company shall prepare six strands of an SM-6 cable and terminate these six strands using type SC-APC connectors then connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel. 
e.  The town shall supply a conduit, or specify an equivalent routing, from within the building to a point outside of the building. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the fiber panel through the building to the inside end of this conduit then through this conduit to its outside end. The company shall route this SM-6 cable from the outside end of this conduit to the company's network node 3B505 in accordance with town's existing zoning and easement requirements. 
f.  The company shall prepare two strands as spares and splice four strands of this SM-6 cable to four strands of the town's existing six strand, single mode optical fiber cable at the company's network node 3B505 end. 
g.  The town shall install a fiber panel in the town hall site located at 2121 Cross Timbers Lane. 
h.  The company shall prepare these four strands of the existing six strand, single mode optical fiber cable and terminate these four strands using type SC-APC connectors. Company shall connect each strand to the fiber panel providing a fiber strand service loop for all strands of approximately 20 feet within the fiber panel.  
DIVISION 4. - ADVANTEX COMMUNICATIONS/GRANDE COMMUNICATIONS 
TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS 
ORDINANCE NO. 69-04 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS, GRANTING TO ADVANTEX COMMUNICATIONS/GRANDE COMMUNICATIONS, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE, AND FRANCHISE FOR THE TERM OF TEN YEARS, TO ERECT, MAINTAIN, AND OPERATE A CABLE SYSTEM IN THE TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS; TO ERECT, MAINTAIN, AND OPERATE ITS POLES, TOWERS, ANCHORS, WIRES, CABLES, ELECTRONIC CONDUCTORS, CONDUITS, MANHOLES, AND OTHER STRUCTURES AND APPURTENANCES IN, OVER, UNDER, ALONG, AND ACROSS THE PRESENT AND FUTURE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY IN THE TOWN; PRESCRIBING COMPENSATION FOR THE RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES, AND FRANCHISE CONFERRED HEREUNDER; PRESCRIBING THE CONDITIONS GOVERNING THE OPERATION OF THE BUSINESS INSOFAR AS IT AFFECTS THE USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY FOR THE PURPOSE OF SUCH BUSINESS; CONTAINING OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE SUBJECT; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
WHEREAS, by Ordinance No. 48-99 passed and approved on August 16, 1999, the Town of Flower Mound, Texas ("Town"), granted to CoServ, L.L.C., now known as Advantex Communications/Grande Communications ("Grantee"), the right, privilege, and Franchise to erect, maintain, and operate, until January 4, 2004, a cable system in said Town; and 
WHEREAS, Grantee has provided cable services within the Town under such Franchise; and 
WHEREAS, Grantee has requested a renewal of the Franchise in accordance with Section 626 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, to allow continued operation of a cable system in the Town; and 
WHEREAS, the Town Council finds from all the evidence that Grantee meets the legal, character, financial, and technical qualifications, as well as other qualifications necessary to assure that the residents of the Town receive the best available cable service if provided in accordance with this Franchise; and 
WHEREAS, following proper notice, the Town Council of the Town held a public hearing on Grantee's request for renewal, at which time representatives of Grantee and interested citizens were heard in a full public proceeding affording opportunity for comment by any and all persons desiring to be heard; and 
WHEREAS, from information presented at such public hearing, from facts and circumstances developed or discovered through independent study and investigation, the Town Council now deems it appropriate and in the best interest of the Town and its inhabitants that the cable service franchise be renewed with Grantee. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS: 
SECTION 1 
 
1.0 - Enactment. 
1.01  Recitals. The facts and recitations set forth in the preamble of this ordinance are hereby adopted, ratified, and confirmed. 
1.02  Short title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "the Town of Flower Mound Cable Service Franchise Ordinance." Within this document, it is referred to as the "franchise." 
SECTION 2  
2.0 - Definitions. 
2.01  Terms. The following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meanings hereafter set forth. Terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with the Communications Act of 1934 (the Communications Act), as amended, and if not therein defined, then in accordance with the ordinances of the town or their customary usage and meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular shall include the plural, words in the plural shall include the singular, and words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses or derivative forms. The headings contained in this franchise are to facilitate reference only, do not form a part of this franchise, and shall not in any way affect the construction or interpretation hereof. The words "shall," "will," and "must" are mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive or directory. 
A.  Affiliate. A person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the grantee, provided that "affiliate" shall in no event mean any limited partner holding an interest of less than five percent of the grantee, or any creditor of the grantee solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliate by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with, the grantee. 
B.  Basic cable service. The lowest priced cable service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals as well as the PEG channels required by this franchise. 
C.  Communications Act. Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and as may be amended from time to time during the term of this franchise (47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as amended). 
D.  Cable operator. Any person or group of persons (i) who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in the cable system, or (ii) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
E.  Cable service. (A) The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and (B) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
F.  Cable system. A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes, but is not limited to, video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include facilities that qualify under the exceptions put forth in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7). Unless otherwise specified, "cable system" is used in this franchise to refer to the particular cable system authorized under the franchise and operated by the grantee within the franchise area. 
G.  Channels. A portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, which is capable of delivering a video signal, an audio signal, a voice signal or a data signal. A channel can be either "downstream," in which case the signal is transmitted by grantee from grantee's facilities to subscriber premises, or "upstream," in which case the signal is transmitted in the reverse direction from subscriber premises to grantee's facilities. For purposes of rate regulation, the town retains all lawful authority, and grantee retains any lawful rights, to interpret the definition of "channels" in a manner consistent with this franchise and regulations promulgated by the FCC. 
H.  Control. The actual working control of a grantee in whatever manner exercised. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, for the purposes hereof, a change in control shall be deemed to have occurred at any point in time when there is: 
(i)  A change in working or effective voting control, in whatever manner effectuated, of the grantee; 
(ii)  An agreement of the holders of voting stock or rights of the grantee which effectively vests or assigns policy decision-making in any person other than the grantee; or 
(iii)  A sale, assignment or transfer of more than 35 percent of the shares or interest in the grantee. 
I.  Days. Calendar days unless otherwise specified. 
J.  Drop. An aerial or underground portion of the cable system, which extends from the tap to the demarcation point of the subscriber's residence or business. 
K.  Educational access channel. The non-commercial channel(s) on the cable system which are reserved for educational users and used in accordance with the rules and procedures established by the town or its designee. 
L.  Expanded basic cable service. One or more clusters of cable programming services which may or may not be offered for an additional monthly charge over and above the charge for basic cable service. 
M.  Federal Communications Commission or FCC. The agency as presently constituted by the United Stated Congress or any successor agency with jurisdiction over cable service matters. 
N.  Franchise area. The incorporated area of the town and such additional contiguous areas as may be included in the corporate limits of the town during the term of this franchise. 
O.  Government access channel. The non-commercial channel(s) on the cable system reserved for government users and used in accordance with the rules and procedures established by the town or its designee. 
P.  Grantee. Advantex Communications/Grande Communications, or any person who succeeds Advantex Communications/Grande Communications, in accordance with the provisions of this franchise. 
Q.  Gross revenue. Any and all revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, received by grantee, its affiliates who are cable operators (as defined by section 602(5) of the Communications Act) of the cable system, or other persons providing cable service over the cable system that are classified as cable operators pursuant to section 602(5) of the Communications Act, which is derived from or attributable to the operation of the grantee's cable system to provide cable services, regardless of whether the grantee or other third-party provider actually bills for the cable service. By way of illustration and not limitation, gross revenue includes all fees charged subscribers for any and all cable services provided by grantee over the cable system such as basic cable service revenues, expanded basic cable service revenues, pay cable service revenues, revenues resulting from connection or reconnection to the cable system in order to receive cable services, revenues resulting from the lease, rental, use, repair, or servicing of cable system equipment used to receive cable service, revenues from late, delinquent, or other administrative fees applied to cable services, and franchise fees assessed on cable services which are collected from subscribers. Gross revenues shall also include advertising revenues received by the grantee which are attributable to cable services delivered over the cable system in the town, revenues resulting from the lease, use or rental of channels or channel capacity to provide cable services, revenues received by the grantee from commissions on sales from shopping cable services, and revenues received from programmers providing cable service programming over the cable system. Gross revenues shall not include those payments described in subsection 14.10 of this franchise. 
(i)  The town recognizes that, in the future, grantee may allocate revenue between cable services (which are subject to the franchise fee) and non-cable services (which are not subject to the franchise fee but may be subject to other fees and/or taxes), when these two types of service are bundled together in a discounted package offered to subscribers. Due to the uncertainties that currently exist, both in the business and regulatory environment on this issue, the town and the grantee hereby reserve all rights, claims, defenses and remedies regarding the town's authority to impose and/or enforce requirements related to the revenue allocation methodology to be used when cable services and non-cable services are offered to subscribers in a discounted package, for the purpose of calculating franchise fee payments. 
(ii)  In the event that the town believes that grantee has unlawfully or unfairly allocated revenue between cable services and non-cable services for the purpose of calculating franchise fee payments, the town and the grantee shall meet upon advance notice from the town to discuss the allocation methodology. If the town and the grantee cannot agree on the matter within a reasonable period of time, the town and grantee may submit the matter to a mutually agreeable third party for mediation. The cost of the mediation shall be shared equally between the town and the grantee. At any time, either the town or the grantee can bring the matter to a court of competent jurisdiction, or pursue any other remedies available to them in this franchise or by law. Unless otherwise approved by the town, the venue for any judicial dispute between the town and grantee arising out of this provision shall be the Civil District Court, Denton County, Texas, or the United States District Court, Northern District of Texas. If the court determines that the allocation of revenue to cable services violates this franchise, then the town would be entitled to the benefits of such a decision. 
(iii)  The parties intend for the definition of gross revenue to be as inclusive as possibly consistent with existing applicable law. If there is a change in federal law subsequent to the effective date of this franchise, such change shall not impact this gross revenues definition in such a way to reduce gross Revenues unless the change specifically preempts the affected portion of the definition above. 
R.  Institutional network. A portion of the cable system constructed and maintained by grantee and which is only available for private, non-commercial use by governmental and/or educational entities pursuant to agreement between the grantee and the town. 
S.  Pay cable services. The delivery over the cable system of cable service programming to subscribers for a fee or charge over and above the charge for basic cable service or expanded basic cable service on a per program, per-channel, per connection or per-time period of connection basis. 
T.  PEG channels. All public access channels, educational access channels and government access channels, collectively. 
U.  PEG programming. Programming produced for and exhibited over the PEG channels. 
V.  Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
W.  Public access channel. The non-commercial channel(s) on the cable system reserved for public users and used in accordance with the rules and procedures established by the town, or its designee. 
X.  Public rights-of-way. The surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, easement or similar property in which the town holds any property interest or exercises any rights of management or control and which, consistent with the purposes for which it was acquired or dedicated, may be used for the installation and maintenance of a cable system. No reference in this franchise to a public right-of-way shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the town that its interests or other rights in such property are sufficient to permit its use for the installation and maintenance of a cable system, and the grantee shall be deemed to gain only those rights which the town has the undisputed right and power to give. 
Y.  Subscriber. Any person lawfully receiving cable service delivered by means of the grantee's cable system. 
SECTION 3  
3.0 - Grant of authority. 
3.01  Use of public rights-of-way. There is hereby granted to grantee the right, privilege, and franchise to have, acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain, use, and operate in the town a cable system, and to have, acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain, use, and operate in, over, under, and along the present and future public rights-of-way of the town all necessary or desirable poles, towers, anchors, wires, cables, electronic conductors, underground conduits, manholes, and other structures and appurtenances necessary for the construction, maintenance, and operation of a cable system in the franchise area. Grantee or affiliates shall not install or construct facilities within the town's public rights-of-way which are not authorized by this franchise or lawfully allowed by applicable state or federal law. 
3.02  Use, rental, or lease of utility poles and facilities. There is hereby granted to grantee the authority to contract with the town or with the holder or owner of any utility franchise in the town for the use, rental, or lease of its or their poles, underground conduits, and other structures and facilities for the purpose of extending, carrying, or laying grantee's wires, cables, electronic conductors, and other facilities and appurtenances necessary or desirable in conjunction with the operation of its cable system. The town agrees that any public utility owning or controlling such poles or underground conduits may, without amendment to its franchise, allow, and is encouraged to allow, grantee to make such use thereof pursuant to any agreement reached between such utility and grantee. Nothing in this franchise shall authorize grantee to attach any part of its cable system to any town-owned conduits or facilities until grantee has entered into a separate agreement with the town, supported by independent consideration, for such rights of attachment or use. 
3.03  Additional services. By granting this franchise, the town does not waive, and specifically retains, any right to regulate and receive compensation as allowed by law for services offered over the cable system which are not cable services. Upon request, grantee shall inform the town of any non-cable service offered over the cable system of which grantee is aware. Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to limit any lawful authority of the town to impose a tax, fee, or other assessment of any kind on any person (other than the grantee, its affiliates, or other persons which are cable operators of the cable system pursuant to section 602(5) of the Communications Act), with respect to cable service or other communications service provided by such person over the cable system for which charges are assessed to subscribers but not received by the grantee, its affiliates or other persons who are cable operators of the cable system pursuant to section 602(5). Upon request, grantee shall inform the town of any uses of which grantee is aware of the cable system by persons who are not cable operators. 
3.04  Right of condemnation reserved. Nothing in this franchise shall limit or expand any right the town may have to acquire by eminent domain any property of the grantee. 
3.05  Responsibility for costs. Except as expressly provided otherwise, any act that grantee is required to perform under this franchise shall be performed at its cost. If grantee fails to perform work that it is required to perform within the time provided for performance, the town may perform the work and bill the grantee for documented costs. The grantee shall pay the amounts billed within 30 days. The parties agree that any amounts paid pursuant to this subsection are not franchise fees and fall within one or more of the exceptions to the definition of franchise fee under federal law. Nothing in this subsection is intended to affect in any way (by expansion or contraction) grantee's rights under applicable law governing rates. 
SECTION 4  
4.0 - Term, evaluation, and renewal. 
4.01  Term of franchise. This franchise shall be in full force and effect for a term and period of ten years commencing after passage and approval by the town, assuming that the grantee files the written acceptance as required herein. 
4.02  Annual meeting with town. Upon request by the town, grantee shall meet no less than annually with the town council and make a verbal report of the character, quality, and efficiency of service it has rendered since the prior meeting. Grantee shall be available at this meeting to address any questions or concerns presented by its customers, the town council, and residents of the town. The town shall notify the grantee of the date, time, and location of the meeting. 
4.03  Performance evaluations. In order to assure that the grantee is complying with the terms of this franchise and with the character, quality, and efficiency of service to be rendered, given, performed, and furnished under this franchise, and in order to promote a sharing of information between the town council and the grantee, a performance evaluation may be held every three years of the franchise, subject to paragraph F below, in accordance with the following process: 
A.  At least 90 days prior to each performance evaluation, the town shall notify the grantee of the date, time and location of the evaluation. Such notice shall include specification of any additional information to be provided by the grantee pursuant to paragraph B (vii) below. Unless specifically waived by the town council, attendance of grantee's duly authorized representative at these meetings shall be mandatory. 
B.  Within 60 days from receipt of such notification, the grantee shall file a report with the town that is certified by a representative of the grantee knowledgeable of the operations of grantee within the town, in reasonable detail, specifically addressing, at a minimum, the following areas: 
(i)  Compliance with the requirements specified in subsection 10.04 of the franchise; 
(ii)  Compliance with the requirements regarding technical performance and testing, as provided in subsection 12.02 of this franchise; 
(iii)  Compliance with the PEG channel requirements, as provided in subsections 14.01 and 14.02; 
(iv)  Compliance with the customer service standards, as provided in exhibit A of this franchise; 
(v)  A summary of the development of new cable services and the use of new technologies, subject to subsection 19.04; 
(vi)  A comparison of rates to any benchmarks or standards set by federal, state, or local agencies having jurisdiction; and 
(vii)  Any other topic deemed material or relevant by the town for its enforcement of this franchise. 
C.  All reports to be prepared under this subsection and submitted by grantee shall be based on information since the previous performance evaluation up to and inclusive of the most current quarter available and not data that ends more than six months before the time of the performance evaluation. 
D.  Following receipt of the report, but not less then 30 days prior to the performance evaluation, the town may request additional information, clarification or detailed documentation concerning those topics identified for inclusion in the performance evaluation. Grantee shall make reasonable effort to provide such additional information to the town prior to the meeting. In the event that the information cannot be made available prior to the performance evaluation, grantee shall notify the town in writing explaining the reasons for such delay. 
E.  The town council may hear any interested persons during such performance evaluation. The grantee shall be entitled to all the rights of due process consistent with the town proceedings, including but not limited to, the right to present evidence and the right to be represented by counsel. 
F.  The foregoing notwithstanding, the town council may initiate and conduct such additional performance evaluations regarding grantee's performance under this franchise as the town council, in its sole discretion, may deem justified or necessary under the circumstances. Grantee shall be given reasonable notice of the date, time, and location of any such additional performance evaluations. 
G.  Upon request of the town, grantee shall assist the town in notifying subscribers of the triennial evaluation sessions. Nominal costs associated with the notification, in an amount not to exceed $1,500.00, shall be borne by the grantee. 
4.04  Renewal. Grantee and town agree that franchise renewal proceedings shall be governed by the Communications Act, or other law applicable at the time of renewal. 
SECTION 5  
5.0 - Recoupment of costs by town. 
5.01  Publication costs. Any and all costs of publication of this franchise which may be required by law or action of town council shall be borne by grantee. Any payments made by the town under this provision are to be reimbursed to the town within 30 days of grantee's receipt of the invoice. 
SECTION 6  
6.0 - Compliance with town, state, and federal laws. 
6.01  Compliance with applicable laws. Grantee shall at all times comply with all generally applicable laws, rules, and regulations of the town, state and federal governments and any administrative agencies thereof. 
6.02  Subject to police power of the town. The construction, maintenance, and operation of grantee's cable system and all property of grantee subject to the provisions of this franchise shall be subject to all lawful police powers, rules, and regulations of the town. The town shall have the power at any time to order and require grantee to remove or abate any pole, line, tower, wire, cable, guy, conduit, electric conductor, or any other structure or facility that is dangerous to life or property. In the event grantee, after written notice, fails or refuses to act within 15 days of such written notice, town shall have the power to remove or abate the same at the expense of grantee, all without compensation or liability for damages to grantee except in instances where the damage was caused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the town or its agents. 
6.03  Notification in the event of pre-emptive law. Grantee shall use its best efforts to notify the town in the event of any change in law that materially affects grantee's rights or obligations under this franchise. 
SECTION 7  
7.0 - Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy. 
7.01  Use. All structures, wires, cables, equipment, and facilities erected or maintained by grantee within the town shall be located as to cause minimum interference with the proper and intended use of the public rights-of-way and with the rights or reasonable convenience of the owners or occupants of property which adjoins any of such public rights-of-way. The location of all poles, towers, anchors, wires, cables, electronic conductors, conduits, manholes and other structures and appurtenances in, over, under, along, and across the present and future public rights-of-way in the town shall be fixed under the supervision of the town or an authorized agent appointed by the town. Grantee agrees to comply with all other town laws, rules, or ordinances that govern the use of public rights-of-way that currently exist or may be applicable during the term of this franchise, provided that such are promulgated under the town's lawful police powers. In the event that there is conflict between requirements of this franchise and other generally applicable and lawful town ordinances governing grantee's ability to use the public rights-of-way, the stricter provisions shall apply. 
7.02  Excavation. Grantee may excavate only for the construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, and maintenance of all or a portion of its facilities used to provide cable service under this franchise. Except in the case of emergency maintenance, grantee shall provide the town written notice within 15 days of any proposed disturbance to any public rights-of-way prior to the commencement thereof. Grantee shall provide the town with notice within 24 hours following any emergency maintenance that disturbed the public rights-of-way. Owners or occupants of adjoining property shall be given reasonable notice. When the grantee shall make or cause to be made excavations or shall place obstructions in any public rights-of-way, the public shall be protected by barriers and lights placed, erected, and maintained by the grantee in accordance with any existing or future town, state, or federal requirements. No public rights-of-way shall be encumbered by construction, maintenance, removal, restoration, or repair work by grantee for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute such work. 
7.03  Restoration. The surface of any public rights-of-way disturbed by grantee in laying, constructing, maintaining, operating, using, extending, removing, replacing, or repairing its cable system shall be restored by grantee as soon as reasonably possible, but in no instance greater than 30 days after the completion of the work under normal operating conditions, at its cost and expense, to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work. The 30-day period shall be extended for days that the grantee is unable to perform the work due to unfavorable weather conditions. In the event restoration is scheduled to take longer than 30 days for any other reason, grantee shall provide the town with written notice as to the reason(s) for the delay. Such restoration shall be maintained by grantee to the satisfaction of the town for one year from the date of completion of such restoration work. If there is an unreasonable delay by grantee in restoring and maintaining public rights-of-way after such excavations or repairs have been made, town shall have the right, following written notice to grantee to which grantee has 48 hours in which to respond, to restore or repair the same and to require grantee to pay to the town the reasonable cost of such restoration or repair all without compensation or liability for damages to the grantee unless such damage was caused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the town or its agents. In the event town determines that grantee's use of any of town's public rights-of-way as set forth in this franchise poses an immediate danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public, town shall have the right to restore or repair same and shall require grantee to pay to the town the reasonable costs incurred regarding same, all without compensation or liability for damages to the grantee unless the damage was caused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the town or its agents. 
7.04  Relocation. Whenever by reason of the construction, repair, maintenance, relocation, widening, raising, or lowering of the grade of any public rights-of-way by the town or by the location or manner of construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of any public property, structure, or facility by the town, it shall be deemed necessary by the town for grantee to move, relocate, change, alter, or modify any of its facilities or structures, such change, relocation, alteration, or modification shall be promptly made by grantee, when directed in writing to do so by the town. Grantee shall pay the cost of such relocation unless there are funds allocated to affected users of the public right-of-way, including grantee, for the reimbursement of such costs. If the funds are controlled by another governmental entity, the town shall make application for such funds on behalf of the grantee, upon request of grantee, if grantee cannot make such application itself. In the event grantee, after such notice, fails or refuses to commence, pursue, or complete such relocation work within a reasonable time, the town shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to remove or abate such structures or facilities and to require grantee to pay to the town the reasonable cost of such removal or abatement, all without compensation or liability for damages to grantee unless such damage was caused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the town or its agents. 
7.05  Temporary removal of wire for building moving. Upon written request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the town, grantee shall remove, raise, or lower its wires and cables temporarily to permit the moving of houses, buildings, or other bulky structures. The reasonable expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering shall be paid by the benefited person, and grantee may require such payment in advance, grantee being without obligation to remove, raise, or lower its wires and cables until such payment shall have been made. Grantee shall be given not less than 72 hours' advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire and cable adjustments. 
7.06  Tree trimming. From time to time, the town council may pass ordinances regulating the trimming or removal of trees on or along town property, and grantee shall comply with these ordinances. 
7.07  Placement of fixtures. Grantee shall not place poles, towers, or similar fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telecommunications, water hydrant, water main, drainage, sanitary sewer or other facilities located within the town's public rights-of-way as authorized by the town, and all such poles, towers, and similar facilities shall be placed as directed by the town and in such manner as not to interfere with the usual travel or use or visibility of the public rights-of-way. 
7.08  Removal of fixtures. Grantee shall remove its structures, wires, cables, equipment, and facilities of any and all kinds from the public rights-of-way within 30 days following the non-use or cessation of use of such structures, wires, cables, equipment, and facilities. 
7.09  Approval of plans and specifications. With the exception of installation of individual drops and/or emergency repairs, grantee shall provide complete plans and specifications for all construction within public rights-of-way to the town for its review in accordance with applicable town ordinances and permit application procedures. Approval of plans and specifications shall not be unreasonably delayed or denied. In the event of rejection, grantee shall submit revised plans and specifications for approval. This provision shall apply to each construction sequence if the construction is accomplished in phases. 
7.10  Underground installation. In those portions of the town having telephone lines and electric utility lines underground, whether required by ordinance or not, any and all of grantee's lines, cables, and wires shall also be underground. Grantee's lines, cables, wires, and similar facilities located above ground prior to the effective date of this franchise shall be relocated underground by grantee at the same time that other above-ground utility lines (e.g., electric and telecommunications lines) located within the immediate vicinity of grantee's facilities are placed underground. Grantee shall pay the cost of such relocation unless there are funds allocated to affected users of the public right-of-way, including grantee, for the reimbursement of such costs. If the funds are controlled by another governmental entity, the town shall make application for such funds on behalf of the grantee upon request of grantee if grantee cannot make such application itself. It shall be the policy of the town that existing poles for electric and communications purposes be utilized by grantee whenever possible and that underground installation, even when not required, is preferable to the placing of additional poles. 
7.11  Facilities location. From time to time, the town or its representatives, may request identification of the specific location of certain grantee cable system facilities. The grantee agrees to respond to such request within 48 hours of the receipt of the request. In the event that grantee fails to provide the necessary information, and damage is caused to grantee facilities as a direct result of withholding said information, the grantee shall hold the town harmless from all liability, damage, cost or expense resulting from any town action in this regard unless such damage was caused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the town or its agents. 
The town shall have the right to be informed as to matters in connection with or affecting the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, operations, and repair of the cable system facilities of the grantee within the public rights-of-way including, but not necessarily limited to, the identification and location of the grantee's cable system facilities within the public rights-of-way and to updates of such information as changes regarding same occur. At a minimum, this requires grantee to maintain on file with the town a current set of strand and trench drawings of the cable system. Such strand and trench maps shall be updated as changes occur in the cable system, and shall provide, as follows: 
A.  CAD drawings must be submitted in .dxf (drawing exchange file) or other mutually agreeable format. 
B.  Drawings must be submitted digitally on either CD ROM or floppy diskette. 
C.  Drawings must be referenced in real world coordinates: 
(i)  North Central Texas State Plane; 
(ii)  Zone 5351; 
(iii)  NAD 83 datum; 
(iv)  Units feet. 
In addition to providing the location of grantee's facilities, grantee agrees to obtain facilities location information from other users of the public rights-of-way prior to grantee's construction, reconstruction, maintenance, operations and repair of the cable system facilities. 
Upon request by the town, the grantee shall furnish the town information relevant to such matters, which is prepared, maintained, and available in the ordinary course of business. 
SECTION 8  
8.0 - Indemnification and liability. 
8.01  Grantee's obligation. Grantee shall pay, and by the acceptance of this franchise specifically agrees that it will pay, the following: 
A.  Damages and penalties. All damages or penalties which the town, its officers, agents, employees, or contractors may legally be required to pay as a result of damages arising out of copyright infringements and all other damages arising out of the installation, maintenance, or operation of the cable system by the grantee, its affiliates, contractors, subcontractors or agents, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this franchise. 
B.  Expenses. If any action or proceeding is brought against the town or any of its officers, agents, employees, or contractors with respect to which payment may be sought for claims for damages or penalties described in this section, the grantee, upon written notice from the town, shall assume the investigation or defense and fully control any resolution or compromise thereof, including the employment of counsel and the payment of all expenses including the reasonable value of any services rendered by any officers, agents, employees or contractors of the town which are not unreasonably duplicative of services provided by grantee and its representatives. The town shall fully cooperate with the grantee. 
C.  Separate counsel. The town shall have the right to employ separate counsel in any action or proceeding and to participate in the investigation and defense thereof, and the grantee shall pay the reasonable fees and expenses of such separate counsel if employed with the approval and consent of the grantee or if representation of both the grantee and the town by the same attorney would be inconsistent with accepted canons of professional ethics. 
D.  Indemnification. It is the intent of this section and by its acceptance of this franchise, grantee specifically agrees that grantee, for itself and its agents, employees, subcontractors, and the agents and employees of said subcontractors, shall indemnify and hold the town, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, elected officials, successors and assigns harmless from all liability actions, causes of action, lawsuits, judgments, claims, damages, penalties, costs or fees, including attorney's fees and costs of defense, for any injury to or the death of any person or damage to or destruction of any property arising out of, resulting from or based upon, in whole or in part, any act or omission of grantee, its officers, employees, contractors, subcontractors, and agents under this franchise, including without limitation the construction, operation, or maintenance of its cable system. In the event that any action, suit or proceeding is brought or claim is made against the town based upon or arising out of any such act or omission of the grantee under this franchise, the town shall give notice in writing of such action, suit, proceeding or claim to the grantee. However, the failure of the town to promptly provide such notice in writing to grantee shall not relieve grantee of its duties and obligations under this section. The town shall not and does not by reason of this granting of this franchise, or any failure to act by the town which may impact the grantee's performance under this franchise, assume any liability of grantee whatsoever for injury to persons, damage to property, or penalties of any kind whatsoever. The provisions of this section shall survive the expiration or earlier termination of this franchise. 
SECTION 9  
9.0 - Insurance requirements. 
9.01  Minimum coverage. Grantee, for itself, its contractors, and subcontractors, shall maintain throughout the term of this franchise: 
A.  A commercial general liability insurance policy issued by a company duly authorized to do business in the State of Texas (and acceptable to the town) insuring the grantee, its contractors, and its subcontractors with respect to the installation, maintenance, and operation of grantee's cable system in the following minimum amounts: 
(i)  One person. One million dollars for bodily injury or death to any one person. 
(ii)  One accident. One million dollars for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident. 
(iii)  Property damage. One million dollars for property damage resulting from any one occurrence. 
(iv)  All other types of liability. Two million dollars for all other types of liability per occurrence. 
B.  An automobile liability insurance policy and, if necessary, a commercial umbrella liability insurance policy with a limit of not less than $1,000,000.00 for each accident. Such insurance shall cover liability arising out of any motor vehicle (including owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles). 
9.02  Increased coverage. The town council reserves the right to require grantee to increase the minimum amounts of liability insurance coverage up to $4,000,000.00 per incident if such increased coverage is deemed by town council to be reasonably based on changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the grantee. Such requirement shall be expressed by resolution or ordinance. 
9.03  Endorsements. Grantee agrees that with respect to the insurance requirements contained in subsection 9.01, all insurance certificates will contain the following required provisions: 
A.  Name the Town of Flower Mound and its officers, employees, and elected representatives as additional insured. 
B.  Provide for 30 days' notice to the town for cancellation, non-renewal or material change. 
C.  Shall be on an occurrence basis and shall be primary coverage of all losses resulting from grantee's operations covered by the policies. 
9.04  Workers' compensation. The grantee, its contractors, and its subcontractors shall maintain throughout the term of this franchise workers' compensation within statutory limits and employers liability insurance in the amount of a) by accident, $100,000.00 per each accident, and b) by disease, $100,000.00 per employee with a policy aggregate or $500,000.00, or an amount which is required by applicable state or federal law, whichever is greater. 
9.05  Certificate of insurance. Within 30 days after the effective date of this franchise, grantee shall provide to the town and maintain on file throughout the term of the franchise a certificate of insurance evidencing coverage as required in this section. At the town's request, such request to be based only on evidence which suggests that the certificates supplied are incorrect, a true and correct copy of the insurance policies shall be made available for the town's review at grantee's offices. If grantee elects to make such policies available for review outside of the Dallas/Fort Worth, Texas, metropolitan area, grantee shall pay the travel costs for a town representative to review such policies. The town will not be allowed to make copies of the insurance policies. 
9.06  Term. The insurance required by subsection 9.01 shall be kept in full force and effect by grantee during the existence of this franchise and thereafter until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of grantee's cable system, should such removal be required by town council or undertaken by grantee. 
9.07  Issuing companies. Companies issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse against the town for payment of any premiums or assessments which all are set at the sole risk of the grantee. Insurance policies obtained by grantee shall provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the town in connection with any damage covered by these policies. 
SECTION 10  
10.0 - Cable system characteristics. 
10.01  Channel capacity. As of the effective date of this franchise, the cable system shall have the potential of providing no fewer than 74 channels. At no time during the term of this franchise shall grantee offer fewer than 68 channels to subscribers. All channels being offered to subscribers within the franchise area will adhere to the technical standards set forth in section 12. 
10.02  New construction. Any areas of the town where grantee constructs new cable system facilities shall be built, at a minimum, to the same technical specifications as the cable system existing in the town as of the effective date of this franchise. Specifically, including any new construction areas, the average node size in the town shall be no greater than 800 homes per node, unless the grantee provides the town with valid technical justification for a greater average node size. 
10.03  Cable system capabilities. The cable system will have the following attributes during the term of this franchise: 
A.  Activated return capability from subscriber locations, upon the completion of the upgrade of the cable system to a digital format. 
B.  Emergency standby power rated at a minimum of 12 hours at the headend, four hours at each fiber optic node located throughout the cable system with at least 100 subscribers, and one and one-half hours at any other power supply on the distribution portion of the cable system. 
10.04  Comparability of town cable system to others in metroplex. Grantee's cable system in the town shall be capable of offering cable services that are comparable to other cable systems owned or operated by the grantee or an affiliate of the grantee in the Dallas/Fort Worth metropolitan area ("comparable systems") pursuant to the terms of this subsection. If the town believes that there are comparable systems providing more advanced cable services than those offered in the town, the town may send a written request to grantee, not to exceed one notice every three years, requesting information on the cable services offered by the comparable systems. Within 60 days of receiving the request, grantee shall provide the town with information on any cable services that are offered in the comparable systems, but not being offered in the town. If the identified cable services are being offered by grantee or its affiliates to at least 50 percent of the total subscribers in the comparable systems, the town may require that grantee make available such cable services on the cable system in the town. Should the town determine that grantee shall commence provision of such cable services, the town and grantee shall negotiate a schedule for deployment that takes into consideration the impact on subscriber rates, the ability of grantee to recover the cost of such increased capacity or cable services over the remaining life of the franchise from the incremental revenue derived from such additional cable services, and the financial condition of grantee. The parties recognize that, as of the effective date of this franchise, the town is not permitted to require the provision of specific video programming services pursuant to this subsection. 
10.05  Future upgrades. In the event grantee, either voluntarily, or under the terms of subsection 10.04, undertakes an upgrade or rebuild of the cable system during the term of this franchise, at least 30 days prior to the implementation of any upgrade and/or replacement activities, grantee shall provide to the town a written plan which shall include general information as to the construction necessary for the project, and the procedure or method grantee will employ to ensure minimal interruption of cable service. All construction and technical specifications included in the plan(s) submitted by grantee shall be in conformity with the provisions of this franchise, including any lawful and generally applicable town permitting process. Grantee shall meet with the town to discuss the status and progress of the construction upon request. 
SECTION 11  
11.0 - Performance bonding. 
11.01  Amount. Within 30 days of the effective date of this franchise, the grantee shall furnish and keep in full force during the term of the franchise and file with the town a performance bond in the amount of $5,000.00, until such time as grantee's number of doors passed reaches 5,000, at which point grantee will furnish a performance bond of $16,500.00. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the grantee of all terms and conditions of the franchise. Such performance bond will be in addition to any construction bonding requirements of other lawful and generally applicable town ordinances. 
11.02  Reservation of rights. The rights reserved by the town with respect to the bond are in addition to all other rights the town may have under the franchise or any other law. 
11.03  Endorsement. The bond shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be changed or cancelled without advance notice to the Town. The Town will be given 30 days written notice by registered mail, return receipt requested, of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
11.04  Evidence. Grantee shall maintain a copy of the bond on file with the town during the term of this franchise. 
SECTION 12  
12.0 - Operational standards. 
12.01  Compliance with FCC rules. At a minimum, grantee shall comply with present and future rules and regulations of the FCC, including, but not limited to, technical standards, testing requirements, consumer protection standards and consumer electronics compatibility regulations and all other present and future rules and regulations of the FCC in connection with and relating to the operation of grantee's cable system. Such compliance will not negate or replace any additional requirements identified in this franchise. 
12.02  Technical performance. 
A.  Grantee's cable system within the town shall meet all FCC and other applicable federal technical and signal quality standards for cable systems, including any such standards or regulations as hereinafter may be amended or adopted to the extent that compliance with such amended standards is mandated by federal law or regulation. In the event that such amended standards are not mandated by federal law or regulation, and provide for a less strict performance standard and/or less frequent testing requirements, such modifications will not be included as a part of this franchise unless the town chooses to incorporate by means of a resolution or amendment hereto. 
B.  Antennas, supporting structures, headend and associated equipment, and outside plant used in the cable system shall comply with any applicable federal, state, county, or generally applicable town laws. 
C.  Grantee shall not design, install or operate its facilities in a manner that will interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the electrical or telephone system located in any building, the cable system of another franchisee, or individual or master antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast signals. 
D.  If the town contacts grantee prior to the next FCC-required test period (i.e., before December 15 and June 15 of each year), a town representative may be present during the testing. Upon request, grantee shall provide summary written reports of the results of such tests to the town. 
E.  Grantee shall maintain all of its real property, headend facilities and outside plant in a safe condition. Upon request by the town, grantee shall provide copies of the detailed maintenance procedure manuals in existence at the time of the request. 
F.  Grantee shall keep and maintain a proper and adequate inventory of maintenance and repair parts for the cable system. Grantee shall maintain or otherwise have available a work force of skilled technicians for cable system repair and maintenance. 
G.  Upon request, grantee shall provide copies of all correspondence with the FCC related to technical performance of the cable system. In the event that any complaints are filed with the FCC related to the cable system operations, grantee shall provide copies of such complaints as well as the resolution thereof to the town upon request. 
12.03  Parental guidance control. Upon request of a subscriber, grantee shall provide by sale and/or lease a device by which the subscriber can prohibit viewing or use of a particular cable service(s) during periods selected by that subscriber. Subscribers shall be notified individually, in writing, by the grantee of the availability of the device no less frequently than annually. 
12.04  Customer service. The grantee shall provide customer service in accordance with the town's customer service standards set forth in exhibit A. Such standards shall apply to all affiliates that provide cable services to subscribers and any other company that provides cable services under written agreement with the grantee. 
12.05  Quality of service. Throughout the term of this franchise, the grantee shall maintain the quality of service and meet operational standards in the maintenance and operation of its cable system as are required herein. 
Should the town find that the grantee has failed to maintain such quality of service or operational standards, the town may notify the grantee in writing and specifically set forth therein the improvements required to rectify such deficiencies. 
SECTION 13  
13.0 - Signals to be carried. 
13.01  Required programming categories. Grantee shall, at a minimum, carry programming classified under each of the following broad categories so long as such programming remains commercially and reasonably available: 
A.  News and information; 
B.  Arts, culture, performing arts; 
C.  Movies; 
D.  Sports; 
E.  General entertainment; 
F.  Children and family; 
G.  Science; 
H.  Religious; 
I.  Educational; 
J.  Governmental; 
K.  Ethnic; 
L.  Weather; 
M.  Music. 
13.02  Service for the hearing impaired. Grantee shall comply with any FCC or other lawful and applicable federal, state, or local requirements regarding altering or adapting programming for the hearing impaired. Grantee shall not take any action to remove or alter closed captioning provided for the hearing impaired as a part of any programming. Grantee shall deliver intact such closed captioning in the manner in which it arrives at the headend or from another origination source to the cable system. 
13.03  Interconnection. Grantee's subscriber cable system in the town may be interconnected with contiguous cable systems that are owned and operated by grantee or an affiliate, provided that such systems are served by the same headend that serves the town. 
13.04  Use of cable system to provide internet access by multiple providers. The town believes that nondiscriminatory access to the cable system for multiple providers of internet service may be a benefit to subscribers. Therefore, the town reserves the right to adopt requirements for such access to the cable system, subject to applicable law. Prior to such action, the town shall notify the grantee in writing at least 45 days in advance of its intent to impose such a requirement, and hold a hearing, which affords the grantee and other interested members of the public the right to be heard. By approval and acceptance of this franchise, neither the town nor the grantee has waived any rights, obligations, claims, defenses or remedies regarding the town's authority to impose such conditions. 
SECTION 14  
14.0 - Public, educational, and government (PEG) access. 
14.01  Initial channels. As of the effective date of this franchise, grantee shall dedicate three channels for the carriage of PEG programming. The grantee shall ensure that such channels are of a technical quality comparable to any other channel offered over the cable system. 
14.02  Additional channels. Grantee shall make available up to one additional PEG channel (for a total of four PEG channels) under the procedures below. Grantee shall make available up to four additional PEG channels (for a total of eight PEG channels) under the procedures detailed in this section if all the video programming services offered by grantee on the cable system are in a digital format. 
If the town or one of its PEG channel designees believes that additional channel capacity is needed for PEG programming, the interested party may file a request with the town manager. In his/her deliberations, the town manager will consider supply and demand, and, in particular, the ability and resources to produce additional PEG programming, the interest of the community in the additional PEG programming as measured through a survey methodology that is mutually acceptable between the town and the grantee, consideration of the programming that would be displaced, how much programming is produced on the existing PEG channels, how much programming on the existing PEG channels is repeated, how much programming on the existing PEG channels is character-generated, whether it is feasible to cluster PEG programming into blocks of time such that the channel space can be compatibly shared between multiple PEG programming providers, and if several PEG programming providers should combine their programming onto a single PEG channel. 
Should the town manager find that the evidence exists to support the activation of an additional channel for PEG programming, then the town manager shall provide his/her decision in writing and grantee shall provide the channel within 90 days of receiving the request. Grantee may appeal the decision of the town manager to the town council. 
14.03  Underutilized PEG channels. Grantee and the town agree that it is their mutual goal to fully and efficiently use the channel capacity of the cable system, which may include allowing the grantee to use underutilized time on the PEG channels. If grantee believes that any PEG channel has underutilized time, grantee may file a request with the town manager to use that time. In response to the request, the town manager will consider a combination of factors, including, but not limited to, the community's needs and interests, and the source, quantity, type and schedule of the programming carried on the channel. The town manager will also consider, taking into account the mission of the PEG programming, whether it is feasible to cluster PEG programming into blocks of time such that the channel space can be compatibly shared between the PEG programming provider and the grantee and/or if several PEG programming providers can combine their programming onto a single PEG channel. The town manager shall render his/her decision regarding the matter within 60 days of receiving the request. Should the town manager find that the PEG channel or portion of the channel may be used by the grantee, then grantee may begin using such time 90 days after receipt of the decision. The grantee's request shall not be unreasonably denied. Any permission granted pursuant to this subsection for use of a PEG channel or a portion thereof shall be considered temporary. 
At such time as a PEG programming provider believes that it has the resources and ability to utilize any PEG channel currently used by the grantee pursuant to this subsection, the PEG programming provider may request that the town return such PEG channel or portion of a PEG channel being used by the grantee to the PEG programming provider. In response to the request, the town will consider a combination of factors, including, but not limited to, the community's needs and interests, the quantity and schedule of the programming the applicant proposes to carry on the PEG channel, and the applicant's ability and resources to acquire or produce the proposed PEG channel programming. The town will also consider whether it is feasible for the PEG programming provider to cluster programming into blocks of time such that the PEG channel can be compatibly shared between the PEG programming provider and the grantee and/or if several PEG programming providers can combine their programming onto a single PEG channel. The town shall render its decision regarding the matter within 90 days of receiving the request. Should the town find that the evidence exists to support the return of a PEG channel or portion of a PEG channel to the PEG programming provider, then the grantee shall surrender the requested time on the PEG channel within 90 days of receiving the decision. 
14.04  Delivery of PEG programming. PEG programming shall be produced, recorded and transmitted in a format which is compatible with the technology used by the cable system, whether audio, video, or other information (including, by way of example and not limitation, secondary audio, text, digital information, high definition signals and compressed signals). Such uses must be in furtherance of PEG programming uses. 
14.05  Management and control of PEG channels. The town or its designee shall at its discretion manage the use of all PEG channels and facilities and allocate and reallocate the PEG channels amongst public, educational and government access programming. The town may authorize a third party(ies) to control and manage the use of any or all PEG channels and related facilities provided by grantee under this franchise. The town or its designee may formulate rules for the operation of PEG channels consistent with this franchise and federal law. 
14.06  Routing of PEG channel content. Grantee shall continue to provide the necessary upstream channel capacity and equipment to originate PEG channel content from the Town of Flower Mound Town Hall, located at 2121 Cross Timbers Road, Flower Mound, Texas, 75028, for dissemination over the cable system to subscribers, so long as this site is used to originate PEG programming. Grantee shall provide the necessary upstream channel capacity and equipment to route PEG channel content from additional sites as identified by the town within 120 days of said request, provided that the town is responsible for the costs of all construction and equipment. Grantee shall provide the town with an estimate of the construction and equipment costs prior to beginning construction of any new return line. Grantee shall not be responsible for constructing any new return line until the town has approved such costs in writing. 
14.07  Relocation of access channels. Grantee will use reasonable efforts to minimize the movement of PEG channel assignments. Grantee shall provide the town with a minimum of 90 days' notice, and use its best efforts to provide 120 days' notice, prior to the time any PEG channel designation is changed, unless the change is required by federal law, in which case grantee shall give the town the maximum notice possible. In addition, grantee shall pay to the town an amount equal to the town's costs in remarketing the location of the PEG channels and managing the relocation administratively and technologically, up to a maximum of $0.50 per subscriber. Grantee shall only be allowed to recover such amounts paid to the town as "external costs" (as that term is used in 47 C.F.R. section 76.922) if the movement of channels is required by federal, state, or local law. Grantee, at grantee's expense, will place the town's notices of the channel change on or with one regular monthly billing, upon the town's request. Any new channel designations for the PEG channels provided pursuant to this franchise shall be in full compliance with FCC signal quality and proof-of-performance standards. 
14.08  Reception of PEG access signals. All PEG access channels provided for under this section shall be a part of the basic cable service. 
14.09  Technical assistance. Within one hour of a request from the town and/or its designee, identifying a problem and requesting assistance from the grantee regarding a PEG channel, grantee will respond by telephone to address the problem. Within four hours, grantee shall provide technical assistance or diagnostic services to determine whether or not a problem with a PEG channel is the result of matters for which grantee is responsible and, if so, grantee will take prompt corrective action. Such assistance will be at no charge to the town. 
14.10  PEG support. 
A.  Grantee shall provide the town with an initial grant of $5,000.00 at such time as the town requests it during the first year of this franchise for PEG capital, followed by a subsequent contribution of $20,000.00, once the threshold of 5,000 doors passed is reached. The town shall give grantee at least 90 days' advance written notice to submit payment of the grant. Grantee shall be allowed to pass through this payment to subscribers over the term of this franchise. 
B.  Upon at least 90 days' advance written notice the town may require the grantee to provide an additional amount each month not to exceed $0.50 per month, per residential subscriber, as additional capital support for PEG programming. Grantee shall be allowed to pass through these payments to subscribers. 
C.  Grantee shall not be responsible for collecting or paying the PEG capital fee described in subsection 14.10, paragraph B or C on gratis accounts or for subscribers covered by bulk agreements. Each payment shall be due and payable no later than 30 days following the end of the quarter from when the PEG capital fee takes effect. The town may adjust the amount of the PEG capital fee on an annual basis (not to exceed the sum of the amounts specified in subsection 14.10, paragraphs B and C. 
D.  No PEG access channel may be used for the exhibition of any advertisement. For purposes of this section "advertisement" is defined as a message, announcement, or other programming material which is exhibited or otherwise transmitted in exchange for any remuneration and which is intended to (1) promote any service, facility, or product offered by any person who is engaged in such offering for profit; (2) to express the views of any person with respect to any matter of public importance or interest; or (3) to support or oppose any candidate for political office. 
E.  Current PEG equipment. Equipment that is currently provided to the town for PEG channel programming shall become the property of the town at no charge to the town or its subscribers. Equipment which is currently used to provide programming for the public access channel, will also become the property of the town, at no charge to the town or the subscribers. 
F.  Late payment. Grantee shall pay a late charge in an amount which is the greater of $100.00 or 10 percent per annum, compounded daily, on PEG capital fee payments, or portions thereof, that are paid subsequent to the payment dates specified above. 
G.  The town shall have the authority to distribute and re-distribute the PEG capital fee in a manner that is deemed by the town to be in the best interest of the subscribers with respect to PEG programming, in accordance with applicable law. 
SECTION 15  
15.0 - Emergency use of the cable system. 
15.01  Emergency or disaster. In accordance with and at the time required by the provisions of FCC regulations part 11, subpart D, section 11, and as such provisions may from time to time be amended, grantee shall install and maintain an emergency alert system (EAS) for use in transmitting pursuant to such regulations in the event of an emergency. Grantee shall provide the town with the ability to activate the EAS from multiple locations to override both audio and video of all programming services simultaneously during a period of emergency or disaster. Such emergency alert capability shall be operational throughout the term of this franchise. Grantee shall provide the appropriate training to town personnel as may be necessary to operate the equipment and facilities necessary to satisfy this provision of the franchise. 
15.02  Interconnection of EAS. In the event that the town enters into franchise agreements with other cable service providers, to the extent technically and legally feasible, grantee shall cooperate with the town to create a system and/or procedure to simultaneously activate the EAS over all cable systems operating in the town. The cost of such interconnection shall be borne by the other cable operators connecting to the grantee's facilities. 
SECTION 16  
16.0 - Employment requirements. 
16.01  Equal opportunity in employment. Grantee shall afford equal opportunity in employment to all qualified persons. No person shall be discriminated against in employment because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. 
SECTION 17  
17.0 - Other business activity. 
17.01  Limitations and restrictions. Subject to applicable state and federal law, this franchise only authorizes the grantee to provide those services or engage in business activities specifically identified herein. Such limitation is not a prohibition on grantee from providing services or engaging in business activities which the town cannot lawfully restrict or condition. 
SECTION 18  
18.0 - Payment to town. 
18.01  Amount and time. As compensation for the right, privilege, and franchise herein conferred, grantee shall pay to the town each year during the term of this franchise a sum equal to five percent of the grantee's gross revenue. Such payments shall be made quarterly within 45 days after the expiration of each calendar quarter. Accompanying the payment, grantee shall file a financial statement prepared according to generally accepted accounting practice showing in detail the gross revenues used in the computation of said payment. Such statement shall be signed by an officer or certified public accountant of the grantee. 
18.02  Right of inspection of records. The town shall have the right to inspect grantee's records showing the gross revenues from which payments to the town are computed and to audit and recompute any and all amounts paid under this franchise. The town's right to audit and the grantee's obligation to retain records related to a franchise fee audit shall expire three years after each franchise fee payment has been made to the town. Pursuant to subsection 2.01, paragraph Q, subparagraph (i), as part of any franchise fee audit, the town shall specifically have the right to review records related to the allocation of revenue to Cable services in the event grantee offers cable services bundled with non-cable services. 
18.03  Late payment charge. Grantee shall pay a late charge in an amount which is the greater of $100.00 or ten percent per annum, compounded daily, on franchise fee payments, or portions thereof, that are paid subsequent to the payment dates specified in subsection 18.01. The town shall provide written notice to the grantee that such payments have not been received in accordance with the dates specified in subsection 18.01, but such notice does not negate any late charge owed to the town beginning on the day following the required date of receipt under subsection 18.01. In the event the town identifies, as a result of an audit, amounts owed by the grantee from prior periods, the grantee shall pay a late charge of eight percent per annum, compounded quarterly, on the amounts identified, calculated from the date each portion of the underpayment was originally due until the date grantee remits the underpayment to the town. In the event that any audit or recomputation of fees results in an underpayment of greater than five percent (prior to the late charge) for the audit period, grantee shall reimburse the town for its costs to conduct the audit or recomputation. 
18.04  Acceptance. Payments received from the grantee under this section shall not in any way limit or impair any of the privileges or rights of the town, whether under this franchise or otherwise. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is the correct amount, nor shall acceptance be construed as a release of any claim that the town may have for additional amounts payable under the provisions of this section, subject to the limitations in subsection 18.02. 
18.05  Evasion of franchise fees. Any transaction or arrangement made for the purpose of or knowingly results in the evasion of franchise fees payable under this franchise is prohibited. 
18.06  Additional commitments not franchise fees. The franchise fee payable hereunder shall be exclusive of and in addition to all ad valorem taxes, special assessments, fees for municipal improvements, the PEG capital fee, and other lawful obligations of grantee to town. Although the total sum of franchise fee payments and additional commitments set forth elsewhere in this franchise may total more than five percent of grantee's gross revenues in any annual period, grantee agrees that the additional commitments herein are neither franchise fees as defined under any federal law in effect as of the effective date of this franchise, nor are the additional payments to be offset or credited against any franchise fee payments due to the town, nor do they represent an increase in franchise fees to be passed through to subscribers. 
SECTION 19  
19.0 - Records and reports. 
19.01  Notice. Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response required by the franchise to be served upon the town or the grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party when hand delivered, or five business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope sent by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid. 
The notices or responses to the town shall be addressed as follows: 
Town of Flower Mound 
Attention: Town Manager 
2121 Cross Timbers Road 
Flower Mound, Texas 75028 
The notices or responses to the grantee shall be addressed as follows: 
Advantex Communications/Grande Communications 
Attention: General Manager 
7701 South Stemmons 
Suite 210 
Corinth, Texas 76210 
With a copy to: 
Advantex Communications/Grande Communications 
Attention: Legal & Regulatory Division 
401 Carlson Circle 
San Marcos, Texas 78666 
The town and the grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other. 
19.02  Books of account. The town, through its duly designated officers, agents, or representatives shall have access to all books of accounts and records of grantee which are reasonably related to the enforcement of this franchise. Grantee shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of its business and operations under and in connection with this franchise. All such books of accounts and records reasonably related to the enforcement of this franchise shall be made available for inspection by the town at an office of the grantee located within the Dallas metropolitan area during normal business hours upon reasonable advance notice. In the alternative, and at grantee's discretion, grantee may make books available in other locations, but must pay the travel costs for a town representative to visit this site if such review is requested by the town. Grantee shall maintain the books and records for franchise compliance purposes for a period of three years. 
19.03  Quarterly reports. A report shall be filed by grantee with the town within 30 days following the end of each calendar quarter, or portion thereof during which the franchise is in effect, beginning with the fourth quarter of calendar year 2004. The material substance of the report shall be in a form reasonably acceptable to the town. The information contained within the quarterly report shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  A summary of the extent to which grantee has met the customer service standards included in exhibit A of this franchise. 
The quarterly reports may be submitted in conjunction with the payments to the town as required in subsection 18.01. 
19.04  Confidentiality. The town agrees to treat as confidential any books or records that constitute proprietary or confidential information under federal or state law, to the extent grantee makes the town aware of such confidentiality. Grantee shall be responsible for clearly and conspicuously stamping the word "Confidential" on each page that contains confidential or proprietary information, and shall provide a brief written explanation as to why such information is confidential under state or federal law. If the town believes it must release any such confidential books and records in the course of enforcing this franchise, or for any other reason, it shall advise grantee in advance so that grantee may take appropriate steps to protect its interests. If the town receives a demand from any person for disclosure of any information designated by grantee as confidential, the town shall, so far as consistent with applicable law, advise grantee and provide grantee with a copy of any written request by the party demanding access to such information within a reasonable time. Until otherwise ordered by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the town agrees that, to the extent permitted by state and federal law, it shall deny access to any of grantee's books and records marked confidential as set forth above to any person. 
SECTION 20  
20.0 - Regulation of rates. 
20.01  Town regulation of grantee's rates. The town council shall regulate, by ordinance, the rates for any and all of those cable services and related installations and equipment of grantee subject to regulation by the town, consistent with FCC rules governing rate regulation and the provisions of the Communications Act. In such event the town council shall first prescribe by ordinance the procedure and standards to be followed and the extent and scope of such rate regulations, all of which matters shall be consistent with due process and shall conform to any and all of those federal and state laws, rules, and regulations then applicable. Subject to its authority to regulate rates the town shall have access to all books and records related to grantee's rates including bulk contract rate information, subject to applicable law. 
20.02  Notice of rates. Grantee shall provide written notice of its then current rates and charges for any and all of its cable services in the town in compliance with any timing requirements prescribed in FCC regulations. 
SECTION 21  
21.0 - Free drops and service. 
21.01  Free drops and service. Grantee shall, at no cost, continue to provide one outlet of basic cable service and expanded basic cable service to all town-owned and occupied buildings, schools, and public libraries where such service is provided as of the effective date of this franchise. For purposes of this subsection, "school" means all state-accredited K-12 public and private schools. In addition, grantee shall provide, at no cost, one outlet of basic cable service and expanded basic cable service to new or relocated, owned, or leased and occupied town buildings, schools, and libraries where service is not being provided as of the effective date of this franchise upon request, and if the drop line from the feeder cable to such building does not exceed 150 feet, or if the town, school, or library agrees to pay the incremental cost of such drop line in excess of 150 feet, including the cost of such excess labor and materials. Such obligation to provide free cable service shall not extend to areas of town buildings where the grantee would normally enter into a commercial contract to provide such cable service (e.g., golf courses, airport restaurants and concourses, and recreation center work out facilities). Outlets of basic cable service and expanded basic cable service provided in accordance with this subsection may only be used to distribute cable services throughout such buildings upon the express agreement of the grantee. Any cable service provided under this subsection may only be used for lawful purposes. 
SECTION 22  
22.0 - Prohibition of discriminatory or preferential practices. 
22.01  Rates, charges, and services. In its rates or charges, or in making available cable, or in its rules or regulations, or in any other respect, grantee shall not make or grant preference or advantage to any subscriber or potential subscriber and shall not subject any such person to any prejudice or disadvantage. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns to stimulate subscriptions to the cable system or other legitimate uses thereof. 
SECTION 23  
23.0 - Non-exclusive franchise. 
23.01  Franchise non-exclusive. The rights, privileges, and franchise granted hereby are not exclusive and nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent town from granting any like or similar rights, privileges, and franchise to any other person within all or any portion of town. The town shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that any person providing video programming services and/or cable services does not enter into the public rights-of-way in the franchise area on terms or conditions materially more favorable or less burdensome to such person than those applied to the grantee pursuant to this franchise. 
23.02  Disputes. In the event that the town grants a franchise to another person to provide video programming and/or cable services in the town, grantee shall have no longer than three months from the date grantee receives a copy of such franchise to notify the town, in writing, of any alleged discrimination between this franchise and the burdens and rights provided in such other franchise. Failure to notify the town shall estop grantee from any further action related to allegations of discrimination regarding the granting of such franchise. This subsection is not intended to prevent grantee from any action related to the town's actual administration of such franchise that the grantee believes is discriminatory. 
SECTION 24  
24.0 - Material breach of franchise, notice and liquidated damages. 
24.01  Notice of default; opportunity to cure; public hearing. 
A.  Notice of default. The town shall notify the grantee, in writing, of an alleged failure to comply with a provision of this franchise, which notice shall specify the alleged failure with reasonable particularity. The grantee shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to: 
(i)  Correct the violation before the town may take further action or with respect to any such violation, if by reason of the nature thereof such violation cannot with due diligence be wholly cured within such period of 30 days, then the 30-day period shall be extended for such period of time as may be necessary to complete the correction of the same with all due diligence, but in no event longer than 90 days unless a further extension of time is approved by the town council; or 
(ii)  Provide a written response to the town, presenting facts and arguments in refutation or excuse of such alleged failure. 
B.  If the town is unsatisfied with the grantee's response under subsection 24.01, paragraph A, the town shall hold a public hearing on the matter. Grantee must be given at least ten days' notice of the hearing. At the hearing, the grantee shall be entitled to all the rights of due process consistent with the town procedures, including, but not limited to, the right to present evidence and the right to be represented by counsel. The grantee shall make available to the town, if requested, any records, documents or other information reasonably necessary to its consideration of the matter. Following the public hearing, the town may determine: 
(i)  Whether a failure to comply with a franchise provision has occurred; 
(ii)  Whether such failure is excusable; and 
(iii)  Whether such failure has been cured or will be cured by the grantee. After the hearing, grantee will be provided with a written copy of any action taken by the town council, along with supporting documents. 
C.  If the town determines that a failure to comply with a provision of the franchise has occurred and that such failure is not excusable and has not been or will not be cured by the grantee in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the town, then the town may take any actions provided in subsection 24.02. 
D.  In the event grantee fails to make a franchise fee payment as require by subsection 18.01, fails to make the PEG payments specified in subsection 14.10, paragraphs A through E, or fails to maintain insurance in accordance with section 9, the town is not required to conduct the public hearing identified in paragraph A above, but may proceed directly to subsection 24.02 for the procedures in paragraph A above. 
24.02  Town action in event of breach. In the event that grounds exist which give the town reason to believe that the grantee failed to comply with a material provision of this franchise, then the town may, at any time during the term of this franchise, to the extent lawful: 
A.  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; 
B.  Commence an action at law for monetary damages from the grantee as compensation for such material breach; 
C.  Seek liquidated damages pursuant to subsection 24.03; and/or 
D.  In the case of breach of a material provision of the franchise or other material violation as set forth in subsections 25.01 and 25.02, seek to revoke the franchise pursuant to subsection 25.03. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town may not pursue monetary damages or liquidated damages for late payment of franchise fees in addition to the interest specified in subsection 18.03, or for late payment of the PEG capital fee in addition to the interest specified in subsection 14.10, paragraph F. 
24.03  Liquidated damages. In the event the town's selected course of action following the process set forth in subsections 24.01 and 24.02 is to impose liquidated damages, the town shall give grantee written notice of its intent, and a reasonable period of time following receipt of the notice, not less than 30 days and not more than 90 days unless a longer period is approved by the town council, to cure the alleged violation. If grantee remains in violation of the franchise following this cure period, the town may charge to and collect from the grantee the liquidated damages set forth below, with the liquidated damages beginning to accrue no earlier than the day following the end of the cure periods. The parties agree that actual damages that might be sustained by the town by reason of the breach by grantee of the provisions of this franchise set forth below are uncertain and difficult of ascertainment, and that the sums set forth below would be reasonable compensation for such breach, and grantee promises to pay, and the town agrees to accept, such sums as liquidated damages, and not as a penalty, in the event of such breach. Additionally such sums of money shall be considered liquidated damages due the town by grantee by reason of inconvenience to the public and because of public works supervision and maintenance and other town administrative time and involvement which resulted in the expenditure of public funds due to grantee's failure to comply with certain provisions in this franchise. Grantee covenants that any such sums paid to the town under this provision of the franchise shall not be included in the development of any rate, change, or price for services charged to subscribers. 
A.  For failure of grantee to provide any report, certificate or map to the town as required by this franchise, $50.00 per day. 
B.  For failure of grantee to respond, restore or repair the public rights-of-way within 48 hours of notice by town under subsection 7.03, $250.00 per day for every day following 48 hours after grantee's receipt of the notice. Should the town adopt any lawful and generally applicable ordinance governing the public rights-of-way which includes administrative fees for failure to restore the public rights-of-way, such fees in the ordinance shall apply to the grantee and supersede the ability of the town to collect liquidated damages under this provision of the franchise. 
C.  If town is required to relocate grantee's facilities under subsection 7.04, grantee shall pay $1,000.00 to the town in addition to reimbursement of the costs incurred by the town in relocating the facilities. Should the town adopt any lawful and generally applicable ordinance governing the public rights-of-way which includes administrative fees for town-performed relocation of grantee facilities, such fees in the ordinance shall apply to the grantee and supersede the ability of the town to collect liquidated damages under this provision of the franchise. 
D.  For failure of grantee to provide the PEG channels as required by subsections 14.01, 14.02, or 14.08, $100.00 per day. 
E.  For failure of grantee to provide the return lines required by subsection 14.06, $100.00 per day. 
F.  For failure of grantee to provide the town the ability to activate the EAS as required by subsection 15.01, $500.00 per day. 
G.  For failure of grantee to provide the notice of rates as required by subsection 20.02, $50.00 per day. 
H.  For failure to comply with the service extension requirements set forth in section 28, the greater of $250.00 per day or $1.00 per day per impacted subscriber. 
I.  Force majeure. Other than its failure, refusal, or inability to pay its debts and obligations, including, specifically, the payments to town required by this franchise, grantee shall not be declared in default or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this franchise in those cases in which performance of such provision is prevented by reasons beyond its control. 
24.04  Reservation of rights. The rights reserved to the town under this section are in addition to all other rights of the town whether reserved by this franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right shall affect any other right the town may have. 
SECTION 25  
25.0 - Revocation of franchise. 
25.01  General. In addition to all rights and powers of the town by virtue of this franchise or otherwise, the town reserves, as an additional and as a separate and distinct power, the right to revoke the franchise in accordance with the procedures specified herein if any of the following events occur or for any of the following reasons: 
A.  Grantee by act or omission substantially violates any material term, condition, or provision of this franchise and shall fail or refuse to effect material compliance following the notice and opportunity to cure specified under subsection 24.01; or 
B.  Grantee knowingly or willingly attempts to evade any material provision of this franchise; or 
C.  Repeated and substantial violation or willful disregard of: 
(i)  Town's lawful ordinances and regulations related to the public rights-of-way; or 
(ii)  The customer service standards in exhibit A; or 
(iii)  The cable system technical performance requirements in subsections 12.01 and 12.02. 
D.  The occurrence of any event which may reasonably lead to the foreclosure or other similar judicial or non-judicial sale of all or any material part of the cable system; or 
E.  Grantee becomes insolvent or is adjudged bankrupt or all or any part of grantee's facilities are sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by grantee within 30 days from the date of such sale; provided, however, this shall not be an event of termination or cancellation in the event of bankruptcy proceeding and the trustee, receiver, or debtor in possession agrees in writing to be bound by the terms of this franchise; or 
F.  Grantee has been found by a court of law to have practiced any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under this franchise with the town, subscribers or potential subscribers. 
25.02  Material provisions. Material terms of this franchise include, but are not limited to: 
A.  The indemnification required by section 8. 
B.  The insurance required by subsection 9.01. 
C.  The channel capacity required by subsection 10.01. 
D.  The emergency standby power required by subsection 10.03, paragraph B. 
E.  The PEG channels as required by subsections 14.01 and 14.02. 
F.  The PEG capital fee required by subsection 14.10, paragraph B. 
G.  The EAS required by subsection 15.01. 
H.  Payment of franchise fees as required by subsection 18.01. 
I.  Non-discrimination in rates and services as required by section 22. 
J.  Town approval of transfers and changes of control as required by subsections 26.01 and 26.02. 
25.03  Method of revocation. Should the town council determine, following the process set forth in subsections 24.01 and 24.02, that its selected course of action shall be to seek revocation of the franchise, the town shall give grantee written notice of such intent. The notice shall set forth the causes and reasons for the proposed revocation, shall advise grantee that it will be provided an opportunity to be heard by town regarding such proposed action before any such action is taken, and shall set forth the time, date, and place of the hearing. In no event shall such hearing be held less than 30 days following delivery of such notice to grantee. At the hearing, the grantee shall be entitled to all rights of due process consistent with the town procedures, including but not limited to the right to present evidence and the right to be represented by counsel. Any such revocation of this franchise shall be by ordinance. 
25.04  Grantee may appeal town's decision. The grantee may appeal the town's decision to revoke the franchise to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the town's decision de novo and to modify or reverse such decision as justice may require. Such appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within 60 days of the issuance of the determination of the town. 
SECTION 26  
26.0 - Assignment of franchise. 
26.01  Town approval of assignment required. This franchise shall be a privilege personal to the grantee and shall not be assigned or transferred, or otherwise encumbered, without the prior consent of the town. Two exceptions to the requirement of town consent are: 
A.  If such assignment or transfer is to an affiliate of comparable technical and financial capability as well as proven experience in managing and operating cable systems; or 
B.  For a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the grantee in the franchise or cable system in order to secure indebtedness. Transfer to an affiliate shall mandate notification from grantee concerning the transfer or assignment. 
C.  For all other requests by grantee to assign or transfer this franchise, grantee shall provide appropriate written notification pursuant to FCC regulations. Within 30 days of receiving the request for transfer, the town shall notify the grantee in writing of the information it requires to determine the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the transferee. If the town has not taken action on the grantee's request for transfer within 120 days after receiving such request, and provided the town has promptly received from grantee the information it requested in connection with the request, consent by the town shall be deemed given. The town may condition its consent to the transfer upon such terms and conditions reasonably related to the legal, technical and financial qualifications of the transferee. No assignment to any person shall be effective until the transferee has filed with the town an instrument in writing, duly executed, reciting the fact of such assignment, accepting the terms of this franchise, and agreeing to comply with all of the provisions hereof, subject to applicable law. 
26.02  Town approval of transfer of control required. The grantee shall promptly notify the town of any actual or proposed change in, or transfer of, or disposition or acquisition by any other person in control of the grantee. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the town shall have consented thereto provided that the town has acted within the time constraints required by law. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, disposition, or acquisition of control, the town may inquire into the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the prospective controlling party, but shall do so within 30 days of receipt of the requested transfer from the grantee. Grantee shall assist the town in such inquiry and will respond within ten days unless a longer time is reasonably necessary or allowed by law. 
SECTION 27  
27.0 - Failure of town to enforce franchise. 
27.01  No waiver of terms. The grantee shall not be excused from complying with each and all of the terms, conditions, and provisions of this franchise even though the town should upon one or more occasions fail to insist upon, require, or seek compliance with any such term, condition, or provision. 
SECTION 28  
28.0 - Service availability. 
28.01  Service availability. The grantee shall provide cable service throughout the entire franchise area, subject to the provisions below. 
28.02  Annexations. If the town annexes any contiguous territory which is being provided cable service by the grantee or its affiliates, the annexed area will be subject to the provisions of this franchise upon the effective date of the annexation; provided, however, that grantee shall be allowed a reasonable time under the circumstances to make any required modifications to the cable system, cable services, billing system, etc., as may be required to accommodate such change, and provided that if the area is serviced by an affiliate, a transfer of ownership of the cable system in that area to the grantee shall not be required by the town. If the annexed area is being provided comparable cable service by another provider, grantee shall have the right, but not the requirement, to extend its cable system to the annexed area. In the event that the annexed territory is contiguous and not being provided cable service by any provider, grantee agrees that it shall within 12 months extend its cable system into the newly annexed territory under the terms of subsection 28.03. In the event that the annexed area is not contiguous to the franchise area existing as of the effective date of this franchise, grantee shall not have the obligation to extend to such area. 
28.03  Extension policy. Within six months of a qualified request as described herein, grantee must extend and make cable service available to every lot or tract of land for which the owner or occupant thereof has requested cable service in all unserved areas having at least ten dwelling units constructed or planned for construction per 1,320 cable bearing strand feet or 25 dwelling units per cable bearing strand mile, as measured from the portion of the existing cable system which is to be extended. Extensions shall be at grantee's cost. For purposes of this section, "planned for construction" shall have the meaning of fully prepared lots. 
If more than 150 feet of distance lies between the nearest distribution cable and the point of connection of service to the property for which service is requested, the grantee may charge the potential subscriber non-standard installation charges as permitted by federal law. 
If the unserved area is a new underground development, grantee shall participate in joint trenching with the utilities installing service to the area, provided grantee is provided adequate notice and access to the trenches and is not otherwise prevented from participating due to conditions beyond its control. The ability of the grantee to participate in joint trenching shall not impact the grantee's requirement to provide extensions pursuant to this subsection. 
28.04  Contributions in aid of construction. In the event that potential subscribers request cable service in an area that does not meet the density requirements of subsection 28.03, the subscriber(s) will be given the alternative to provide a contribution in aid of construction of the cable system extension equal to three-fourths of the grantee's actual out-of-pocket costs to provide extension less than 1,320 cable bearing strand feet. That portion of any extension greater than 1,320 cable bearing feet shall be paid by the subscriber(s) at the grantee's actual out-of-pocket cost. In the event that any portion of the extension for which a subscriber has provided contribution in aid of construction ultimately meets the extension requirements in subsection 28.03, grantee shall reimburse all subscribers that have made such contributions in aid of construction, provided that such subscribers provide proof of the contribution in aid of construction to grantee. 
SECTION 29  
29.0 - Valuation. 
29.01  Purchase price of cable system. If the franchise is revoked for cause and the parties agree that the town may purchase the cable system, the town may purchase the cable system at an equitable price. If renewal of the franchise is lawfully denied and the parties agree that the town may purchase the cable system, the town may purchase the cable system at fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. Should the parties fail to agree upon the then current fair market value, the same shall be determined in an appropriate proceeding filed in any court having jurisdiction. 
SECTION 30  
30.0 - Recourse, understanding, and construction. 
30.01  Requirements and enforcement. Except as expressly provided herein, grantee shall have no monetary recourse whatsoever against town of any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of this franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by town or because of the lack of town's authority to grant all or any part of this franchise. 
30.02  Grantee's understanding. Grantee expressly acknowledges that in accepting this franchise, it relied solely upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of town to grant this franchise and that grantee was not induced to accept this franchise by any understanding, promise, or other statement, verbal or written, by or on behalf of town or by any third person concerning any term or condition not expressed herein. 
30.03  Construction of franchise. By acceptance of this franchise, grantee acknowledges that it has carefully read the provisions hereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meanings of such. 
SECTION 31  
31.0 - Acceptance of franchise. 
31.01  Method of acceptance. Within 30 days from the effective date of this franchise, grantee shall file with the town secretary a written statement in the following form signed in its name and behalf: 
"To the Honorable Mayor and Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas: For itself, its successors, and assigns, Advantex Communications/Grande Communications, duly authorized to do business in the State of Texas, hereby accepts the attached Franchise and agrees to be bound by all of its terms, conditions, and provisions, subject to applicable law. 
Advantex Communications/Grande Communications 
By: ___________ 
Its: ___________ 
Dated this the ________ day of ________, 2004." 
31.02  Acceptance of franchise not a waiver. Acceptance of this franchise by grantee shall not constitute a waiver by it of any of its rights. 
SECTION 32  
32.0 - Severability. 
32.01  Provisions severable. If any provision, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this franchise is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this franchise. It is the intent of town in adopting this franchise that no portion or provision thereof shall become inoperative or fail by reason of any invalidity or unconstitutionality of any other portion or provision, and to this end all provisions of this franchise are declared to be severable. 
[SECTION 33.0]  
33.0 - Conflicts. 
33.01  Conflicts. All ordinances and provisions of the town that are in conflict with this franchise shall be and same are hereby repealed, and all ordinances and provisions of ordinances of said town not so repealed are retained in full force and effect. 
PASSED, APPROVED, AND ADOPTED ON FIRST READING THE 19th DAY OF JULY, 2004. 
PASSED, APPROVED, AND ADOPTED ON SECOND READING THE 2ND DAY OF AUGUST, 2004. 
APPROVED: Jody A. Smith, Mayor 
ATTEST: Paula Lawrence, Town Secretary 
EXHIBIT A  
1.1.A - Customer service standards. 
1)  Section 1. Definitions. 
A.  Normal operating conditions. Those service conditions which are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, labor strikes or slowdowns, telephone network outages, interruption of electric power service which is not a direct result of the grantee's actions, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which ordinarily are within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate adjustments, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, backup power during power outages, changes in billing cycles, changes in channel line-ups that are within grantee's control, construction, rebuilds, maintenance (including repairs related thereto) and/or upgrade of the cable system. 
B.  Outage. A service interruption affecting multiple subscribers in a contiguous area that has the same source problem. 
C.  Service call. The action taken by the grantee to correct a service interruption affecting an individual subscriber. 
D.  Service interruption. The loss of picture or sound on one or more channels. 
E.  Standard installation. Installations where the length of the drop is up to 125 feet.  
Section 2. - Telephone availability. 
A.  The grantee shall maintain a toll-free number to respond to all calls and inquiries from subscribers in the franchise area and/or town residents regarding cable service. Grantee representatives trained and qualified to answer questions related to cable service in the franchise area must be available to receive requests for service calls or report outages 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and other inquiries at least 45 hours per week, including some evening and weekend hours. Grantee representatives shall identify themselves by name when answering this number. 
B.  The grantee's telephone numbers shall be listed, with appropriate description (e.g. administration, customer service, billing, repair, etc.), in the directory published by the local telephone company or companies serving the franchise area. 
C.  In the event that the grantee chooses to use an automated response unit ("ARU") or a voice response unit ("VRU") to distribute calls, the system shall have as a first tier menu option (not including a routing option for foreign language), an option "for all other inquiries." If a foreign language routing option is provided, and the subscriber does not enter an option, the menu will default to the first tier menu of English options. 
After the first tier menu (not including a foreign language routing option) has run through twice, if customers do not select any option, the ARU or VRU will forward the call to a queue for a live representative. The grantee may reasonably substitute this requirement with another method of handling calls from customers who do not have touch-tone telephones. 
The total elapsed time between when a subscriber's call is first answered by an ARU or VRU to the end of the last tier menu shall not be longer than 90 seconds. For purposes of this subsection, the "last tier menu" is the last tier before the subscriber is routed to a live representative, or specific information is given to the subscriber, such as instructions for troubleshooting or directions to an office. 
The town may review the options provided to callers and recommend to the grantee that additional options be provided. The grantee shall consider the town's recommendations. 
D.  Under normal operating conditions, calls received by the grantee shall be answered within 30 seconds after the subscriber has selected their final menu option. The grantee shall meet this standard for 90 percent of the calls it receives, as measured on a calendar quarter basis. Measurement of this standard shall include all calls received by the grantee, whether they are answered by a live representative, automated attendant, or abandoned before completion. 
If the grantee does not meet the 90 percent standard described in this paragraph D. during any calendar quarter, liquidated damages may be assessed by the town against the grantee as follows: 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 85 [percent] and less than 90 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $25.00, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $250.00. 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 75 percent and less than 85 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $75.00, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $750.00. 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 65 percent and less than 75 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $250.00, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $2,500.00. 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs less than 65 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $500.00, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $5,000.00. 
For any consecutive quarter(s) in which the grantee performs at a level below 90 percent, the grantee shall pay the town the amount listed above for the most recent quarter, plus the amount paid to the town for the previous quarter. For example, if the grantee performs at 79 percent one quarter and 60 percent in the next quarter, the grantee shall pay the town $250.00 for the first quarter and $750.00) [$500.00 for the most recent quarter plus $250.00 for the previous quarter] for the second quarter, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $2,500.00 for the first quarter and $7,500.00 [$5,000.00 for the most recent quarter plus $2,500.00 for the previous quarter] for the second quarter. 
E.  Under normal operating conditions, callers to the grantee shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time during any calendar quarter. 
F.  Not more than 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter, beginning with the fourth quarter of calendar year 2004, the grantee shall report to the town the following for all call centers receiving calls from subscribers except for temporary telephone numbers set up for national promotions: 
• Total number of calls received by the grantee 
• Number of calls answered by these categories: live representative, automated attendant, and abandoned 
• Number of calls answered within 30 seconds 
• Percentage of calls answered within 30 seconds 
• Percentage of time all trunks were busy 
The material substance of the report shall be in a form reasonably acceptable to the town. 
If the town does not receive the quarterly calls report when due, the town shall give notice to the grantee. The grantee shall be assessed liquidated damages in the amount of $5.00 per day for every day following receipt of the notice that the report is not provided to the town, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $50.00 per day. The grantee shall not be assessed liquidated damages for failure to report on statistics which cannot be produced for reasons outside of its control, provided that the grantee supplies an explanation to the town as to why the statistics required herein could not be produced. 
G.  The grantee shall notify the town's designee as promptly as possible, by any available means, whenever there is a situation that prevents all subscribers from being able to reach the grantee by telephone. 
H.  At the grantee's option, the measurements and reporting above may be changed from calendar quarters to billing or accounting quarters. The grantee shall notify the town of such a change at least 30 days in advance of any implementation.  
Section 3. - Service centers. 
A.  The grantee shall provide the town with a written list of service centers and hours of operation for each location that subscribers can visit for any of the following functions, and notify the town of any subsequent changes in either location or hours 30 days in advance. Such locations shall be open at least 40 hours during the week, including some evening and weekend hours. 
• To accept payments 
• To exchange or accept return of grantee-provided equipment 
• To schedule technical calls and delivery and pick up of converter boxes, remotes and similar grantee-supplied equipment from subscribers 
• To answer subscriber inquiries  
Section 4. - Installations and service appointments. 
A.  All installations will be in accordance with FCC rules, including but not limited to, appropriate grounding, connection of equipment to ensure reception of cable service, and the provision of required consumer information and literature to adequately inform the subscriber about the utilization of the grantee-supplied equipment and cable services. 
B.  Under normal operating conditions, standard installations shall be performed within seven days after an order has been placed, except for those subscribers who specifically request an installation date later than seven days after order placement. 
The company shall meet this standard for 90 percent of the standard installations it performs, as measured on a calendar quarter basis, excepting out customer requests for connection later than seven days after order placement. 
If the grantee does not meet the 90 percent standard described in this paragraph B. during any calendar quarter, liquidated damages may be assessed by the town against the grantee as follows: 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 85 [percent] and less than 90 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $25.00, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $250.00. 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 75 percent and less than 85 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $75.00, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $750.00. 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 65 percent and less than 75 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $250.00, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $2,500.00. 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs less than 65 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $500.00, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $5,000.00. 
For any consecutive quarter(s) in which the grantee performs at a level below 90 percent, the grantee shall pay the town the amount listed above for the most recent quarter, plus the amount paid to the town for the previous quarter. For example, if the grantee performs at 79 percent one quarter and 60 percent in the next quarter, the grantee shall pay the town $250.00 for the first quarter and $750.00 [$500.00 for the most recent quarter plus $250.00 for the previous quarter] for the second quarter, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $2,500.00 for the first quarter and $7,500.00 [$5,000.00 for the most recent quarter plus $2,500.00 for the previous quarter] for the second quarter. 
In addition, any individual subscriber who does not have their standard installation completed within the seven-day period shall be entitled to receive a free standard installation upon request, except for those subscribers who request installation later than seven days after order placement. 
C.  The grantee shall provide the town with a report, beginning with the fourth quarter of calendar year 2004, within 30 days following the end of each calendar quarter, noting the following: 
* Number of total standard installations completed for the quarter, excluding those requested outside of the seven-day period by the subscriber 
* Number of standard installations completed within the seven-day period 
* Number of standard installations not completed within the seven-day period 
* Percentage of standard installations completed within the seven-day period, excluding those requested outside of the seven-day period by the subscriber 
At the grantee's option, the measurements and reporting above may be changed from calendar quarters to billing or accounting quarters. The grantee shall notify the town of such a change not less than 30 days in advance. 
D.  The grantee will offer subscribers "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities of a maximum four-hour scheduled time block between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. except during months where available light does not permit appointments after 6:00 p.m. At the grantee's discretion, the grantee may offer subscribers appointments other than these four-hour time blocks if agreeable to the subscriber. The grantee may offer to schedule subscriber appointments for a specific time and shall schedule the subscriber to be the first call of the day or last call of the day if requested by the subscriber and warranted by the circumstances. The grantee shall also perform some service calls outside of the hours specified above in the evenings and on weekends. 
E.  At the request of the subscriber, the grantee will call the subscriber prior to an installation or service call appointment. The call shall be made by the grantee at the approximate time and to the telephone number requested by the subscriber. 
F.  At the time this franchise was entered into, grantee was voluntarily participating in the industry "on-time guarantee" program. Under the terms of that program, if the grantee does not arrive for an installation or service call appointment within the scheduled time frame agreed to with the subscriber, the subscriber is entitled to receive either a free standard installation in the event of an installation appointment, or a $20.00 credit in the event of a missed service call appointment. Calling a subscriber during the appointment window does not negate the subscriber's entitlement to credit for a missed appointment. The grantee will participate in this program and reserves the right to substitute another customer service program for the "on-time guarantee" at its discretion, provided that the subscriber benefits are reasonably comparable to those provided by the current program. 
G.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after 6:00 p.m. On the business day prior to the day of the scheduled appointment. 
H.  If the grantee's representative is running late for an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the grantee will document an effort to contact the subscriber directly. If, however, the subscriber is unavailable at the time the contact attempt is made, the grantee will attempt at least a second documented contact during the previously agreed upon appointment window or before the specifically scheduled time. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is mutually agreeable. 
I.  If it is necessary to place a temporary drop on the ground, the grantee shall bury the temporary drop within ten business days, under normal operating conditions. The ten-day period shall be extended for days that the grantee is unable to bury the drop due to unfavorable weather conditions or is unable to gain access to a temporary drop located on private property. If grantee fails to bury the drop within this authorized time period, grantee shall pay the town $100.00 a day for each day that a drop remains on the ground.  
Section 5. - Service interruptions and outages. 
A.  The grantee shall make repairs promptly, and interrupt cable service only as necessary and for the shortest time period possible. Unless otherwise required by law or approved by the town, the grantee will not schedule routine testing or maintenance which would cause a service interruption or outage on Friday, Saturday or Sunday night. 
B.  The grantee shall promptly notify the town of any significant outage of the cable system. For the purposes of this section, a significant outage of the cable system shall mean any service interruption lasting at least four continuous hours that affects at least ten percent of the subscribers in the franchise area. 
C.  The grantee shall exercise its best efforts to limit any outage for the purpose of maintaining, repairing, or constructing the cable system. Except in an emergency or other situation necessitating a more expedited or alternative notification procedure, the grantee may schedule an outage for a period of more than four hours during any 24-hour period only after the town and each affected subscriber in the town have been given 15 days' prior notice of the proposed outage. 
D.  Technicians employed by the grantee who are capable of responding to outages must be available to respond 24 hours a day, seven days per week. 
E.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee must respond to a call or written notice from a subscriber regarding a service interruption within 24 hours. The grantee must begin actions to correct all other cable service problems the next business day after notification by the subscriber or the town of a cable service problem. 
F.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee shall complete service calls within 72 hours after being notified of a service interruption, not including situations where the subscriber is not reasonably available for a service call to correct the service interruption within the 72-hour period. 
G.  The grantee shall meet the standard in paragraph F. of this section for 90 percent of the service calls it completes, as measured on a quarterly basis. 
If the grantee fails to meet this standard during any calendar quarter, liquidated damages may be assessed by the town against the grantee as follows: 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 85 [percent] and less than 90 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $25.00, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $250.00. 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 75 percent and less than 85 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $75.00, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $750.00. 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs equal to or greater than 65 percent and less than 75 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $250.00, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $2,500.00. 
* Any quarter where the grantee performs less than 65 percent, the grantee shall pay the town $500.00, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $5,000.00. 
For any consecutive quarter(s) in which the grantee performs at a level below 90 percent, the grantee shall pay the town the amount listed above for the most recent quarter, plus the amount paid to the town for the previous quarter. For example, if the grantee performs at 79 percent one quarter and 60 percent in the next quarter, the grantee shall pay the town $250.00 for the first quarter and $750.00 [$500.00 for the most recent quarter plus $250.00 for the previous quarter] for the second quarter, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $2,500.00 for the first quarter and $7,500.00 [$5,000.00 for the most recent quarter plus $2,500.00 for the previous quarter] for the second quarter. 
H.  The grantee shall provide the town with a report, beginning with the fourth quarter of calendar year 2004, within 30 days following the end of each calendar quarter, noting the following: 
• Number of total service calls completed for the quarter, not including service calls where the subscriber was reasonably unavailable for a service call within the 72-hour period. 
• Number of service calls completed within the 72-hour period. 
• Percentage of service calls completed within the 72-hour period, not including service calls where the subscriber was reasonably unavailable for a service call within the 72-hour period. 
• At the grantee's option, the measurements and reporting above may be changed from calendar quarters to billing or accounting quarters. The grantee shall notify the town of such a change at least 30 days in advance. 
I.  Within 30 days following the end of each calendar year, grantee shall provide a report of all service calls for the year by category. 
J.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee shall provide credit upon subscriber request to affected subscriber(s) when there is an outage or service interruption of all channels for a period of four consecutive hours or more. The credit for such an outage shall equal, at a minimum, a proportionate amount of the affected subscriber(s) current monthly bill. In order to qualify for the credit, the subscriber must promptly report the problem and allow the grantee to verify the outage if requested by the grantee. 
K.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee shall provide a credit upon subscriber request to any subscriber experiencing an outage or service interruption of any specific cable service or channel for a period of four consecutive hours or more. The credit shall equal, at a minimum, a proportionate amount of the affected cable services. In order to qualify for the credit, the subscriber must promptly report the problem and allow the grantee to verify the outage if requested by the grantee. 
L.  Under normal operating conditions, if an outage affects all video programming cable services in an area which serves more than ten percent of total grantee subscribers in the franchise area, for more than 24 consecutive hours, the grantee shall issue an automatic credit to the affected subscribers in the amount of the value of basic plus expanded basic service for the proportionate time the cable service was out. Such credit will be reflected on subscriber billing statements within 45 days following the outage. Such credit under this provision does not negate the subscriber's right to request additional credit under items J. and K. herein.  
Section 6. - Customer complaints. 
A.  The grantee shall maintain a written log or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction in printed form, of all cable-related subscriber contacts which result in a service call. Such log shall, at a minimum, list the date and time of such contact, the nature of the complaint, and when and what actions were taken by the grantee in response thereto. Such log shall be kept at the grantee's office in or near the franchise area, for a period of at least three years and shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by town upon request, subject to section 631 of the Cable Act regarding subscriber privacy. 
Additionally, the grantee shall maintain a written or electronic log of every subscriber complaint referred by the town, including the dates, times and detailed information related to the complaint and resolution. The grantee shall cooperate with the town in the development of this log format. 
If the town receives a pattern of complaints from subscribers which indicates a recurring problem, town may require the grantee to maintain a manual or electronic log of the problem being tracked until such time as the calls to the town are reasonably reduced. 
B.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee shall resolve subscriber complaints referred by the town within 72 hours. The grantee shall notify the town of those matters that necessitate an excess of 72 hours to resolve, but those matters must be finally resolved within ten days of the initial complaint. The town may require reasonable documentation to be provided by the grantee to substantiate the request for additional time to resolve the problem. If the grantee fails to resolve a complaint within the required 72 hours (or extended period), the grantee shall pay to the town $10.00 per day for each day the complaint is not resolved within the specified time frame, until such time as grantee reaches the threshold of 5,000 doors passed, at which point the liquidated damages amount will be increased to $100.00 per day. 
For purposes of this subsection, "resolve" means that the grantee shall perform those actions which, in the normal course of business, are necessary to respond to the subscriber's problem. 
C.  The grantee's customer service representatives shall have the authority to provide credit for interrupted cable service or any of the other credits, to waive fees, and to schedule service appointments. Any difficulties that cannot be resolved by the customer service representative shall be referred to the appropriate supervisor who shall contact the customer within four hours and resolve in accordance with this section.  
Section 7. - Billing. 
A.  Subscriber bills must be itemized, in accordance with cable services purchased by subscribers and related equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, credits, and late charges. If the grantee chooses to itemize franchise fees and/or other governmentally imposed fees as a separate line item(s), such fees must be shown in accordance with applicable law. The grantee shall maintain records of the date and place of mailing of bills and upon request shall certify in writing to town the date of mailing of each group of bills. 
B.  Every subscriber with a current account balance sending payment directly to grantee shall be given at least 20 days from the date statements are mailed to the subscriber until the payment due date. Automatic withdrawals for payment shall be performed in accordance with Uniform Commercial Code. 
C.  Within one year of the effective date of the franchise, to the extent that the grantee chooses to bill in advance for cable services, every subscriber with a current account balance sending payment directly to the grantee shall be given at least 15 days from the first day of the billing period until the payment due date. The billing period is the time period for which cable services are being billed. For example, if the customer's billing period is from the first to the thirty-first of the month, the due date shall not be earlier than the fifteenth day of the month. 
D.  A specific due date shall be listed on the bill of every subscriber whose account is current. Delinquent accounts may receive a bill that lists the due date as "upon receipt"; however, the current portion of that bill shall not be considered past due except in accordance with B. and C. above. 
E.  Any subscriber who, in good faith, disputes all or part of any bill shall have the option of withholding the disputed amount without disconnect or late fees being assessed until the dispute is resolved, provided that: 
* The subscriber pays all undisputed charges; 
* The subscriber provides notification of the dispute to grantee within five days of the due date; and 
* The subscriber cooperates in determining the accuracy and/or appropriateness of the charges in dispute. 
It shall be within the grantee's sole discretion to determine when the dispute has been resolved; however, the town has the right to determine if the grantee has met its obligations to the subscriber under this subsection. 
F.  Under normal operating conditions, the grantee shall investigate and resolve all billing complaints received from subscribers within five business days of receipt of the complaint if the dispute is regarding charges that are no greater than six months old, or within 15 business days if the dispute involves charges that are more than six months old. 
G.  Subscriber bills from the grantee shall include the name, address and telephone number of the appropriate regulatory agencies, including the town. The town shall have the opportunity to approve the name, address and telephone number of the town that appears on the bills. 
H.  The grantee shall provide a telephone number and address on the bill for subscribers to contact the grantee. 
I.  The grantee shall forward a copy of any billing inserts or other mailing sent to subscribers to the town upon request. 
J.  The grantee shall provide all subscribers with the option of paying for cable service by (1) cash, (2) check, (3) an automatic payment plan, where the amount of the bill is automatically deducted from a checking account designated by the subscriber, or (4) by using a major credit card, as determined by the grantee, on a preauthorized basis. 
The town recognizes that only option (4) above is available as of the effective date of this franchise for subscription to the grantee's cable internet service, but that the grantee is taking steps to make options (1)—(3) available in the near future. The town reserves the right to enforce the requirement above for the cable internet service if the grantee has not voluntarily made available the other payment options within 18 months of the effective date of this franchise.  
Section 8. - Deposits, refunds and credits. 
A.  The grantee may require refundable deposits from subscribers with (1) a poor credit or poor payment history, (2) who refuse to provide credit history information to the grantee, or (3) who rent subscriber equipment from the grantee, so long as such deposits are applied on a non-discriminatory basis. The maximum deposit the grantee may charge subscribers with poor credit or poor payment history or who refuse to provide credit information is the average of a typical subscriber's bill over the most recent six-month period. The maximum deposit the grantee may charge for subscriber equipment is the cost (not depreciated value) of the equipment that the grantee would need to purchase to replace the equipment rented to the subscriber. 
B.  The grantee shall pay simple annual interest at five percent on deposits collected for equipment that are unrelated to poor credit or poor payment history if the deposit is held by the grantee for a period in excess of one year, and the subscriber's account is current at the time the deposit is refunded. The grantee shall pay interest on other deposits if required by state law or other generally applicable law. 
C.  Under normal operating conditions, refund checks will be issued within 45 days following the resolution of the event giving rise to the refund. 
D.  Credits for cable service will be issued no later than the subscriber's next bill which is printed following the determination that a credit is warranted, and the credit is approved and processed. Such approval and processing shall not be unreasonably delayed. 
E.  Bills shall be considered paid when appropriate payment is received by the grantee or its authorized agent. Appropriate time considerations shall be included in the grantee's collection procedures to assure that payments due have been received before late notices or termination notices are sent.  
Section 9. - Rates, fees and charges. 
A.  The grantee shall not, except to the extent expressly permitted by law, impose any fee or charge for service calls to a subscriber's premises to perform any repair or maintenance work related to grantee equipment necessary to receive cable service, except where any such problem which was caused by a negligent or wrongful act of the subscriber (including, but not limited to, a situation in which the subscriber reconnects grantee equipment incorrectly), or by the failure of the subscriber to take reasonable precautions to protect the grantee's equipment (for example, a dog chew). 
B.  Any late fee that grantee assesses on subscribers in the town for delinquent payment shall not exceed the prevailing late fee assessed by grantee or its affiliates on cable service within the entire Dallas/Fort Worth, Texas, metropolitan area. The grantee shall provide written advance notice to subscribers of the possible assessment of a late fee, including the amount of the late fee, on bills or by separate notice, and upon request by the town the grantee will provide to the town written explanation of any change to the late fee. 
C.  No late fee may be assessed on cable services until one month following the date of the bill on which the charges first appeared. The amount of the late fee shall be subject to any applicable federal, state or local consumer protection laws or other lawful and applicable regulations.  
Section 10. - Disconnection /denial of service. 
A.  The grantee shall not terminate cable service for nonpayment of a delinquent account unless the grantee provides a notice of the delinquency and impending termination at least 15 days prior to the proposed termination. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the subscriber to whom the cable service is billed. This notice shall not be given until five days after the original due date for the charges. The notice of delinquency and impending termination may be part of a billing statement. 
B.  In the event that cable service is terminated pursuant to a bulk contract and the grantee is permitted to enter into cable service arrangements with individual dwellings previously serviced under such contract, the grantee shall not hold such individual subscriber(s) liable for any nonpayment or underpayments related specifically to the contract. Subscribers may be held accountable for payment for cable services subscribed to during the period of the contract, which were in addition to the cable services provided pursuant to the contract. 
C.  Cable service terminated in error must be restored without charge within 24 hours of notice. If subscriber was billed for the period during which cable service was terminated in error, an automatic credit shall be issued to subscriber if the service interruption was reported by the subscriber. The amount of the automatic credit shall be in accordance with section 5, paragraph J. of these customer service standards. 
D.  Subject to section 23 of this franchise, the grantee shall furnish and maintain cable services to each person who makes a request to receive any grantee-offered cable service. Nothing in these standards shall limit the right of the grantee to deny cable service for non-payment of previously provided cable services, refusal to pay any required deposit, theft of cable service, damage to the grantee's equipment, or abusive and/or threatening behavior toward the grantee's employees or representatives. 
E.  No period of notice prior to requested termination of service can be required of subscribers by the grantee. No charge shall be imposed upon the subscriber for or related to total disconnection of cable service, or for any cable service delivered after the effective date of the disconnect request (unless there is a delay in returning grantee equipment). If the subscriber fails to specify an effective date for disconnection, the subscriber shall not be responsible for cable service received after the day following the date the disconnect request is received by the grantee. For purposes of this subsection, the term "disconnect" shall include subscribers who elect to cease receiving cable service from the grantee and to receive cable service or other multi-channel video service from another person or entity. 
F.  Upon the termination of cable service and upon request by the subscriber, the grantee shall either entirely remove its drop or secure the drop in a method reasonably acceptable to town.  
Section 11. - Communications with subscribers. 
A.  All grantee personnel, contractors and subcontractors contacting subscribers or potential subscribers outside of the office of the grantee shall wear a clearly visible identification card bearing their name and photograph. The grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. In addition, all grantee representatives shall wear appropriate clothing while working at a customer's premises. Every service vehicle of the grantee, its contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly identified as such to the public. Specifically, grantee vehicles shall have the grantee's logo and phone number plainly visible; those of contractors and subcontractors working for the grantee shall have the contractor's/subcontractor's name and phone number plus markings (such as a magnetic door sign) indicating they are under contract to the grantee. 
B.  All contact with a subscriber or potential subscriber by a person representing the grantee shall be conducted in a courteous manner. 
C.  The grantee shall send annual written notices to all subscribers informing them that any complaints or inquiries not satisfactorily handled by the grantee may be referred to the town. Such notification shall be either: 
* A separate document included with a billing statement; 
* Included on the portion of the monthly bill that is to be retained by the subscriber; or 
* A separate mailing. 
D.  The grantee shall notify subscribers in writing and as soon as possible of any pricing changes or additional charges (excluding temporary marketing on sales discounts or offers) and/or any changes in cable services, including channel line-ups. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if within the control of the grantee, and the grantee shall provide a copy of the notice to the town including how and when the notice was given to subscribers. 
E.  The grantee shall provide written information to all subscribers about each of the following areas at the time of installation of cable service, and thereafter at least annually to all subscribers, at any time upon request, and at least 30 days prior to making significant changes in the information required by this subsection, if within the control of the grantee: 
* Products and cable service offered. 
* Prices and options for cable services and conditions of subscription to cable services. Prices shall include those for cable service options, equipment rental, program guides, installation, downgrades, late fees and other fees charged by the grantee related to cable service. 
* Installation and maintenance policies including, when applicable, information regarding the subscriber's in-home wiring and/or home run wiring rights during the period cable service is being provided. 
* Instructions about how to use the cable services, including procedures and options for ordering pay-per-view services, if offered. 
* Channel positions of cable services offered on the cable system. 
* Complaint procedures, including the name, address and telephone number of the town, but with a notice advising the subscriber to initially contact the grantee about all complaints and questions. 
* Procedures for requesting cable service credit. 
* The availability of a parental control device. 
* Grantee practices and procedures for protecting against invasions of privacy. 
* The telephone number of the grantee's service center to which complaints may be reported. 
* When applicable, the grantee's community unit identifier as specified by the FCC. 
* Other information relating to the provision of cable services pursuant to this franchise in format and substance as from time to time requested by the town and agreed to by the grantee. The grantee shall promptly notify the town if they are unable to agree and shall propose viable alternatives. 
A copy of notices required in this paragraph E. will be given to the town at least 15 days prior to distribution to subscribers if the reason for notice is due to a change that is within the control of grantee and as soon as possible if not within the control of grantee. 
F.  Notices of changes in rates shall indicate the new rate and the amount the rate has increased or decreased from the current rate. Specific words such as "increase" or "decrease" must be used to describe the changes. 
G.  Notices of changes of cable services and/or channel locations shall include a description of the new cable service, the specific dial location, and the hours of operation of that cable service if the cable service is only offered on a part-time basis. In addition, should the dial location, hours of operation, or existence of other cable services be affected by the introduction of a new cable service, such information must be included in the notice. 
H.  Every notice of termination of cable service shall include all of the following information: 
* The name and address of the subscriber whose account is delinquent. 
* The amount of the delinquency. 
* The date by which payment is required in order to avoid termination of cable service. 
* The telephone number for the grantee where the subscriber can receive additional information about their account and discuss the pending termination. 
I.  The grantee shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that employees that speak Spanish and English are available to assist subscribers and potential subscribers as requested.  
Section 12. - Protection of subscriber privacy. 
A.  The grantee shall comply fully with all applicable state and federal laws relating to the protection of subscriber privacy.  
Section 13. - Handicapped access. 
A.  The grantee shall comply with all rules and regulations pertaining to the Americans with Disabilities Act.  
Section 14. - Amendments. 
A.  These standards may be amended from time to time upon mutual agreement of the town and the grantee.  
ARTICLE II. - TELEPHONE  
DIVISION 1. - SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY[5] 
An ordinance whereby the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, and Southwestern Bell Telephone Company agree that, for the purpose of operating its telecommunications business, the telephone company shall maintain and construct its poles, wires, anchors, fiber, cables, manholes, conduits and other physical plant and appurtenances in, along, across, on, over, through, above and under all public streets, avenues, highways, alleys, sidewalks, bridges or public property in said town; prescribing the annual compensation due the town under this ordinance; prescribing the conditions governing the use of public rights-of-way and the performance of certain construction work on public rights-of-way for the telephone company's telecommunications business; providing an indemnity clause; specifying governing laws; providing for a release of all claims under prior ordinances; providing for future contingencies; providing for written acceptance of this ordinance by the telephone company; and providing for a term and an effective date. 
Whereas, Southwestern Bell Telephone Company (hereinafter referred to as the "telephone company") is now and has been engaged in the telecommunications business in the State of Texas and in furtherance thereof, has erected and maintained certain items of its physical plant in the town of Flower Mound, Texas (hereinafter referred to as the "town") for many years pursuant to such rights as have been granted it by and under the laws of the State of Texas, and subject to the reasonable exercise of the powers granted by and under said laws to the town and as reflected in prior ordinances of the town; and 
Whereas, the telephone company has operated its telecommunications business in the town under successive ordinances of the town, the last of which was Ordinance No. 20-89, adopted May 15, 1989, which provided compensation of the town for that agreement based upon a percentage of gross receipts received by the telephone company from certain services rendered within the corporate limits of the town; and 
Whereas, certain disputes have arisen regarding those prior ordinances and it is recognized by the parties that changes in the telecommunications industry, changes in technology, changes in state and federal law, and changes in the accounting practices mandated by the Uniform System of Accounts promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC"), along with regulatory requirements of the Texas Public Utility Commission ("PUC"), have caused the traditional method of determining the amount of compensation to municipalities to become administratively impractical for telecommunications utilities. In order to resolve these issues in a manner satisfactory to both the town and the telephone company, the town and the telephone company have chosen the method of determining the amount of compensation provided for in this ordinance to eliminate the expense and time related to audits, to achieve administrative simplicity, to provide the town with predictable revenues and an opportunity for growth and to avoid the expense and delays of further litigation which otherwise would be necessary to resolve the issues in controversy between the parties; and 
Whereas, it is to the mutual advantage of both the town and the telephone company that an agreement should be entered into between the telephone company and the town establishing the conditions under which the telephone company shall maintain and construct its physical plant in the town in the future; 
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, that: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the telephone franchise with Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, as adopted by Ordinance Number 33-95 on July 6, 1995. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Section 1. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to the laws of the State of Texas, the Town Charter and this ordinance, the telephone company has the non-exclusive right and privilege to use the public rights-of-way in the town for the operation of a telecommunications system subject to the restrictions set forth herein. The telephone company may use such rights-of-way for its telecommunications facilities. The telephone company's facilities and transmission media used in or incident to the provision of telecommunications service and to the maintenance of a telecommunications business by the telephone company in the town shall remain as now constructed, subject to such changes as under the conditions prescribed in this ordinance may be considered necessary to the public health and safety by the town in the exercise of its lawful powers and such changes and extensions as may be considered necessary by the telephone company in the pursuit of its telecommunications business. The terms of this ordinance shall apply throughout the town, and to all operations of the telephone company within the town, and shall include all operations and facilities used in whole or in part in the provision of telecommunications services in newly annexed areas upon the effective date of any annexation.  
Section 2. - Additional authority required. 
The telephone company is not authorized to provide cable television service as a cable operator in the town under this ordinance, but must first obtain a franchise from the town for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may be required by law.  
Section 3. - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this ordinance, the following words and terms shall have the definitions and meanings provided in this section: 
(a)  Facilities. All telephone company duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways, and other equipment, structures and appurtenances and all associated transmission media. 
(b)  Use. The telephone company's acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance or operation of any facilities in, over, under, along, through or across the public rights-of-way, for any telecommunications purpose whatsoever. 
(c)  Town. The Town of Flower Mound, Texas. 
(d)  Rights-of-way. All present and future streets, avenues, highways, alleys, bridges and public ways within the town limits of the town. 
(e)  Transmission media. All telephone company cables, fibers, wires or other physical devices used to transmit and/or receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other characteristics, and whether for voice, data or other telecommunications purposes. 
(f)  Non-exclusive. No rights provided in this ordinance by the town shall be exclusive, and the town reserves the right to grant franchises, licenses, easements or permissions to use the public rights-of-way within the town to any person or entity as the town, in its sole discretion, may determine to be in the public interest. 
(g)  Telephone company. Southwestern Bell Telephone Company. 
(h)  Stipulation of settlement. As filed by the settlement class and settling defendants in connection with Cause No. D-142,176 in the 136th District Court of Jefferson County, Texas.  
Section 4. - Term. 
(a)  Subject to paragraph 4(b) below, this ordinance shall continue for a period of five years from the effective date hereof; provided that at the expiration of the initial period, such term shall be automatically extended for successive periods of one year, unless written notice of intent to terminate this agreement is given by either party not less than 90 days prior to the expiration of the then current period. When such notice is given, this agreement shall terminate at the expiration of the then current period. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the term set out in paragraph 4(a) above, this ordinance shall terminate if final approval does not occur as set forth in the stipulation of settlement.  
Section 5. - Supervision by town of location of poles and conduits. 
All poles placed shall be of sound material and reasonably straight, and shall be set so that they will not interfere with the flow of water in any gutter or drain, and so that the same will not unduly interfere with ordinary travel on the streets or sidewalks. The town shall have the option, but not the obligation, to exercise any and all lawful, reasonable and proper control related to the location and route of all poles, stubs, guys, anchors, conduits, fiber and cables placed and constructed by the telephone company in the construction and maintenance of its telecommunications system in the town.  
Section 6. - Attachments to poles and space in ducts. 
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to require or permit any pole attachments for electric light or power wires or communications facilities or systems not provided by the telephone company to be attached to the telephone company's poles or other physical plant or placed in the telephone company's conduit. If the town desires pole attachments for electric light or power wires or communications facilities or systems not provided by the telephone company, or if the town desires to place communications facilities or systems not provided by the telephone company in any telephone company duct, then a further separate, noncontingent agreement shall be prerequisite to such attachment(s) or such use of any duct by the town. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall obligate or restrict the telephone company in exercising its rights voluntarily to enter into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with light and/or power companies or with other wire-using companies which are authorized to operate within the town.  
Section 7. - Streets to be restored to pre-existing condition. 
The surface of any street, alley, avenue, highway or public place disturbed by the telephone company in building, constructing, renewing or maintaining its telecommunications system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as good a condition as before the commencement of work and maintained to the satisfaction of the town council or of any town official to whom such duties have been or may be delegated for one year from the date the surface of said street, alley, avenue, highway or public place is broken for such construction or maintenance work, after which time responsibility for the maintenance shall become the duty of the town; provided, however, that the telephone company shall not take up or excavate any pavement at any time without first securing permission, in writing, of the town manager or his nominee except in cases of emergencies; and provided further, that all excavation and installation so made shall be performed in such a manner as will cause the least inconvenience to the public. No street, alley, avenue, highway or public place shall be encumbered for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute the work.  
Section 8. - Temporary rearrangement of aerial wires. 
Upon request, the telephone company shall remove or raise or lower its aerial wires, fiber or cables temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting them, and the telephone company may require payment in advance. The telephone company shall be given not less than 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary rearrangements.  
Section 9. - Tree trimming. 
The right, license, privilege and permission is hereby granted to the telephone company, its contractors and agents, to trim trees upon and overhanging the streets, avenues, highways, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the town so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the aerial wires, fiber or cables of the telephone company, and when so directed by the town, said trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the town or of any town official to whom said duties have been or may be delegated.  
Section 10. - Indemnity. 
The telephone company shall indemnify and hold the town harmless from all costs, expenses (including attorney's fees) and damages to persons or property arising directly or indirectly out of the construction, maintenance or operation of the telephone company's facilities located within the public rights-of-way found to be caused solely by the negligence of the telephone company. This provision is not intended to create a cause of action or liability for the benefit of third parties but is solely for the benefit of the telephone company and the town; nor is this provision intended to abrogate the common law or statutory rights of either the town or the telephone company to indemnity or contribution from the other.  
Section 11. - Administration of ordinance. 
(a)  The town may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to this ordinance and the telephone company shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis by providing information which is prepared, maintained and available in the ordinary course of business. 
(b)  Copies of specifically identified petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted by the telephone company to the Federal Communications Commission or the Public Utility Commission of Texas shall be provided to the town upon request. 
(c)  The town may establish, after reasonable notice, such rules and regulations as may be appropriate for the administration of this ordinance and the construction of the telephone company's facilities on town property to the extent permitted by law.  
Section 12. - Compensation to the town. 
(a)  As compensation for the use, occupancy, oversight, supervision and regulation of the town's rights-of-way and for any other consideration provided by the town under this agreement, and in lieu of and in full compensation for any lawful tax or license or charge or right-of-way permit fee or inspection fee, whether charged to the telephone company or its contractor(s), or any right-of-way easement or street or alley rental or franchise tax or other character of charge for use and occupancy of the rights-of-way within the town, except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments in accordance with state law or sales taxes now or hereafter levied by the town in accordance with state law, the town hereby imposes a charge upon the gross receipts (as hereinafter defined) of the telephone company. The amount of the charge for the first year this ordinance is in effect shall be $23,500.00. For the second year, the charge shall be increased by the growth factor as set forth in paragraph 12(c), if applicable. For the third and subsequent years, while this ordinance remains in effect, the above charge is subject to adjustment by application of the growth factor set out in paragraph 12(c). In no event shall such charge be less than the above amount for each year this ordinance is in effect, except as provided in the case of disannexation as set forth in paragraph 12(e), or as provided in section 16 herein. 
The telephone company will, according to tariff, bill such charge to the customers billed the customer service charges included within the term "gross receipts," as defined herein. Gross receipts, for purposes of this charge, shall include only customer service charges which meet all four of the following conditions: (1) such charges are for telephone company services provided within the town; (2) such charges are billed through the telephone company's customer records information system ("CRIS"); (3) such charges are the recurring charges for the local exchange access rate element specified in the telephone company's tariffs filed with the PUC; and (4) such charges are subject to an interstate end user common line ("EUCL") charge as imposed by the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC"). 
For the second and subsequent years while this ordinance remains in effect, the above charge is subject to adjustment by application of the growth factor set out in paragraph 12(c). This adjustment for the growth factor will be made effective as of each anniversary date of this ordinance. 
The telephone company shall adjust its billings to customers to account for any undercollection or overcollection of the charge due the town. 
(b)  The charge for each year shall be paid in four equal payments. The first payment under this ordinance shall be due on the last day of the fifth month following the effective date hereof, with subsequent payments due on the last day of each third successive month thereafter during the term of this ordinance. In the event of any over or undercollection from customers at the expiration of this ordinance, the telephone company may make a pro rata one-time credit or charge to the customer billing for affected customers who are billed for a service included within gross receipts, as defined in paragraph 12(a). This will be accomplished within 150 days following the date of expiration of this ordinance. If however, it is impractical to credit any overcollection to customers, then such overcollection shall be paid to the town. 
(c)  The growth factor shall be calculated by dividing the telephone company's revenues within the corporate limits of the town subject to state sales taxes ("sales tax revenues") for the 12-month period ending three months prior to the next anniversary date of this ordinance by the sales tax revenues for the 12-month period ending three months prior to either the initial effective date or the preceding anniversary date of this ordinance, as applicable. The growth factor calculated by the method set forth in the preceding sentence, if greater than one, shall be multiplied by the current year's charge to determine the dollar amount of the charge for the next year. If the growth factor calculated above is one or less, the charge for the next year shall be equal to the current year's charge. The telephone company will adjust its customer billing to account for the growth factor calculated above. 
Once the growth factor calculation is completed, the telephone company will provide the town with the sales tax revenues upon which the growth factor calculation was based. 
The town agrees to rely upon audits by the Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts of state sales taxes as reported by the telephone company which are performed in compliance with V.T.C.A, Tax Code §§ 151.023 and 151.027. The growth factor shall be recomputed to reflect any final, nonappealable adjustments made pursuant to an audit finding by the Texas Comptroller of an inaccuracy in the telephone company's reports of revenues subject to state sales taxes. The charge shall be recalculated using the growth factor recomputed as specified in the preceding sentence, and the recalculated charge shall be used for all future calculations required by this ordinance. Any overpayment or underpayment resulting from such recalculation shall be subtracted from or added to the first installment due the following year. If any overpayment or underpayment shall be due during the final year of this ordinance, then payment shall be made as follows. In the case of overpayment by the telephone company, the town shall pay such overpayment to the telephone company within 150 days following the expiration of this ordinance and, in the case of underpayment by the telephone company, the telephone company shall pay such underpayment to the town within 150 days following the expiration of this ordinance. 
(d)  Such payments shall not relieve the telephone company from paying all applicable municipally owned utility service charges. Should the town not have the legal power to agree that the payment of the foregoing charge shall be in lieu of the taxes, licenses, charges, rights-of-way permit or inspection fees, rentals, rights-of-way easements or franchise taxes aforesaid, then the town agrees that it will apply so much of such payments as may be necessary to the satisfaction of the telephone company's obligation, if any, to pay any such taxes, licenses, charges, rights-of-way permit or inspection fees, rentals, rights-of-way easements or franchise taxes. 
(e)  In the event that either (1) territory within the boundaries of the town shall be disannexed and a new incorporated municipality created which includes such territory or (2) an entire, existing incorporated municipality shall be consolidated or annexed into the town, then notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the charge shall be adjusted. To accomplish this adjustment, within 30 days following the action effecting a disannexation/annexation as described above, the town shall provide the telephone company with maps of the affected area(s) showing the new boundaries of the town. 
In the event of an annexation as described above, the charge for the town will be adjusted to include the amount of the payment by the telephone company to the existing incorporated municipality being annexed. In the event that the annexed municipality had no ordinance imposing a charge or in the event of a disannexation, then the adjustment to the charge will be calculated using the effective date of the imposition of local sales taxes as determined by the Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts. The adjustment shall be the percent increase/decrease in the telephone company's gross receipts as defined herein for the town for the first calendar month following the local sales tax effective date compared to the last month prior to such effective date. This adjustment to the charge will be made on the first day of the second month following the local sales tax effective date and the adjusted charge shall be prorated from that date through the remainder of the payment year. The charge as adjusted shall be used for all future calculations required by this ordinance.  
Section 13. - Assignment of ordinance. 
This ordinance and any rights or privileges hereunder shall not be assignable to any other entity without the express consent of the town. Such consent shall be evidenced by an ordinance which shall fully recite the terms and conditions, if any, upon which such consent is given.  
Section 14. - Mutual releases. 
Upon final approval, as defined in the stipulation of settlement, the town hereby fully releases, discharges, settles and compromises any and all claims which the town has made or could have made arising out of or connected with Ordinance Number 20-89, adopted May 15, 1989, and renewed or extended from time to time thereafter, and its predecessor ordinances, if any (hereinafter referred to collectively as "ordinances"). This full and complete release of claims for any matters under the ordinances shall be for the benefit of Southwestern Bell Telephone Company; its parent; its affiliates; their directors, officers, attorneys and employees; successors and assigns; and includes any and all claims, actions, causes of action and controversies, presently known or unknown, arising directly or indirectly out of or connected with the telephone company's obligations to the town pursuant to the provisions of the ordinances. Upon final approval as defined in the stipulation of settlement, Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, its parent, its affiliates, successors and assigns hereby fully release, discharge, settle and compromise any and all claims, actions, causes of action or controversies heretofore made or which could have been made, known or unknown, against the town, its officers, attorneys or its employees, arising out of or connected with any matters under the ordinances. 
It is the intent of the town and the telephone company to enter into the foregoing mutual releases in order to reach a compromise that is acceptable to both the town and the telephone company. This ordinance and the mutual releases set forth in this section represent a compromise of each party's claims as well as each party's defenses, and is not intended to be and is not an admission of liability or vulnerability by either party to the other with respect to either the claims or the defenses asserted against the other.  
Section 15. - Adoption of stipulation of settlement. 
The town hereby adopts, ratifies, confirms, and agrees to be bound by the terms of the stipulation of settlement in Cause No. D-142,176 in the 136th Judicial District Court in and for Jefferson County, Texas (the "class litigation"), in its entirety, in all respects as if the town were an original signatory thereto. The town acknowledges that as a member of the settlement class in the class litigation it has received and reviewed the stipulation of settlement and that the town has had access to and/or has consulted counsel, to the extent that it desired to do so, in connection with its evaluation of the stipulation of settlement.  
Section 16. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances and agreements. 
Ordinance Number 20-89, adopted May 15, 1989, and all predecessor ordinances are hereby repealed; provided, however, such repeal shall take effect at 11:59 p.m. on the day immediately preceding the effective date specified in the section of this ordinance entitled "Acceptance of Agreement and Effective Date." The final payment (including payment for any partial year) under Ordinance Number 20-89 shall be due 60 days following the effective date of this ordinance, as set out in section 19 hereof. All other ordinances and agreements and parts of ordinances and agreements in conflict herewith are also repealed, to the extent of such conflict only, which repeal shall take effect at the time and on the date specified in the preceding sentence.  
Section 17. - Future contingency. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this ordinance to the contrary, in the event that (a) this ordinance or any part hereof, (b) any tariff provision by which the telephone company seeks to collect the charge imposed by this ordinance, or (c) any procedure provided in this ordinance, or (d) any compensation due the town under this ordinance, becomes, or is declared or determined by a judicial, administrative or legislative authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unrecoverable, unenforceable, void, unlawful or otherwise inapplicable, in whole or in part, the telephone company and town shall meet and negotiate a new ordinance that is in compliance with the authority's decision or enactment and, unless explicitly prohibited, the new ordinance shall provide the town with a level of compensation comparable to that set forth in this ordinance provided that such compensation is recoverable by the telephone company in a mutually agreed manner permitted by law for the unexpired portion of the term of this ordinance. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding paragraph to the contrary, the town and telephone company agree that in the event this ordinance is submitted for review to any court in which the currently existing case styled City of Port Arthur et al, v. Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, et al, Cause No. D-142,176 in the 136th Judicial Court, Jefferson County, Texas, is pending, the town and telephone company agree to take any and all actions reasonably necessary to obtain approval and ratification of the ordinance by the court.  
Section 18. - Governing law. 
(a)  This ordinance shall be construed in accordance with the town Charter and town Code in effect on the date of passage of this ordinance to the extent that such Charter and Code are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas. 
(b)  This ordinance shall be construed and deemed to have been drafted by the combined efforts of the town and the telephone company.  
Section 19. - Acceptance of agreement and effective date. 
The town shall deliver a properly certified copy of this ordinance to the telephone company within three working days of its final passage. The telephone company shall file its written acceptance of this ordinance in accordance with the stipulation of settlement. This ordinance shall become effective beginning on the first day of the first calendar month which begins not less than 30 days after entry of judgment, as defined in the stipulation of settlement. 
Passed, approved, and adopted on first reading this 19th day of June, 1995. 
Passed, approved, and adopted on second and final reading this 6th day of July, 1995. 
	/s/  _____
Larry W. Lipscomb, 
Mayor 
Attest: 	Approved as to form and legality: 
/s/  _____
Cindy Stewart, 
Interim Town 
Sec. 	/s/  _____
Terrence S. Welch, 
Town Attorney 
  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL TELEPHONE COMPANY OF THE SOUTHWEST[6] 
An ordinance granting the right, privilege and franchise to General Telephone Company of the Southwest, grantee, and its successors and assigns, to construct, erect, build, equip, own, maintain and operate in, along, under, over and across the streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, viaducts and public grounds of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, such posts, poles, wires, cables, conduits and other appliances, structures and fixtures necessary or convenient for rendition of telephone and other communication service and for conducting a general local and long-distance telephone business; providing for consideration; for period of grant; for assignment; for method of acceptance; for repeal of conflicting ordinances and for partial invalidity. 
Be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is telephone franchise with General Telephone Company of the Southwest, as adopted by Ordinance Number 3-83 on January 10, 1983. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Section 1. - Grant of right, privilege and franchise for construction and maintenance of telephone plant and service. 
That the right, privilege and franchise be, and the same is hereby granted to General Telephone Company of the Southwest, hereinafter referred to as the "telephone company," and its successors or assigns, subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth, to construct, erect, build, equip, own, maintain and operate in, along, under, over and across the streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, viaducts and public grounds of the town, such posts, poles, wires, cables, conduits and other appliances, structures and fixtures necessary or convenient for rendering telephone and other communication services and for conducting a general local/extended area and long-distance telephone business.  
Section 2. - Supervision by town of location of poles and conduit. 
That all poles to be placed shall be of sound material and reasonably straight, and shall be so set that they will not interfere with the flow of water to any gutter or drain, and so that the same will interfere as little as practicable with the ordinary travel on the street or sidewalk. The location and route of all poles, stubs, guys, anchors, conduits and cables to be placed and constructed by the telephone company in the construction and maintenance of its telephone system in the town, and the location of all conduits to be laid by the telephone company within the limits of the town under this ordinance, shall be subject to the reasonable and proper regulation, control and direction of the town council or of any town official to whom such duties have been or may be delegated. 
That nothing in this ordinance is intended to add to or detract from any authority granted by the Legislature of the State of Texas to the town.  
Section 3. - Streets to be restored to good condition. 
That the surface of any street, alley, highway or public placed within the town disturbed by the telephone company in building, constructing, renewing or maintaining its telephone plant and system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work and maintained to the satisfaction of the town council, or of any town official to whom such duties have been or may be delegated, for one year from the date the surface of said street. alley, highway or public place is broken for such construction or maintenance work, after which time responsibility for the maintenance shall become the duty of the town. No such street, alley, highway, or public place shall be encumbered for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute the work.  
Section 4. - Temporary removal of wires. 
That the telephone company on the request of any person shall remove or raise or lower its wires within the town temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the benefitted party or parties, and the telephone company may require such payment in advance. The telephone company shall be given not less than 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. The clearance of wires above ground or rails within the town and also underground work shall conform to the basic standards of the National Electrical Safety Code, National Bureau of Standards, United States Department of Commerce, as promulgated at the time of erection thereof.  
Section 5. - Tree trimming. 
That the right, license, privilege and permission is hereby granted to the telephone company, its successors and assigns, to trim trees upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the town, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires or cables of the telephone company, and when so ordered by the town, said trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the town council or of any town official to whom said duties have been or may be delegated.  
Section 6. - Annual cash consideration to be paid by the telephone company. 
To indemnify the town for any and all possible damages to its streets, alleys and public grounds which may result from the placing therein of the telephone company's poles, conduits, or other equipment or apparatus, and to compensate the town for its superintendence of this agreement, and as the cash consideration for the same, the telephone company agrees to pay to the town annually during the continuance of the agreement a sum of money equal to two percent of the annual gross receipts derived by the telephone company from exchange access rates, contained in sections 6 and 36 of its approved general exchange tariff, charged customers within the corporate limits of the town during the preceding year. The first payment hereunder shall be made March 31, 1984, and shall equal in amount two percent of the gross receipts derived from exchange access rates from the date of acceptance of this ordinance to December 31, 1983; and thereafter payment shall be made annually on March 31st as herein provided.  
Section 7. - Payment of cash consideration to be in lieu of any other payments except usual general or special ad valorem taxes. 
That the town agrees that the consideration set forth in the preceding section hereof shall be paid and received in lieu of any tax, license, charge, fee, street or alley rental or any other character of charge for use and occupancy of the streets, alleys, and public places of the town; in lieu of any pole tax or inspection fee tax; in lieu of any easement or franchise tax, whether levied as an ad valorem, special or other character of tax; and in lieu of any imposition other than the usual general or special ad valorem taxes now or hereafter levied. Should the town not have the legal power to agree that the payment of the foregoing cash consideration shall be in lieu of the taxes, licenses, charges, fees, rentals, and easement or franchise taxes aforesaid, then the town agrees that it will apply so much of said payment as may be necessary to the satisfaction of the telephone company's obligations, if any, to pay any such taxes, licenses, charges, fees, rentals, and easement or franchise taxes.  
Section 8. - No exclusive privileges conferred by this ordinance. 
That nothing herein contained shall be construed as giving to the telephone company any exclusive privileges.  
Section 9. - Successors and assigns. 
That the rights, powers, limitations, duties and restrictions herein provided for shall inure to and be binding upon the parties hereto and upon their respective successors and assigns; provided, however, that this franchise shall not be transferrable except with the approval of the town council, expressed by ordinance.  
Section 10. - Period of franchise. 
That this agreement shall be in full force and effect for the period beginning with the acceptance date hereof and ending 20 years after such date.  
Section 11. - Partial invalidity and repeal provisions. 
That if any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be illegal, ultra vires or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. All ordinances and agreements and parts of ordinances and agreements in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
Section 12. - Acceptance of agreement. 
That the telephone company shall have 60 days from and after the passage and approval of this ordinance to file its written acceptance thereof with the town secretary, and upon such acceptance being filed, this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of its acceptance, and shall effectuate and make binding the agreement provided by the terms hereof. 
Passed and approved this 10th day of January, A.D., 1983. 
;sigr;  \Gary Pressler 
Mayor 
Attest: 
;sigl;  \Margaret Maxwell 
Town Secretary  
ARTICLE III - GAS  
DIVISION 1. - TXU GAS[7] 
An ordinance granting to Lone Star Gas Company, a division of Enserch Corporation, a corporation, its successors and assigns, a franchise to furnish and supply gas to the general public in the Town of Flower Mound, Denton County, Texas for the transporting, delivery, sale, and distribution of gas in, out of, and through said municipality for all purposes; providing for the payment of a fee or charge for the use of the streets, alleys and public ways; and providing that it shall be in lieu of other fees and charges, excepting ad valorem taxes; and repealing all previous gas franchise ordinances. 
Be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas: 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the gas franchise with TXU Gas which is the successor to Lone Star Gas Company, as adopted by Ordinance Number 16-90 on May 21, 1990. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Section 1. - Grant of franchise. 
That the Town of Flower Mound, Texas hereinafter called "town," hereby grants to Lone Star Gas Company, a division of Enserch Corporation, hereinafter called "company," its successors and assigns, consent to use and occupy the present and future streets, alleys, highways, public places, public thoroughfares and grounds of town for the purpose of laying, maintaining, constructing, operating and replacing therein and thereon pipelines and all other appurtenant equipment needed and necessary to deliver gas in, out of, and through said town and to sell gas to persons, firms and corporations, including all the general public, within the town corporate limits and consent being granted for a term of 20 years from and after the date of the final passage and approval of this ordinance.  
Section 2. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
Company shall lay, maintain, construct, operate and replace its pipes, mains, laterals and other equipment so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic and shall promptly clean up and restore to an approximate original condition, at its cost, all thoroughfares and other surfaces which it may disturb. The location of all mains, pipes, laterals and other appurtenant equipment shall be fixed under the supervision of the town or an authorized committee or agent appointed by said town.  
Section 3. - Restoration of public ways. 
When company shall make or cause to be made excavations or shall place obstructions in any street, alley or other public place, the public shall be protected by barriers and lights placed, erected and maintained by company; and in the event of injury to any person or damage to any property by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the gas distributing plant or system of company, company shall indemnify and keep harmless town from any and all liability in connection herewith. Company shall repair, clean up and restore to an approximate original condition all streets and alleys disturbed during the construction and repair of its gas distributing system.  
Section 4. - Contract with customer; ownership rights. 
In addition to the rates charged for gas supplied. Company may make and enforce reasonable charges, rules and regulations for service rendered in the conduct of its business including a charge for services rendered in the inauguration of natural gas service, and may require, before furnishing service, the execution of a contract therefor. Company shall have the right to contract with each customer with reference to the installation of, and payment for, any and all of the gas piping from the connection thereof with the company's main in the streets or alleys to and throughout the consumer's premises. Company shall own, operate and maintain all service lines, which are defined as the supply lines extending from the company's main to the customer's meter where gas is measured by company. The consumer shall own, operate, and maintain all yard lines and house piping. Yard lines are defined as the underground supply lines extending from the point of connection with company's customer meter to the point of connection with consumer's house piping.  
Section 5. - Main extension requirements. 
Company shall not be required to extend mains on any street more than 50 feet for any one consumer of gas.  
Section 6. - Deposit. 
Company shall be entitled to require from each and every consumer of gas, before gas service is commenced, a deposit in an amount calculated pursuant to the company's quality of service rules as may be in effect during the term of this franchise. Said deposit shall be retained and refunded in accordance with such quality of service rules and shall bear interest, as provided in V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 183.001 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time. Company shall be entitled to apply said deposit, with accrued interest, to any indebtedness owed company by the consumer making the deposit.  
Section 7. - Rights nonexclusive. 
The rights, privileges and franchises granted by this ordinance are not to be considered exclusive, and town hereby expressly reserves the right to grant at any time, like privileges, rights and franchises as it may see fit to any other person or corporation for the purpose of furnishing gas for light, heat and power to and for town and the inhabitants thereof.  
Section 8. - Rates and charges. 
Company shall furnish reasonably adequate service to the public at reasonable rates and charges therefor, and company shall maintain its property, equipment and appliances in good order and condition.  
Section 9. - Franchise fee. 
A.  Effective January 1, 2003, the consideration payable by TXU Gas for the rights and privileges granted to TXU Gas by the franchise ordinance heretofore duly passed by the governing body of this town and duly accepted by TXU Gas is 4 percent of the gross revenues, as defined in section 1.B. below, received by TXU Gas. 
B.  "Gross revenues" shall mean all revenue derived or received, directly or indirectly, by TXU Gas from or in connection with the operation of the system of TXU Gas within the corporate limits of the town and including, without limitation: 
1.  All revenues received by TXU Gas from the sale of gas to all classes of customers within the town; 
2.  All revenues received by TXU Gas from the transportation of gas through pipeline system of TXU Gas within the town to customers located within the town; 
3.  The value of gas transported by TXU Gas for transport customers through the system of TXU Gas within the town ("third party sales"), with the value of such gas to be reported by each transport customer to TXU Gas, provided, however, that should a transport customer refuse to furnish TXU Gas its gas purchase price, TXU Gas shall estimate same by utilizing TXU Gas Distribution's monthly industrial weighed average cost of gas, as reasonably near the time as the transportation service is performed; and 
4.  "Gross revenues" shall include: 
a.  Other revenues derived from the following "miscellaneous charges": 
i.  Charges to connect, disconnect, or reconnect gas within the town; 
ii.  Charges to handle returned checks from customers within the town; 
iii.  Such other service charges and charges as may, from time to time, be authorized in the rates and charges on file with the town; and 
iv.  Contributions in aid of construction (CIAC); 
b.  Revenues billed but not ultimately collected or received by TXU Gas; and 
c.  Gross receipts fees. 
5.  "Gross revenues" shall not include: 
a.  The revenue of any person including, without limitation, an affiliate, to the extent that such revenues is also included in gross revenues of TXU Gas; 
b.  Sales taxes; 
c.  Any interest incomes earned by TXU Gas; and 
d.  All monies received from the lease or sale of real or personal property, provided, however, that this exclusion does not apply to the lease of facilities within the town's right-of-way. 
C.  Calculation and payment of franchise fees based on CIAC shall be: 
1.  Calculated on an annual calendar year basis, i.e., from January 1 through December 31 of each calendar year; and 
2.  Paid at least once annually on or before April 30 each year based on the total CIAC recorded during the preceding calendar year. 
D.  Effect of other municipal franchise ordinance fees accepted and paid by TXU Gas. 
1.  If TXU Gas should at any time after the effective date of this ordinance agree to a new municipal franchise ordinance, or renew an existing municipal franchise ordinance, with another municipality, which municipal franchise ordinance determines the franchise fee owed to that municipality for the use of its public right-of-way in a manner that, if applied to the town, would result in a franchise fee greater than the amount otherwise due town under this ordinance, then the franchise fee to be paid by TXU Gas to town pursuant to this ordinance shall be increased so that the amount due and to be paid is equal to the amount that would be due and payable to the town were the franchise fee provisions of that other franchise ordinance applied to town. 
2.  The provisions of this subsection D apply only to the amount of the franchise fee to be paid and do not apply to other franchise fee payment provisions, including, without limitation, the timing of such payments. 
E.  TXU Gas franchise fee recovery tariff. 
1.  TXU Gas may file with the town a tariff amendment(s) to provide for the recovery of the franchise fees under this amendment. 
2.  Town agrees that: 
a.  As a regulatory authority, it will adopt and approve the ordinance, rates, or tariff which provide for 100 percent recovery of such franchise fees as part of TXU Gas' rates; 
b.  If the town intervenes in any regulatory proceeding before a federal or state agency in which the recovery of TXU Gas' franchise fee is an issue, the town will take an affirmative position supporting 100 percent recovery of such franchise fees by TXU Gas; and 
c.  In the event of an appeal of any such regulatory proceeding in which the town has intervened, the town will take an affirmative position in any such appeals in support of the 100 percent recovery of such franchise fees by TXU Gas. 
3.  The town agrees that it will take no action, nor cause any other person or entity to take any action, to prohibit the recovery of such franchise fees by TXU Gas. 
F.  Lease of facilities within the town's right-of-way. 
1.  TXU Gas shall have the right to lease, license, or otherwise grant to a party other than TXU Gas the use of its facilities within the town's public right-of-way, provided: 
a.  TXU Gas first notifies the town of the name of: 
i.  The lessee, licensee, or user; 
ii.  The type of service(s) intended to be provided through the facilities; and 
iii.  The name and telephone number of a contact person associated with such lessee, licensee, or user; 
b.  TXU Gas makes the franchise fee payment due on the revenues from such lease pursuant to section 2.A. and 2.B. of this ordinance. This authority to lease facilities within the town's right-of-way shall not affect any such lessee, licensee, or user's obligation, if any, to pay franchise fees. 
(Ord. No. 84-02, § 2, 11-18-2002)  
Section 10. - Previous ordinances canceled and annulled. 
In all respects, except as specifically and expressly amended by this ordinance, the existing effective franchise ordinance heretofore duly passed by the governing body of the town and duly accepted by TXU Gas shall remain in full force and effect according to its terms until said franchise ordinance terminates, as provided therein. 
(Ord. No. 84-02, § 3, 11-18-2002)  
Section 11. - Acceptance. 
This ordinance shall take effect 30 days after its final passage, and after TXU Gas' acceptance. TXU Gas shall, within 30 days from the final passage of this ordinance, file its written acceptance of this ordinance with the Town of Flower Mound's town secretary's office in substantially the following form: 
To the Honorable Mayor and Town Council: 
TXU Gas Distribution, a division of TXU Gas Company, acting by and through the undersigned authorized officer, hereby accepts in all respects, on this the ___ day of ________, 20___, Ordinance No. 84-02 amending the current gas franchise between the town and TXU Gas and the same shall constitute and be a binding contractual obligation of TXU Gas and the town. 
TXU Gas Distribution 
A division of TXU Gas Company 
By ___________ 
Vice President 
(Ord. No. 84-02, § 6, 11-18-2002) 
Passed and approved on this 21st day of May, 1990. 
;sigr;  \Gary Acker 
Mayor 
Town of Flower Mound, Texas 
Attest: 
/s/   
      Cheryl Hathaway 
      Assistant Corporate Secretary 	
 	 
 
DIVISION 2. - COSERV GAS[8] 
An ordinance of the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, granting to CoServ Gas, its successors and assigns, a franchise to furnish and supply gas to the general public in the Town of Flower Mound, Denton County, Texas, for the transporting, delivery, sale, and distribution of gas in, out of, and through said municipality for all purposes; providing for the payment of a fee or charge for the use of the streets, alleys, and public ways; and providing that it shall be in lieu of other fees and charges, excepting ad valorem taxes; and repealing all previous gas franchise ordinances. 
Now therefore, be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, that: 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the gas franchise with CoServ Gas, as adopted by Ordinance Number 24-98 on May 4, 1998. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Section 1. - Grant of franchise. 
The Town of Flower Mound, Texas, hereinafter called "town," hereby grants to CoServ Gas, hereinafter called "company," its successors and assigns, consent to use and occupy the present and future streets, alleys, highways, public places, public thoroughfares, and grounds of town for the purpose of laying, maintaining, constructing, operating, and replacing therein and thereon pipelines and all other appurtenant equipment needed and necessary to deliver gas in, out of, and through said town and to sell gas to persons, firms and corporations, including all the general public, within the town corporate limits and the term of the consent granted therein is extended through and including January 1, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 60-05, § 2, 8-1-2005)  
Section 2. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
Company shall lay, maintain, construct, operate, and replace its pipes, mains, laterals, and other equipment so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic and shall promptly clean up and restore to an approximate original condition, at its cost all thoroughfares and other surfaces which it may disturb. The location of all mains, pipes, laterals, and other appurtenant equipment shall be fixed under the supervision of the town or an authorized committee or agent appointed by said town.  
Section 3. - Restoration of public ways. 
When company shall make or cause to be made excavations or shall place obstructions in any street, alley, or other public place, the public shall be protected by barriers and lights placed, erected, and maintained by company; and in the event of injury to any person or damage to any property by reason of the construction, operation, or maintenance of the gas distributing plant or system of company, company shall indemnify and keep harmless town from any and all liability in connection herewith. Company shall repair, clean up, and restore to an approximate original condition all streets and alleys disturbed during the construction and repair of its gas distributing system.  
Section 4. - Contract with customer; ownership rights. 
In addition to the rates charged for gas supplied, company may make and enforce reasonable charges, rules and regulations for service rendered in the conduct of its business including a charge for services rendered in the inauguration of natural gas service, and may require, before furnishing service, the execution of a contract therefor. Company shall have the right to contract with each customer with reference to the installation of, and payment for, any and all of the gas piping from the connection thereof with the company's main in the streets or alleys to and throughout the customer's premises. Company shall own, operate and maintain all service lines, which are defined as the supply lines extending from the company's main to the customer's meter where gas is measured by company. The customer shall own, operate, and maintain all yard lines and house piping. Yard lines are defined as the underground supply lines extending from the point of connection with company's customer meter to the point of connection with customer's house piping.  
Section 5. - Main extension requirements. 
Company shall not be required to extend mains on any street more than 50 feet for any one customer of gas.  
Section 6. - Deposit. 
Company shall be entitled to require from each and every customer of gas, before gas service is commenced, a deposit in an amount calculated pursuant to the company's quality of service rules as may be in effect during the term of this franchise. Said deposit shall be retained and refunded in accordance with such quality of service rules and shall bear interest, as provided in V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 183.004 as it may be amended from time to time. Company shall be entitled to apply said deposit, with accrued interest, to any indebtedness owed company by the customer making the deposit.  
Section 7. - Rights nonexclusive. 
The rights, privileges, and franchises granted by this ordinance are not to be considered exclusive, and town hereby expressly reserves the right to grant, at any time, like privileges, rights, and franchises as it may see fit to any other person or corporation for the purpose of furnishing gas for light, heat, and power to and for town and the inhabitants thereof.  
Section 8. - Rates and charges. 
Company shall furnish reasonable adequate service to the public at reasonable rates and charges therefor; and company shall maintain its property, equipment, and appliances in good order and condition.  
Section 9. - Franchise fee. 
Company, its successors and assigns agree to pay and Town agrees to accept, on or before the 1st of April, 2006, a sum of money which shall be equivalent to the sum of (i) two percent (2%) of the Gross Revenues (as defined in Section 3A. below) for the period of January 1, 2005, through August 31, 2005, plus (ii) four percent (4%) of the Gross Revenues for the period of September 1, 2005, through December 31, 2005, which annual payment shall be for the rights and privileges herein granted to Company, including expressly, without limitation, the right to use the streets, alleys and public ways of said Town. Further, Company, its successors and assigns agree to pay and Town agrees to accept, on or before the 1st of April, 2007, and on or before the same day of each succeeding year during the life of this franchise, the last payment being made on the 1st day of April, 2015, a sum of money which shall be equivalent to four percent (4%) of the Gross Revenues for the preceding calendar year, which annual payment shall be for the rights and privileges herein granted to Company, including expressly, without limitation, the right to use the streets, alleys and public ways of said Town. And it is also expressly agreed that the aforesaid annual payments shall be in lieu of any and all other and additional occupation taxes, easement and franchise taxes or charges (whether levied as an ad valorem, special, or other character of tax or charge), in lieu of municipal license and inspection fees, street taxes, and street or alley rentals or charges, and all other and additional municipal taxes, charges, levies, fees and rentals of whatsoever kind and character which Town may now impose or hereafter levy and collect, excepting only the usual general or special ad valorem taxes which Town is authorized to levy and impose upon real and personal property. Should Town not have the legal power to agree that the payment of the foregoing sums of money shall be in lieu of taxes or charges aforesaid, then Town agrees that it will apply so much of said sums of money paid as may be necessary to satisfy Company's obligations, if any, to pay any such taxes, licenses, charges, levies, fees, rentals, easement or franchise taxes or charges. In the event of the failure on the part of Company to comply with the provisions of this franchise agreement and to furnish and service Company's gas customers within the Town, and the failure of Company to remedy such circumstance within thirty (30) business days after written notice thereof by Town to Company, the franchise herein granted may be forfeited. 
A.  "Gross Revenues" shall mean the annual revenues collected by Company from its customers for the sale of natural gas to business and residential customers within the corporate limits of the Town, including miscellaneous fees such as connect or disconnect fees, deposits, returned check fees, new account fees, and delinquent charges. The term "Gross Revenues" shall not include revenue billed by not received; line extension charges or contributions in aid of construction in the form of one-time or periodic payments or monthly facilities charges; taxes; revenue from materials or equipment sales; principal and/or interest payments on amounts loaned by Company; or any fees required to be remitted by Company to third parties. Company is hereby authorized to surcharge to customers within the Town all or any portion of the Gross Revenues assessment. All bills for services rendered within the Town may be adjusted by the same percentage that is recovered by Company through base rates or other charges. 
B.  Company Franchise Fee Recovery Tariff 
1.  Company may file with the Town a tariff amendment(s) to provide for the recovery of the franchise fees under this amendment. 
2.  Town agrees that: 
a.  as a regulatory authority, it will adopt and approve the ordinance, rates, or tariff which provide for 100 percent (100%) recovery (or such lesser amount requested by Company) of such franchise fees as part of Company's rates; 
b.  if the Town intervenes in any regulatory proceeding before a federal or state agency in which the recovery of Company's franchise fee is an issue, the Town will take an affirmative position supporting 100 percent (100%) recovery of such franchise fees by Company; and 
c.  in the event of an appeal of any such regulatory proceeding in which the Town has intervened, the Town will take an affirmative position in any such appeals in support of the 100 percent (100%) recovery of such franchise fees by Company. 
3.  The Town agrees that it will take no action, nor cause any other person or entity to take any action, to prohibit the recovery of such franchise fees by Company. 
C.  Lease of Facilities Within the Town's Right-of-Way 
1.  Company shall have the right to lease, license, or otherwise grant to a party other than Company the use of its facilities within the Town's public right-of-way, provided: 
a.  Company first notifies the Town of: 
i.  the name of lessee, licensee, or user; 
ii.  the type of service(s) intended to be provided through the facilities; and 
iii.  the name and telephone number of a contact person associated with such lessee, licensee, or user. 
b.  Company makes the franchise fee payment due on the revenues from such lease pursuant to Section 3A. above. This authority to lease facilities within the Town's right-of-way shall not affect any such lessee, licensee, or user's obligation, if any, to pay franchise fees. 
(Ord. No. 60-05, § 9, 8-1-2005)  
Section 10. - Previous ordinances canceled and annulled. 
When this franchise ordinance shall have become effective, all previous ordinances of said town granting franchises for gas distribution purposes which were held by company shall be automatically canceled and annulled, and shall be of no further force and effect.  
Section 11. - Acceptance. 
Company shall file its written acceptance of this franchise ordinance within 60 days after its final passage and approval by said town. 
Duly passed and approved on first reading by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, by a vote of 5 to 0, on this 20th day of April, 1998. 
Approved on second reading May 4, 1998. 
	/s/   
      Larry W. Lipscomb, Mayor 
 	 
Attest: 
/s/   
      Paula Lawrence, CMC, 
      Town Secretary 	
 	 
Approved as to form and legality: 
/s/   
      Terrence Welch, Town Attorney 	
 	 
 
DIVISION 3. - ATMOS ENERGY[9] 
Ordinance No: 59-12 
An Ordinance granting to Atmos Energy Corporation, a Texas and Virginia Corporation, its successors and assigns, a franchise to construct, maintain, and operate pipelines and equipment in the town of Flower Mound, Denton County, Texas, for the transportation, delivery, sale, and distribution of gas in, out of, and through said town for all purposes; providing for the payment of a fee or charge for the use of the public rights-of-ways; and providing that such fee shall be in lieu of other fees and charges, excepting ad valorem taxes; and repealing all previous gas franchise ordinances. 
Be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas: 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the gas franchise with Atmos Energy Corporation, as adopted by Ordinance No. 59-12 on November 5, 2012, inasmuch superseding former Ordinance No. 57-10 , §§ 1—10, adopted September 20, 2010. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. 
 
Sec. 1. - Grant of authority. 
The Town of Flower Mound, Texas, hereinafter called "town," hereby grants to Atmos Energy Corporation, Mid-Tex Division, hereinafter called "Atmos Energy," its successors and assigns, consent to use and occupy the present and future streets, alleys, highways, public utility easements, public ways and other public places ("public rights-of-way"), for the purpose of laying, maintaining, constructing, protecting, operating, and replacing therein and thereon pipelines and all other appurtenant equipment (the "system") to deliver, transport, and distribute gas in, out of, and through town for persons, firms, and corporations, including all the general public, and to sell gas to persons, firms, and corporations, including all the general public, within the town corporate limits, as such limits may be amended from time to time during the term of this franchise, said consent being granted for a term ending December 31, 2032.  
Sec. 2. - Construction, maintenance, operation & relocation of Atmos Energy facilities. 
A.  Atmos Energy shall lay, maintain, construct, operate, and replace its pipes, mains, laterals, and other equipment in a manner to minimize interference with traffic, place or cause to be placed appropriate barriers to mark excavations or obstructions, and restore to approximate original condition all public rights-of-way that it may disturb, at Atmos Energy's sole cost unless Atmos Energy is entitled to reimbursement pursuant to this agreement. In determining the location of the facilities of the town and other users of public right-of-way within town, town shall strive to minimize interference with then existing facilities of Atmos Energy and will require that other users of public rights-of-way minimize interference with existing facilities of Atmos Energy. In the event of a conflict between the location of the proposed facilities of Atmos Energy and the location of the existing facilities of town or other users of public rights-of-way within public rights-of-way that cannot otherwise be resolved, town or an authorized agent of town shall resolve the conflict and determine the location of the respective facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
Atmos Energy or contractors working on behalf of Atmos Energy shall not be required to pay for street cutting permits, street excavation permits or other special permits related to excavations in public rights-of-way in connection with Atmos Energy's operations in public rights-of-way. If town's annual capital improvement plan ("plan") includes projects that will affect Atmos Energy's facilities located in the public rights-of-way, town shall notify Atmos Energy of the plan's availability online, as well as the availability of any updates or changes as soon as the plan, update, or change becomes accessible. Town will endeavor to notify Atmos Energy as soon as reasonably possible of any town projects that will affect Atmos Energy's facilities located in the public rights-of-way. When required by town to remove or relocate its mains, laterals, and/or other facilities lying within public rights-of-way, Atmos Energy shall do so as soon as practically possible with respect to the scope of the project. In no event shall Atmos Energy be required to remove or relocate its facilities in less than 30 days from the time notice is given to Atmos Energy by town, unless town agrees to pay for the removal or relocation at a cost agreed to by both parties and the relocation may be practically accomplished in less than 30 days. 
B.  If town, in constructing its sewers, drainage, water lines, streets, or utilities, should request that Atmos Energy remove or relocate its mains, laterals, and other facilities lying within public rights-of-way, Atmos Energy shall do so at its own expense for facilities that are in conflict, unless such work is for the primary purpose of beautification or accommodating a private developer. Facilities are deemed to be in conflict to the extent that the proposed town facilities are determined by either the town or Atmos Energy to be inconsistent with gas distribution industry standard safe operating practices for existing facilities. Unless Atmos Energy provides agreement in advance, Atmos Energy shall not be required to relocate facilities to a depth greater than the original depth of the facilities or four feet, whichever is deeper, as measured below the new surface elevation. 
When Atmos Energy is required by town to remove or relocate its mains, laterals, and other facilities lying within public rights-of-way to accommodate a request by town, and costs of utility removals or relocations are eligible under federal, state, county, local or other programs for reimbursement of costs and expenses incurred by Atmos Energy as a result of such removal or relocation, and such reimbursement is required to be handled through town, town shall include Atmos Energy's costs and expenses in any application by town for reimbursement if Atmos Energy submits its cost and expense documentation to town prior to the filing of the application. In the event the town has actual knowledge that such proposal provides reimbursement for utility relocation, the town shall provide reasonable written notice to Atmos Energy of the deadline for Atmos Energy to submit documentation of the costs and expenses of such relocation to town in order for town to submit its application for reimbursement to such program in a timely manner. In the event that the town submits an application resulting in funding and does not provide sufficient written notice to Atmos Energy as set forth in this paragraph, and, as a result, the opportunity for company to receive reimbursement through town from such program of costs and expenses incurred by company as a result of such removal or relocation is lost or forfeited, then the town shall be responsible for 50 percent of the cost of the removal or relocation of Atmos Energy's facilities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town is under no obligation to make application to any program. 
If Atmos Energy is required by town to remove or relocate its mains, laterals, or other facilities lying within public rights-of-way for any reason other than the construction or reconstruction of sewers, drainage, water lines, streets, or utilities by town, Atmos Energy shall be entitled to reimbursement from town or others of the cost and expense of such removal or relocation. 
C.  When Atmos Energy is required to remove or relocate its mains, laterals or other facilities to accommodate construction by town, without reimbursement from town, Atmos Energy shall have the right to seek recovery of relocation costs as provided for in applicable state and/or federal law. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit, alter, or modify in any way the right of Atmos Energy to seek or recover a surcharge from customers for the cost of relocation pursuant to applicable state and/or federal law. Town shall not oppose recovery of relocation costs when Atmos Energy is required by town to perform relocation. Town shall not require that Atmos Energy document request for reimbursement as a pre-condition to recovery of such relocation costs. Nothwithstanding any provision of this agreement, the town shall have the right to participate and challenge any other capital costs or expenses of Atmos Energy and request full documentation to the full extent provided by state law. 
D.  If town abandons any public right-of-way in which Atmos Energy has facilities, such abandonment shall be conditioned on Atmos Energy's right to maintain its use of the former public right-of-way and on the obligation of the party to whom the Public right-of-way is abandoned to reimburse Atmos Energy for all removal or relocation expenses if Atmos Energy is requested and agrees to remove or relocate its facilities following abandonment of the public right-of-way. If the party to whom the town has abandoned public right-of-way requests Atmos Energy to remove or relocate its facilities and Atmos Energy agrees to such removal or relocation, such removal or relocation shall be done within a reasonable time at the expense of the party requesting the removal or relocation at the expense of the party requesting the removal or relocation. If relocation cannot practically be made to another public right-of-way, the expense of any right-of-way acquisition shall be considered a relocation expense to be reimbursed by the party requesting the relocation. 
E.  If Atmos Energy employees damage the facilities owned by town within the public rights-of-way which are properly located by the town, Atmos Energy shall reimburse such expenses as are necessary to repair town facilities. Atmos Energy agrees to notify the appropriate town official as soon as reasonably possible after the occurrence of such damage. If town employees damage facilities owned by Atmos Energy within the public rights-of-way which are properly located by Atmos Energy, town shall reimburse such expenses as are necessary to repair Atmos Energy facilities. Town agrees to notify the appropriate personnel of Atmos Energy as soon as reasonably possible after the occurrence of such damage. 
F.  Atmos Energy shall be required to extend distribution mains in any public rights-of-way up to 50 feet for any one residential customer only if such customer, at a minimum, uses gas for unsupplemented space heating and water heating. Atmos Energy shall not be required to extend transmission mains in any public right-of-way within town or to make a tap on any transmission main within town unless Atmos Energy agrees to such extension by a written agreement between Atmos Energy and a customer.  
Sec. 3. - Indemnity and insurance. 
A.  In consideration of the granting of this franchise, Atmos Energy agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the Town, its officers, agents and employees (the "indemnitees") from and against all suits, actions or claims of injury to any person or persons, or damages to any property brought or made for or on account of any death, injuries to, or damages received or sustained by any person or persons or for damage to or loss of property arising out of, or occasioned by Atmos Energy's intentional and/or negligent acts or omissions in connection with Atmos Energy's operations; except that the indemnity provided for in this paragraph shall not apply to any liability determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have resulted from the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the indemnitees. It is understood that it is not the intention of the parties hereto to create liability for the benefit of third parties, but that this section shall be solely for the benefit of the parties hereto and shall not create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any person or entity. 
B.  Atmos Energy's insurance of its obligations and risks undertaken pursuant to this franchise may be in the form of self-insurance to the extent permitted by applicable law, under an Atmos Energy plan of self-insurance maintained in accordance with sound accounting and risk-management practices or by obtaining insurance as follows: 
(1)  Commercial general or excess liability on a claims-made basis with minimum limits of $5,000,000.00 per occurrence and $10,000,000.00 aggregate. This coverage shall include the following: 
(a)  Completed operations to be maintained for one year. 
(b)  Personal and advertising injury. 
(c)  Contractual liability. 
(d)  Explosion, collapse, or underground (XCU) hazards. 
(2)  Automobile liability coverage with a minimum policy limit of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit. This coverage shall include all owned, hired and non-owned automobiles. 
C.  Atmos Energy will provide proof of insurance in accordance with this franchise within 30 days of the effective date of the franchise. Atmos Energy will not be required to furnish separate proof when applying for permits.  
Sec. 4. - Non-exclusive franchise. 
The rights, privileges, and franchises granted by this ordinance are not to be considered exclusive, and town hereby expressly reserves the right to grant, at any time, like privileges, rights, and franchises as it may see fit to any other person or corporation for the purpose of transporting, delivering, distributing, or selling gas to and for town and the inhabitants thereof.  
Sec. 5. - Reasonable charges, rules and regulations. 
In addition to the rates charged for gas supplied, Atmos Energy may make and enforce reasonable charges, rules, and regulations for service rendered in the conduct of its business including a charge for services rendered in the inauguration of natural gas service, and may require, before furnishing service, the execution of a contract therefore. Atmos Energy shall have the right to contract with each customer with reference to the installation of, and payment for, any and all of the gas piping from the connection thereof with Atmos Energy's main in the streets or alleys to and throughout the consumer's premises. Atmos Energy shall own, operate and maintain all service lines, which are defined as the supply lines extending from Atmos Energy's main to the customer's meter where gas is measured by Atmos Energy. The consumer shall own, operate, and maintain all yard lines and house piping. Yard lines are defined as the underground supply lines extending from the point of connection with Atmos Energy's customer meter to the point of connection with consumer's house piping.  
Sec. 6. - Reliability of service. 
Atmos Energy shall furnish reasonably adequate service to the public at reasonable rates and charges therefore; and Atmos Energy shall maintain its property, equipment and appliances in good order and condition.  
Sec. 7. - Payments to town. 
A.  Atmos Energy, its successors and assigns, agrees to pay and town agrees to accept, on or before April 1, 2013 ("initial payment"), and on or before the same day of each succeeding year ("succeeding payments") during the term of this franchise, the last payment being made on the 1st day of April, 2032 a sum of money which shall be equivalent to five percent of the gross revenues, as defined in 7.B below, received by Atmos Energy during the preceding calendar year. 
B.  "Gross revenues" shall mean: 
(1)  All revenues received by Atmos Energy from the sale of gas to all classes of customers (excluding gas sold to governmental customers or gas sold to another gas utility in the town for resale to its customers within town) within the town; 
(2)  All revenues received by Atmos Energy from the transportation of gas through the System of Atmos Energy within the town to customers located within the town (excluding any gas transported to another gas utility in town for resale to its customers within town); 
(3)  The value of gas transported by Atmos Energy for transport customers through the system of Atmos Energy within the town ("third party sales")(excluding the value of any gas transported to another gas utility in Town for resale to its customers within town), with the value of such gas to be established by utilizing Atmos Energy's monthly weighted average cost of gas charged to industrial customers in the Mid-Tex division, as reasonably near the time as the transportation service is performed; and 
(4)  "Gross revenues" shall also include fees collected pursuant to this ordinance and the following "miscellaneous charges": charges to connect, disconnect, or reconnect gas; charges to handle returned checks from consumers within the Town; and contributions in aid of construction (CIAC). Calculation and payment of franchise fees based on CIAC shall be (1) calculated on an annual calendar year basis, i.e., from January 1 through December 31 of each calendar year; and (2) paid at least once annually on or before April 30 each year based on the total CIAC recorded during the preceding calendar year. The last payment of franchise fees based on CIAC shall be on or before April 30, 2033 for the period January 1 through December 31, 2032. 
(5)  "Gross revenues" shall not include: 
(a)  Revenues billed but not ultimately collected or received by Atmos Energy; 
(b)  The revenue of any affiliate or subsidiary of Atmos Energy; 
(c)  Sales tax; 
(d)  Interest or investment income earned by Atmos Energy; and 
(e)  Monies received from the lease or sale of real or personal property, provided, however, that this exclusion does not apply to the lease of facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
C.  The initial payment for the rights and privileges herein provided shall be for the privilege period January 1 through December 31, 2013, and each succeeding payment shall be for the privilege period of the calendar year in which the payment is made. 
It is also expressly agreed that the aforesaid payments shall be in lieu of any and all other and additional occupation taxes, franchise taxes or charges (whether levied as an ad valorem, special, or other character of tax or charge), municipal license, permit, and inspection fees, bonds, street taxes, and street or alley rentals or charges, and all other and additional municipal taxes, charges, levies, fees, and rentals of whatsoever kind and character that town may now impose or hereafter levy and collect from Atmos Energy or Atmos Energy's agents, excepting only the usual general or special ad valorem taxes that town is authorized to levy and impose upon real and personal property. If the town does not have the legal power to agree that the payment of the foregoing sums of money shall be in lieu of taxes, licenses, fees, street or alley rentals or charges, easement or franchise taxes or charges aforesaid, then town agrees that it will apply so much of said sums of money paid as may be necessary to satisfy Atmos Energy's obligations, if any, to pay any such taxes, licenses, charges, fees, rentals, easement or franchise taxes or charges aforesaid. 
D.  Effect of other municipal franchise ordinance fees accepted and paid by Atmos Energy. If Atmos Energy should at any time after the effective date of this ordinance agree to a new municipal franchise ordinance, or renew an existing municipal franchise ordinance, with another municipality in Atmos Energy's Mid-Tex Division, which municipal franchise ordinance determines the franchise fee owed to that municipality for the use of its public rights-of-way in a manner that, if applied to the town, would result in a franchise fee greater than the amount otherwise due town under this ordinance, then the franchise fee to be paid by Atmos Energy to town pursuant to this ordinance may, at the election of the town, be increased so that the amount due and to be paid is equal to the amount that would be due and payable to town were the franchise fee provisions of that other franchise ordinance applied to town. The town acknowledges that the exercise of this right is conditioned upon the town's acceptance of all terms and conditions of the other municipal franchise in toto. The town may request waiver of certain terms and company may grant, in its sole reasonable discretion, such waiver. 
E.  Atmos Energy franchise fee recovery tariff. 
(1)  Atmos Energy may file with the town a tariff or tariff amendment(s) to provide for the recovery of the franchise fees under this agreement. 
(2)  Town agrees that (i)as regulatory authority, it will adopt and approve the ordinance, rates or tariff which provide for 100 percent recovery of such franchise fees as part of Atmos Energy's rates; (ii) if the town intervenes in any regulatory proceeding before a federal or state agency in which the recovery of Atmos Energy's franchise fees is an issue, the town will take an affirmative position supporting 100% recovery of such franchise fees by Atmos Energy; and (iii) in the event of an appeal of any such regulatory proceeding in which the town has intervened, the town will take an affirmative position in any such appeals in support of the 100 percent recovery of such franchise fees by Atmos Energy. 
(3)  Town agrees that it will take no action, nor cause any other person or entity to take any action, to prohibit the recovery of such franchise fees by Atmos Energy. 
F.  Lease of facilities within public rights-of-way. Atmos Energy shall have the right to lease, license or otherwise grant to a party other than Atmos Energy the use of its facilities within the town's public rights-of-way provided (i) Atmos Energy first notifies the town of the name of the lessee, licensee or user; the type of service(s) intended to be provided through the facilities; and the name and telephone number of a contact person associated with such lessee, licensee or user; and (ii) Atmos Energy makes the franchise fee payment due on the revenues from such lease pursuant to section 7 of this ordinance. 
This authority to lease facilities within public rights-of-way shall not affect any such lessee, licensee or user's obligation, if any, to pay franchise fees.  
Sec. 8. - Acceptance of franchise. 
In order to accept this franchise, Atmos Energy must file with the town secretary its written acceptance of this franchise ordinance within 60 days after its final passage and approval by town. If such written acceptance of this franchise ordinance is not filed by Atmos Energy, the franchise ordinance shall be rendered null and void. 
When this franchise ordinance becomes effective, all previous ordinances of town granting franchises for gas delivery purposes that were held by Atmos Energy shall be automatically canceled and annulled, and shall be of no further force and effect.  
Sec. 9. - Paragraph headings; construction. 
The paragraph headings contained in this ordinance are for convenience only and shall in no way enlarge or limit the scope or meaning of the various and several paragraphs hereof. Both parties have participated in the preparation of this ordinance and this ordinance shall not be construed either more or less strongly against or for either party.  
Sec. 10. - Effective date. 
If Atmos Energy accepts this ordinance, it becomes effective as of January 1, 2013. 
Passed, approved, and adopted on first reading the 15th day of October, 2012. 
Passed, approved, and adopted on second reading the 5th day of November, 2012. 
	      Thomas E. Hayden, Mayor 
 	 
Attest: 
      Theresa Scott, Town Secretary 	
 	 
Approved as to form: 
      Terrence S. Welch, Town Attorney 	
 	 
ORDINANCE NO. 30-16 [10] 
An ordinance of the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, approving a negotiated settlement between the Atmos Cities Steering Committee ("ACSC") and Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division regarding the Company's 2016 rate review mechanism filings; declaring existing rates to be unreasonable; adopting tariffs that reflect rate adjustments consistent with the negotiated settlement; finding the rates to be set by the settlement tariffs to be just and reasonable and in the public interest; requiring the Company to reimburse ACSC's reasonable ratemaking expenses; determining that this ordinance was passed in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act; adopting a savings clause; declaring an effective date; and requiring delivery of this ordinance to the Company and the ACSC's legal counsel. 
WHEREAS, the Town of Flower Mound, Texas ("Town") is a gas utility customer of Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division ("Atmos Mid-Tex" or "Company"), and a regulatory authority with an interest in the rates and charges of Atmos Mid-Tex; and 
WHEREAS, the Town is a member of the Atmos Cities Steering Committee ("ACSC"), a coalition of similarly-situated cities served by Atmos Mid-Tex ("ACSC Cities") that have joined together to facilitate the review of, and response to, natural gas issues affecting rates charged in the Atmos Mid-Tex service area; and 
WHEREAS, ACSC and the Company worked collaboratively to develop a new Rate Review Mechanism ("RRM") tariff that allows for an expedited rate review process by ACSC Cities as a substitute to the Gas Reliability Infrastructure Program ("GRIP") process instituted by the Legislature, and that will establish rates for the ACSC Cities based on the system-wide cost of serving the Atmos Mid-Tex Division; and 
WHEREAS, on March 1, 2016, Atmos Mid-Tex filed its 2016 RRM rate request with ACSC Cities; and 
WHEREAS, ACSC coordinated its review of the Atmos Mid-Tex 2016 RRM filing through its Executive Committee, assisted by ACSC's attorneys and consultants, to resolve issues identified in the Company's RRM filing; and 
WHEREAS, the Executive Committee, as well as ACSC's counsel and consultants, recommend that ACSC Cities approve an increase in base rates for Atmos Mid-Tex of $29.9 million on a system-wide basis; and 
WHEREAS, the attached tariffs implementing new rates are consistent with the recommendation of the ACSC Executive Committee, are agreed to by the Company, and are just, reasonable, and in the public interest; and 
WHEREAS, the RRM Tariff contemplates reimbursement of ACSC's reasonable expenses associated with RRM applications; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF FLOWER MOUND, TEXAS: 
Section 1. That the findings set forth in this Ordinance are hereby in all things approved. 
Section 2. That the Town Council finds that the settled amount of an increase in revenues of $29.9 million on a system-wide basis represents a comprehensive settlement of gas utility rate issues affecting the rates, operations, and services offered by Atmos Mid-Tex within the municipal limits arising from Atmos Mid-Tex's 2016 RRM filing is in the public interest, and is consistent with the Town's authority under Section 103.001 of the Texas Utilities Code. 
Section 3. That the existing rates for natural gas service provided by Atmos Mid-Tex are unreasonable. The new tariffs attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A, are just and reasonable, and are designed to allow Atmos Mid-Tex to recover annually an additional $29.9 million in revenue over the amount allowed under currently approved rates, as shown in the Proof of Revenues attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment B; such tariffs are hereby adopted. 
Section 4. That the ratemaking treatment for pensions and other post-employment benefits in Atmos Mid-Tex's next RRM filing shall be as set forth on Attachment C, attached hereto and incorporated herein. 
Section 5. That Atmos Mid-Tex shall reimburse the reasonable ratemaking expenses of the ACSC in processing the Company's 2016 RRM filing. 
Section 6. That to the extent any resolution or ordinance previously adopted by the Council is inconsistent with this Ordinance, it is hereby repealed. 
Section 7. That the meeting at which this Ordinance was approved was in all things conducted in strict compliance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, Texas Government Code, Chapter 551. 
Section 8. That if any one or more sections or clauses of this Ordinance is adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remaining provisions of this Ordinance, and the remaining provisions of the Ordinance shall be interpreted as if the offending section or clause never existed. 
Section 9. That consistent with the Town Ordinance that established the RRM process, this Ordinance shall become effective from and after its passage with rates authorized by attached tariffs to be effective for bills rendered on or after June 1, 2016. 
Section 10. That a copy of this Ordinance shall be sent to Atmos Mid-Tex, care of Chris Felan, Vice President of Rates and Regulatory Affairs Mid-Tex Division, Atmos Energy Corporation, 5420 LBJ Freeway, Suite 1862, Dallas, Texas 75240, and to Geoffrey Gay, General Counsel to ACSC, at Lloyd Gosselink Rochelle & Townsend, P.C., 816 Congress Avenue, Suite 1900, Austin, Texas 78701. 
PASSED AND APPROVED this 20TH day of JUNE, 16. 
	/s/   
      Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Town Secretary 	
 	 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/   
      Town Attorney 	
 	 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-16 , §§ 1—10, adopted June 20, 2016, amends the franchise agreement with Atmos Energy Corp. 
 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRIC[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 70. 
 
DIVISION 1. - TXU ELECTRIC[12] 
An ordinance granting to Texas Power and Light Company, its successors and assigns, an electric light, heat and power franchise. 
Be it ordained by the Town Commission of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas: 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the electric franchise with TXU Electric, which is the successor to Texas Power and Light Company and Texas Utilities Electric Company, as adopted by an ordinance on April 1, 1961 and amended by Ordinance No. 47-96, adopted October 25, 1996. Amendments to the franchise as amended, are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise as amended. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. 
 
Section 1. - Grant of franchise. 
That there is hereby granted to Texas Power and Light Company, its successors and assigns (herein called the "grantee"), the right, privilege and franchise until March 31, 2016, to construct, maintain and operate in the present and future streets, alleys, and public places of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, and its successors, electric light and power lines, with all necessary or desirable appurtenances (including underground conduits, poles, wires, transmission lines, and other structures and telephone wires for its own use), for the purpose of supplying electricity to the said town, the inhabitants thereof, and persons and corporations beyond the limits thereof, for light, heat, power and other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 44-06, § 1, 8-7-2006)  
Section 2. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
Poles, structures and other appurtenances shall be so erected and maintained as not to interfere unreasonably with traffic over streets and alleys. The location of all poles, conduits and other structures shall be fixed under the supervision of the street and alley committee of the Town of Flower Mound, or the successors to the duties of that committee, but not so as to interfere unreasonably with the proper operation of said lines.  
Section 3. - Service subject to rules and regulations; security for payment of bills. 
The service furnished hereunder to said town and its inhabitants shall be first class in all respects considering all circumstances, and shall be subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the grantee may make from time to time. The grantee may require reasonable security for the payment of its bills.  
Section 4. - Hold harmless from expense and liability. 
The grantee shall hold the town harmless from all expense or liability for any act or neglect of the grantee hereunder.  
Section 5. - Franchise fee. 
A final annual payment was made on or before April 1, 2006, based on each kilowatt hour of electricity delivered by Company during the twelve-month period ending January 31, 2006, to each retail customer whose consuming facility's point of delivery is located within the Town's municipal boundaries. This payment was for the rights and privileges granted under the franchise for the twelve-month period of April 1, 2006, through March 31, 2007. 
Effective July 1, 2006, the annual prospective payment schedule is hereby changed to a quarterly prospective schedule as follows: 
_____ 
Payment 
Due Date 	Basis Period 	Privilege Period 
(Following Year) 
July 1 	Feb. 1—Apr. 30 	Apr. 1—June 30 
Oct. 1 	May 1—July 31 	July 1—Sept. 30 
Jan. 1 	Aug. 1—Oct. 31 	Oct. 1—Dec. 31 
April 1 	Nov. 1—Jan. 31 	Jan. 1—March 31 
 
_____
The first quarterly payment will be due and payable on or before July 1, 2006, based on the period beginning February 1, 2006, and ending April 30, 2006, for the rights and privileges granted under the franchise during the period beginning April 1, 2007, and ending June 30, 2007. Subsequent payments will similarly be made on a quarterly basis as provided in the above schedule. The final payment under this Franchise will be made on or before April 1, 2015, based on the period beginning November 1, 2014, and ending January 31, 2015, for the rights and privileges beginning January 1, 2016, and ending March 31, 2016. 
After the final payment date of April 1, 2015, Company may continue to make additional quarterly payments in accordance with the above schedule. The Town acknowledges that such continued payments will correspond to privilege periods that extend beyond the term of this franchise and that such continued payments will be recognized in any subsequent franchise agreement as full payment for the relevant quarterly periods. 
(Ord. No. 44-06, § 2, 8-7-2006)  
Section 6. - Acceptance. 
The grantee shall file its written acceptance of this franchise within 60 days after its passage and approval.  
Section 7. - Rights nonexclusive. 
This franchise is not exclusive, and nothing herein contained shall be construed so as to prevent the town from granting other like or similar rights and privileges to any other person, firm or corporation. 
Passed and approved by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas on the _____ day of April, 1961. 
	/s/   
      Bob Rheudasil 
      Mayor 
 	 
Attest: 
/s/   
      Pat Rheudasil, 
      Town Secretary 	
 	 
ORDINANCE NO. 47-96 
An ordinance amending the existing franchise between the Town of Flower Mound and Texas Utilities Electric Company to provide for a different consideration; providing an effective date; providing for acceptance by Texas Utilities Electric Company; and finding and determining that the meeting at which this ordinance is passed is open to the public as required by law. 
Whereas, Texas Utilities Electric Company (hereinafter called "TU Electric") is engaged in the business of providing electric utility service within the Town of Flower Mound (hereinafter called "town") and is using the public streets, alleys, grounds, and rights-of-way within the town for that purpose under the terms of a franchise ordinance heretofore duly passed by the governing body of the town and duly accepted by TU Electric; and 
Whereas, TU Electric has, pursuant to said franchise ordinance, been paying to the town a sum equal to three percent of its gross receipts from the retail sale of electric power and energy within the town for the rights and privileges set forth in said franchise ordinance and, in addition thereto, has reimbursed the town for its ratemaking expenses pursuant to Section 2.106 of the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995; and 
Whereas, the town and TU Electric desire to amend said franchise ordinance to provide for a different consideration to consist of a sum equal to four percent of its gross receipts from the retail sale of electric power and energy within the town; which different consideration includes, among other things, TU Electric's obligation to reimburse the town for its ratemaking and other regulatory expenses to be incurred by the town involving the regulation of TU Electric; 
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas:  
Section 1. - Rates change. 
The consideration payable by TU Electric for the rights and privileges granted to TU Electric by the franchise ordinance heretofore duly passed by the governing body of this town and duly accepted by TU Electric is hereby changed to be four percent of its gross receipts from the retail sale of electric power and energy within the corporate limits of the town, said changed percentage to be applied to said gross receipts beginning on the first day of the month immediately following the date on which TU Electric accepts this ordinance, and being payable as specified in said franchise ordinance and based upon the same time periods as specified in said franchise ordinance and being payment for the said rights and privileges during the period specified in said franchise ordinance, said payment being in lieu of and shall be accepted as payment for all of TU Electric's obligations to pay municipal charges, fees, rentals, pole rentals, wire taxes, inspection fees, easement taxes, franchise taxes, certain regulatory expenses under Section 2.106 of the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995 or any similar or successor law, or other charges and taxes of every kind, except ad valorem taxes, sales and use taxes, and special taxes and assessments for public improvements.  
Section 2. - One-time payment; calculation. 
TU Electric shall make a one-time payment hereunder for the purpose of making the changed consideration as specified in section 1 hereof effective as specified in said section 1 without altering the payment dates specified in said franchise ordinance heretofore duly passed by the governing body of this town and duly accepted by TU Electric, said one-time payment being due and payable 30 days after TU Electric's acceptance of this ordinance as provided in section 7 hereof, and being a sum calculated as follows: (a) TU Electric shall determine the monthly average of its gross receipts from the retail sale of electric power and energy within the town during the period upon which the most recent franchise payment made to the town prior to the date determined in accordance with section 1 hereof was based; (b) the said monthly average of its said gross receipts shall be multiplied by one percent; and (c) the product so calculated shall be multiplied by the number of whole months from the date determined in accordance with section 1 hereof through the last day of the last month of the period for which the most recent franchise payment made to the town prior to said date determined in accordance with section 1 hereof was made.  
Section 3. - Reimbursement of expenses. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in section 1 hereof, if TU Electric files general rate cases and the town incurs cumulative expenses, otherwise reimbursable by TU Electric under Section 2.106 of the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995 or similar or successor law in excess of $4 million, then in such event, TU Electric shall reimburse all of the expenses incurred by the town in connection with all general rate cases filed during the period beginning with the effective date hereof and ending on September 30, 2008, in excess of said $4 million. The term "general rate case" as used in this ordinance means a rate case initiated by TU Electric in which it seeks to increase its rates charged to a substantial number of its customer classes in the town and elsewhere in its system and in which TU Electric's overall revenues are in setting such rates. The town agrees to exercise reasonable best efforts, considering the facts and circumstances, to keep its expenses on average to under $1,000,000.00 per general rate case.  
Section 4. - Ratemaking expenses; reimbursement. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 1 hereof, TU Electric will continue to reimburse the town's ratemaking expenses, if any, in connection with the appeal and any remand of Public Utility Commission of Texas Docket No. 9300 that are otherwise reimbursable under Section 2.106 of the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995, but will not continue to reimburse the town's ratemaking expenses, if any, in connection with Public Utility Commission of Texas Docket No. 11735; the town hereby agrees that any ratemaking expenses incurred in connection with said Docket No. 11735 that the town incurs on appeal or on remand of said Docket No. 11735 will be the Town's sole responsibility and further agrees in the events that the town is a participant in the join intervention of cities managed by the steering committee of TU Electric Service Area Cities intervening in Docket No. 11735, that the town decides to continue to participate with the steering committee in such appeal of said order, and TU Electric is required to reimburse said steering committee for ratemaking expenses under Section 2.106 of the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995 that are incurred on appeal or remand of said Docket No. 11735—to reimburse TU Electric the town's share of reimbursable expenses related to said appeal and remand and owed by TU Electric to said steering committee determined by the methodology chosen by the said steering committee (the town to notify TU Electric of the method so chosen by the steering committee prior to the submission of an invoice by the steering committee for the payment by TU Electric of said reimbursable expenses related to said appeal or remand)  
Section 5. - Formula for amount calculated. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 3 hereof, in the event that the City of Dallas incurs cumulative expenses in connection with general rate cases filed by TU Electric during the period beginning with the effective date hereof and ending September 30, 2008, in excess of $4 million and TU Electric reimburses the City of Dallas such excess, then, in that event, TU Electric will reimburse the town's reasonable expenses actually incurred that are otherwise reimbursable under Section 2.106 of the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995, Article 1446c-0, V.A.T.S. (The "PURA"), limited, however to an amount calculated in accordance with the following formula: 
A = [(B - $4,000,000.00) - B] × C, 
where: 
A = The amount reimbursable to the town; 
B = The total amount of expenses incurred by the City of Dallas prior to September 30, 2008, in connection with general rate cases filed by TU Electric, which expenses would be reimbursable under Section 2.106 of the PURA to the City of Dallas except for the terms of TU Electric's current franchise with the City of Dallas, but excluding all such expenses incurred in connection with Public Utility Commission of Texas Dockets Nos. 9300 and 11735; and 
C = The total amount of expenses incurred by the town prior to September 30, 2008, in connection with general rate cases filed by TU Electric, which expenses would be reimbursable under Section 2.106 of the PURA except for the terms of this franchise amendment but excluding all such expenses incurred in connection with Public Utility Commission of Texas Dockets Nos. 9300 and 11735; and  
Section 6. - Ordinance to remain in full force and effect. 
In all respects, except as specifically and amended by this ordinance, the said franchise ordinance heretofore duly passed by the governing body of this town and duly accepted by TU Electric shall remain in full force and effect according to its terms until said franchise ordinance terminates as provided therein.  
Section 7. - Effective date; acceptance. 
This ordinance shall take effect from and after its final passage and TU Electric's acceptance. TU Electric shall, within 15 days from the passage of this ordinance, file its written acceptance of this ordinance with the office of the town secretary in substantially the following form: 
To the Honorable Mayor and Town Council: 
Texas Utilities Electric Company (TU Electric, acting by and through the undersigned authorized officer, hereby accepts, on this the 25th day of October 1996, Ordinance No. 47-96 amending the current franchise between the town and TU Electric. 
	TEXAS UTILITIES ELECTRIC COMPANY 
	By: /s/ _____
Senior Vice President 
  
Section 8. - Passed and approved. 
It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which this ordinance is passed is open to the public as required by law and that public notice of the time, place and purpose of said meeting was given as required. 
Passed and approved by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, on first reading on this the 19th day of August, 1996. 
Passed and approved by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, on second and final reading on this the 21st day of October, 1996. 
	/s/  _____
Larry W. Lipscomb 
Mayor 
Attest: 	
/s/  _____
Ann Mills, 
Deputy Town 
Secretary 	
Approved as to form: 	
/s/  _____
Terrence Welch, 
Town Attorney 	
 
ORDINANCE NO. 18-99 
An ordinance of the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, approving rate schedules for Texas Utilities Electric Company, providing an effective date therefor, providing conditions under which such rate schedules may be changed, modified, amended or withdrawn, finding and determining that the meeting at which this ordinance is passed is open to the public as required by law. 
Now therefore, be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, that:  
Section 1. - Time-of-use rate schedules. 
On January 15, 1999, Texas Utilities Electric Company (hereinafter referred to as "TU Electric") filed with the governing body of this municipality a statement of intent and application to implement within the corporate limits of this municipality proposed new rate schedules that provide additional rate options for its customers, which options are entirely voluntary on the part of the customer, namely its proposed rate GTU-M-general service time-of-use-municipality, proposed rate RTU 1-M-residential time-of-use service-municipality, and proposed rate GTUC-M-general service time-of-use voluntary curtailable-municipality (said three proposed new rate schedules hereinafter collectively referred to as the "time-of-use rate schedules").  
Section 2. - Approval. 
The time-of-use rate schedules are hereby approved, and TU Electric is authorized to render service and to collect charges as specified in the time-of-use rate schedules from its customers electing to receive electric service under said time-of-use rate schedules within the corporate limits of this municipality until such time as said rate schedules may be changed, modified, amended or withdrawn with the approval of the governing body of this municipality.  
Section 3. - Effective time period. 
The time-of-use rate schedules herein approved shall be effective from and after the final passage and approval of this ordinance.  
Section 4. - Notice. 
The filing of said time-of-use rate schedules shall constitute notice to the consumers of electricity within its municipality of the availability and application of such time-of-use rate schedules.  
Section 5. - Recovery of revenue prohibited. 
TU Electric shall not seek any additional rate or surcharge mechanism to recover any revenues lost on account of the application of these time-of-use rates, and there shall be no imputed revenues on account of any reduction in TU Electric's revenues that may result from the application of these time-of-use rates.  
Section 6. - Riders. 
The rate reductions approved by the Public Utility Commission of Texas in Docket No. 18490 shall be applied to the time-of-use rates approved herein, such that rider RRD shall be applicable to rate RTU 1-M, rider GSRD shall be applied to all customers taking secondary service under either rate GTU-M designated as GTU-M-SEC or under rate GTUC-M designated as GTUC-M-SEC, and rider RD shall be applied to all other customers on rate GTU-M or rate GTUC-M.  
Section 7. - Base rate case; rate classes. 
In its next general base rate case in which the time-of-use rates herein approved are at issue, TU Electric will either (a) include all customers taking service under rate GTUC or GTUC-M during the test year involved in such base rate case as a separate rate class in its cost allocation study, or (b) include in its cost allocation study the load and revenue data applicable to each GTUC or GTUC-M customer taking service under rate GTUC or GTU-CM during the test year involved in such base rate case with the load and revenue data of the rate class applicable to such GTUC or GTUC-M customer immediately prior to such customer's taking service under rate GTUC or GTUC-M. In the event, however, that industry restructuring is mandated by legislative changes prior to the time that TU Electric has another general base rate case and such legislation authorizes the recovery by TU Electric of any stranded costs from its various customer classes in accordance with its last approved cost of service study, the customers then receiving service under the time-of-use rates will be included in the customer classes reflected in TU Electric's most recent cost of service study as follows: 
(a)  Customers on rate RTU1-M shall be included in rate class RTU; 
(b)  Customers on rate GTU-M shall be included in rate class HV, GP, or GS, depending upon the voltage level of the service, such that customers on rate GTU-M receiving service at high voltages shall be included in rate class HV, customers receiving service at primary distribution voltages shall be included in rate class GP, and customers receiving service at secondary distribution voltages shall be included in rate class GS; and 
(c)  Customers on rate GTUC-M shall be included in rate class NI (noticed interruptible) depending upon the voltage level of the service, such that customers on rate GTUC-M receiving service at high voltages shall be included in rate class NI (High Voltage), customers on rate GTUC-M receiving service at primary distribution voltages shall be included in rate NI (primary), and customers on rate GTUC-M receiving service at secondary distribution voltages shall be included in rate NI (secondary).  
Section 8. - Rates, operations and services. 
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed now or hereafter as limiting or modifying in any manner the right and power of the governing body of this municipality under the law to regulate the rates, operations, and services of TU Electric.  
Section 9. - Public notice. 
It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which this ordinance is passed is open to the public as required by law and that public notice of the time, place, and purpose of said meeting was given as required. 
Duly passed and approved by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, by a vote of 4 to 0 on this the 15th day of February, 1999. 
	APPROVED: 
	/s/  _____
Lori L. DeLuca 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 	
/s/  _____
Paula Lawrence, CMC 
Town Secretary 	
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY: 	
/s/  _____
Terrence S. Welch 
Town Attorney 		
  
DIVISION 2 - COSERV ELECTRIC[13] 
An ordinance granting to Denton County Electric Cooperative, Inc., its successors and assigns, an electric light, heat and power franchise, and declaring an emergency. 
Be it ordained by the Town Commission of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas: 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the electric franchise with CoServ Electric as the successor to Denton County Electric Company, Inc., as adopted on December 2, 1965. Amendments to the franchise, are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Section 1. - Grant of franchise. 
Subject to the terms and conditions mentioned in this ordinance, and until January 1, 2015, the right, privilege and franchise is hereby granted to Denton County Electric Cooperative, Inc., a corporation organized under the laws of the State of Texas, and its successors, lessees and assigns (herein called "grantee"), to erect, establish, construct, maintain and operate an electric power and transmission system in the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, (herein called the "town"), and to use the streets, highways, easements, parks, alleys, public squares and all other public lands and places of the town within the corporate limits as the same may from time to time exist, for the purpose of erecting, maintaining and operating its electric light and power lines, with all necessary or desirable appurtenances, including underground conduits, poles, wires, transmission lines and other structures and telephone lines for its own use, for the purpose of supplying electricity to said town and its inhabitants and to persons, firms, corporations and institutions beyond the corporate limits thereof for light, heat, power and other purposes.  
Section 2. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
The grantee shall erect, maintain, construct, operate and replace their electric light and power lines, and appurtenances, so as to interfere as little as feasible with traffic.  
Section 3. - Rules and regulation of service. 
The grantee herein, its successors, lessees and assigns, shall construct its electric power and transmission facilities in a good and workmanlike manner and shall furnish its customers in the town of Flower Mound, Texas, good, sufficient, and prompt service in all respects considering all circumstances. 
Such service, however, shall be subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the grantee may promulgate.  
Section 4. - Rates and regulations. 
The grantor has determined and hereby finds that the rates and regulations now in force and effect in the area are fair and reasonable under existing circumstances.  
Section 5. - Modifying rate schedule and service regulation 
Should grantee, its successors, lessees and assigns, desire to put into effect within the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, a new rate schedule or a new service regulation or to change any existing rate schedule or service regulation or to withdraw the same, it shall file with the town secretary such new or changed rate schedule or service regulations or notice of withdrawal of any existing rate schedule or service regulation, and unless the town suspends or disapproves the same within 30 days from the time of such filing or notice of withdrawal, the new or changed rate schedule or service regulation or withdrawal of existing rate schedule or service regulation shall be in effect from date of filing and thereafter.  
Section 6. - Liability. 
The grantee agrees to hold and save the town harmless from any and all damages, claims, suits and liabilities arising out of the installation, operation and maintenance of its electric power and transmission system.  
Section 7. - Cumulative franchise. 
The franchise hereby granted is cumulative of and shall not repeal the provisions of that certain franchise granted by the Commissioners' Court of Denton County, Texas, by order entered on the 13th day of July, 1938, of record in Volume Q, Page 313, Minutes of the Commissioners' Court of Denton County, Texas.  
Section 8. - Franchise fee. 
A.  The Grantee agrees to pay to the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, on or before April 1, 2006, a sum of money equal to the sum of (i) three percent (3%) of the Gross Revenues (as defined below) for the period of January 1, 2005, through August 31, 2005, plus (ii) four percent (4%) of the Gross Revenues for the period of September 1, 2005, through December 31, 2005, for the use of the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks, and all other public lands and places within the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, for the Grantee's poles, wires, conduits, pipes, fixtures and all other equipment and appurtenances related to its electric system in the Town. Further, the Grantee agrees to pay to the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, on or before April 1, 2007, and on or before the same day of each succeeding year during the life of this franchise, a sum of money equal to four percent (4%) of the Gross Revenues for the previous calendar year, for the use of the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks, and all other public lands and places within the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, for the Grantee's poles, wires, conduits, pipes, fixtures and all other equipment and appurtenances related to its electric system in the Town. Such payment shall be in lieu of any other tax or increased rate of tax, or other imposition, assessment or charges, except ad valorem taxes. The Grantee shall, on the same date that payment is made, as provided for herein, file a report with the Town Secretary showing the Gross Revenues in the calendar year preceding the date of payment. The Town may have the books and records of the Grantee examined by a representative of the Town to verify the correctness of the report filed. 
B.  Gross Revenues 
As used herein, the term "Gross Revenues" means the annual revenues collected by the Grantee from its customers for the sale of electric energy to business and residential customers within the corporate limits of the Town, including miscellaneous fees such as connect or disconnect fees, deposits, returned check fees, new account fees, and delinquent charges. The term "Gross Revenues" shall not include revenue billed but not received; line extension charges or contributions in aid of construction in the form of one-time or periodic payments or monthly facilities charges; pole rental; taxes; revenue from materials or equipment sales; principal and/or interest payments on amounts loaned by the Grantee; or any fees required to be remitted by the Grantee to third parties. The Grantee is hereby authorized to surcharge to customers within the Town all or any portion of the Gross Revenues assessment. All bills for services rendered within the Town may be adjusted by the same percentage as the Gross Revenues assessment specified herein, less any percentage that is recovered by the Grantee through base rates or other charges. 
C.  Grantee Franchise Fee Recovery Tariff 
1.  To the extent required by applicable law, Grantee may file a tariff amendment(s) to provide for the recovery of the franchise fee payable hereunder. 
2.  The Town agrees: 
a.  to the extent the Town acts as regulatory authority, to adopt and approve that portion of any tariff which provides for 100 percent (100%) recovery (or such lesser amount requested by the Grantee) of the franchise fee payable hereunder as part of the Grantee's rates; 
b.  in the event the Town intervenes in any regulatory proceeding before a federal or state agency in which the recovery of such franchise fees is an issue, the Town will take an affirmative position supporting the 100 percent (100%) recovery of such franchise fees by the Grantee; and 
c.  in the event of an appeal of any such regulatory proceeding in which the Town has intervened, the Town will take an affirmative position in any such appeals in support of the 100 percent (100%) recovery of such franchise fees by the Grantee. 
3.  The Town agrees that it will take no action, nor cause any other person or entity to take any action, to prohibit the recovery of such franchise fees by the Grantee. 
(Ord. No. 59-05 § 8, 8-1-2005)  
Section 9. - Rights nonexclusive. 
This franchise is not exclusive, and nothing herein contained shall be construed so as to prevent the town from granting other, like and similar rights and privileges to any other person, firm or corporation.  
Section 10. - Permission to transfer franchise. 
This franchise is personal to the grantee herein and shall not be transferred or assigned to any other person, firm, or corporation without the written consent and approval of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas.  
Section 11. - Acceptance. 
The grantee shall, within 30 days from the approval of this ordinance, notify the mayor of the town of its consent and acceptance of the provisions and conditions of this ordinance, said notice to be by registered mail.  
Section 12. - Validity. 
If any section, sentence, clause or phase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be illegal, ultra vires or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.  
Section 13. - Effective date. 
The fact that the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, is in immediate need of the relief afforded by the provisions of this ordinance creates an emergency and an imperative public necessity requiring and demanding that any and all rules requiring ordinances to be read and repassed at more than one meeting be suspended, and that this ordinance take effect immediately upon its passage, and it is so ordained. 
Passed and approved on December 2, 1965. 
;sigr;  \Bob Rhuedasil 
Mayor 
Attest: 
;sigl;  \Pat Rheudasil 
Town Secretary  
DIVISION 3. - DENTON COUNTY ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE, INC., D/B/A COSERV ELECTRIC[14] 
Ordinance No. 60-12 
An Ordinance of the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, granting to Denton County Electric Cooperative, Inc., D/B/A Coserv Electric, its successors and assigns, the non-exclusive right to use and occupy rights-of-way within the town of Flower Mound for the construction and operation of an electric transmission and distribution system; prescribing conditions governing the use of the public rights-of-way; providing for compensation therefor, providing for an effective date and a term of said franchise, providing for written acceptance of this franchise; finding that the meeting at which this ordinance is passed is open to the public; and providing for severability. 
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas, that: 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the electric franchise with Denton County Electric Cooperative, Inc., D/B/A COSERV Electric, as adopted by Ordinance Number 60-12 on Nov. 5, 2012. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Sec. 1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
A.  "Town" shall mean the home rule municipal corporation designated as the town of Flower Mound, Texas, and includes the territory that currently is or may in the future be included within the boundaries of the town. Any territory that may be disannexed in the future shall not be included within the boundaries of the town upon the effective date of the disannexation. 
B.  "CIAC" shall mean all payments received for contributions in aid of construction performed within the boundaries of the town, including but not limited to system benefit charges and facilities charges, on contracts entered into after the effective date. 
C.  "Cooperative" shall mean Denton County Electric Cooperative, Inc., d/b/a CoServ Electric, a Texas electric cooperative corporation, its successors and assigns. 
D.  "Effective date" shall be the date specified in section 22 of this ordinance. 
E.  "Electric distribution system" or "system" shall mean the cooperative's system of cables, wires, lines, poles, towers, anchors, guy wires, insulators, transformers, substations, conduits, ducts, and any associated equipment, or plant, or other facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, transmitting or distributing electricity to or from customers or locations within the town, as the same now exists and may from time to time be placed, removed, constructed, reconstructed, extended and maintained. 
F.  "Governmental or regulatory authority" means any court, tribunal, arbitrator, authority, agency, commission, official or other instrumentality of the United States, or any state, county, municipality or other political subdivision. 
G.  "Gross revenues" shall mean the operating revenue for electric services provided by the cooperative to its customers within the corporate boundaries of the town pursuant to the accounting principles established by the rural utilities service of the U. S. Dept. of Agriculture in 7 CFR 1767, including specifically 1767.26, Accounts 440-456, as amended, except as modified herein, including: 
(1)  All operating revenues received by the cooperative from the sale of electricity to all classes of customers within the town; 
(2)  All operating revenues derived from the cooperative's service fees as defined in CFR 1767.26, Accounts 440-456, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(i)  Charges to connect, disconnect, or reconnect service within the town; 
(ii)  Charges to handle returned checks from consumers within the town; and 
(iii)  Such other service charges and charges as may, from time to time, be authorized in the rates and charges of the cooperative; and 
(3)  franchise fees collected from the cooperative's customers located within the corporate boundaries of the town. 
The term "gross revenues" shall not include: 
(a)  The revenue of any person including, without limitation, an affiliate of the cooperative, to the extent that such revenue is also included in gross revenues of the cooperative; 
(b)  Other than franchise fees, any taxes or fees required to be remitted to a third party including the town; 
(c)  Any interest income earned by cooperative; 
(d)  All monies received from the lease or sale of real or personal property; 
(e)  Any amounts billed or collected from cooperative's members for refundable membership fees and deposits; 
(f)  Amounts derived from CIAC; 
(g)  Sales of energy or electric service for resale or to wholesale customers; 
(h)  Reimbursements for damage to or relocation of any part of the system; 
(i)  Amounts billed or collected by the cooperative from its customers for charitable contributions such as operation roundup; 
(j)  revenues billed but not ultimately collected or received by the cooperative; 
(k)  Pole attachment revenue; and 
(l)  State or federal grants or reimbursements. 
H.  "Laws" shall mean any and all federal, state and local statutes, constitutions, ordinances, resolutions, regulations, judicial decisions, rules, tariffs, administrative orders, certificates, orders, or other requirements of the town or other governmental agency having joint or several jurisdiction over the parties to the franchise granted herein, in effect either as of the effective date or at any time during the term of the franchise granted herein. 
I.  "Pole attachment revenue" shall be an amount calculated by dividing the total amount of pole attachment revenue received by the cooperative in a calendar year by the total number of cooperative's meters in service as of December 31 of such calendar year, and multiplying that result by the number of cooperative's meters in service within the corporate boundaries of the town as of December 31 of such calendar year. 
J.  "Public right-of-way" shall mean all present and future public streets, public thoroughfares, highways and alleys owned by town, and all present and future public utility easements located on property owned by the town that allow the use of cooperative's facilities. This term shall not include county, state, or federal rights of way or any property owned by any person or agency other than the town, except as provided by applicable laws or pursuant to an agreement between the town and any such person or agency. 
K.  "Public Utility Commission of Texas" or "PUC" shall mean that agency as presently constituted by the laws of the State of Texas or any successor agency. 
L.  "Tariff" shall mean the tariff for electric service for cooperative, effective as of May 1, 2010, and as subsequently revised or amended.  
Sec. 2. - Grant of authority. 
A.  There is hereby granted to cooperative and its successors and assigns, the right, privilege and franchise to construct, re-construct, extend, maintain, repair, remove and operate in, along, under and across the public rights-of-way of town an electric distribution system consisting of electric power lines, with all necessary or desirable appurtenances and communications cables, equipment, devices and other equipment (including underground conduits, poles, towers, wires, transmission lines and other structures, and telephone and communication lines for its own internal and non-commercial use), for the purposes of supplying, operating, managing, controlling, optimizing, and maintaining electric service to the town, the inhabitants thereof, and persons, firms and corporations beyond the corporate limits thereof, and operating, managing, controlling, and maintaining local and regional distribution and/or transmission systems, for the term set out in section 13 ("franchise"). The franchise granted herein does not grant to the cooperative the right, privilege, or authority to engage in any other business within the town requiring the grant of a right, privilege or authority by the town, other than the provision of electric utility service. 
B.  The franchise granted herein does not establish any priority for the use of the public rights-of-way by cooperative or by any present or future recipients of franchise agreements, franchisees, or other permit holders. In the event of any dispute as to the priority of use of the public rights-of-way, the first priority shall be to the public generally, the second priority to the town, the third priority to the State of Texas and its political subdivisions in the performance of their various functions, and thereafter, as between recipients of franchise agreements, cooperative and other permit holders, as reasonably determined by the town in the lawful exercise of its powers, including the police power and other powers reserved to and conferred on it by the State of Texas. 
C.  Cooperative acknowledges that by this ordinance it obtains only the right to use the public rights-of-way that is expressly granted herein. Cooperative acknowledges and accepts at its own risk that town may make use of the public rights-of-way in a manner that is inconsistent with cooperative's placement and use of its electric distribution system located in the public rights-of-way, and in that event cooperative shall not be entitled to compensation from town except to the extent town is obligated to compensate cooperative under applicable laws. 
D.  Cooperative shall have the right to lease, license or otherwise grant to a party other than cooperative the use of its facilities within the town's public rights-of-way, provided that prior to the date of the initial attachment of the facilities of a new lessee, licensee, or user to cooperative's facilities, cooperative shall notify the town of the name of the lessee, licensee, or user, the type of service(s) intended to be provided through the facilities, and the name and telephone number of a contact person associated with such lessee, licensee, or user. This authority to lease facilities within the public rights-of-way shall not affect any such lessee, licensee, or user's obligation, if any, to pay franchise fees to the town.  
Sec. 3. - Purpose. 
The provisions set forth in this ordinance represent the terms and conditions under which cooperative shall construct, re-construct, extend, repair, remove, operate and maintain the system within the public rights-of-way of the town. In the franchise granted herein, the town does not in any manner surrender or waive its regulatory or other rights and powers under and by virtue of the Constitution and statutes of the State of Texas as the same may be amended, nor any of its rights and powers under or by virtue of present or future ordinances of the town, except as may be set out herein. Not included in the franchise granted herein are any facilities (including any equipment attached in any way to Cooperative's facilities, whether owned by the cooperative or not) that provide data delivery, cable service, telephone service, and/or any other service or product unrelated to the cooperative's transmittal and delivery of electricity.  
Sec. 4. - Operation, construction and maintenance of electric distribution system. 
A.  Cooperative's system shall be initially constructed so as not to unreasonably interfere with any existing publicly-owned or publicly-franchised water and wastewater lines, gas lines, storm sewer lines, open drainage areas, cable, fiber optic cable, roadways, sidewalks, alleys, traffic control devices, public signs, or any other publicly-owned or publicly-franchised facility. The town shall have the right at any time to order and require cooperative to remove and abate any part of its electric distribution system that is unnecessarily dangerous to life or property, and in case cooperative, after notice, fails or refuses to act within a reasonable time, the town shall have the power to remove or abate the same at the expense of cooperative, all without compensation or liability for damages to cooperative. 
B.  Permits. 
1.  Cooperative's facilities shall interfere as little as reasonably possible with town-owned public works facilities and with vehicular and pedestrian use of public rights-of-way. 
2.  Except as provided in section 4(B)(3), cooperative shall not be required to submit a permit application for the placement of facilities outside of the public rights-of-way, however, cooperative shall provide detailed drawings, in accordance with cooperative's customary practice, reflecting cooperative's installations on private property so that town may verify compliance with town ordinances related to zoning, development, building regulations, and setbacks, and for easement verification. 
3.  Cooperative shall submit a permit application to town for the placement of new facilities, for upgrade or augmentation of existing facilities, or for replacement of existing facilities in the public rights-of-way, in utility easements granted or dedicated to the town on private property for installation of water, wastewater or drainage facilities, in utility easements on private property that contain water, wastewater or drainage facilities owned by the town, or in utility easements immediately adjacent to and adjoining public rights-of-way. Such permit application shall include: 
(a)  Complete plans and detailed drawings reflecting compliance with all applicable zoning, development, and building requirements of the town; and 
(b)  All additional information requested by town reasonably related to the permit request. 
4.  Except as otherwise provided in this section 4(B), following the submission of a permit application described herein, notice of town's approval or denial of cooperative's request for a permit shall be provided in accordance with town's usual procedures for processing of permit applications. 
5.  Town shall endeavor to complete its review of cooperative's application within 30 business days (excluding town holidays) after town's receipt of the permit application and, if applicable, any additional information requested by Town reasonably related to the permit request. However, the time associated with Cooperative's provision of a response to town's request for additional information pursuant to section 4(B)(3) above shall not be counted against the 30 business day time period. 
6.  If town has not approved or denied cooperative's request for a permit within 30 business days (excluding town holidays) after: 
(a)  Receipt by town of the permit application (if no additional information was requested by town), or 
(b)  Receipt by town of all additional information requested by town reasonably related to the permit request, then upon written request by cooperative, the town's department director in charge of the permit process shall, within 15 days after such written request, approve (and issue) or deny the permit in question. For good cause, town's department director may by written notice to cooperative extend such 15-day time period to approve or deny cooperative's application for up to an additional 30 days. 
7.  Cooperative may proceed with the placement of the facilities described in its permit application if written notice of town's approval or denial of cooperative's request for a permit is not provided within 15 days (or such additional number of days if extended by town's department director) of the date of Cooperative's request pursuant to section 4(B)(6) above. 
8.  A permit application for new overhead facilities not directly associated with a line extension for new electric service, or for overhead facilities to augment, upgrade, replace, or repair facilities within a public right-of-way on existing poles (existing pole lines) containing overhead facilities, may not be denied for aesthetic reasons. 
9.  A permit application approved by the town may be valid for a period of time consistent with the amount of time reasonably required for the cooperative to perform the work described in the permit application, and may be extended by cooperative for such time as reasonably required to complete such work upon town's receipt of cooperative's verification in writing of the need for such an extension. 
10.  In determining the location of the cooperative's new facilities within the town, the cooperative shall minimize interferences with then-existing or documented planned underground structures of the town or with the existing facilities of other users of the public rights-of-way. In determining the location of the facilities of the town and other utility franchisees and other users of the public rights-of-way within the town, the town shall take reasonable steps to minimize the interference with existing facilities of the cooperative and shall require other utility franchisees or users of the public rights-of-way to minimize interference with existing facilities of the cooperative. 
C.  Cooperative's property and operations within the public rights-of-way of the town shall be subject to such reasonable and lawful rules and regulations of the town or other governmental or regulatory authority as may be authorized by applicable law from time to time for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. This ordinance shall in no way affect or impair the rights, obligations or remedies of the parties under the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act, or other state or federal law. Nothing herein shall be deemed a waiver, release or relinquishment of either party's right to contest, appeal, or file suit with respect to any action or decision of the other party, including ordinances adopted by the town that cooperative believes are contrary to applicable laws. 
D.  Cooperative shall construct, re-construct, extend, repair, remove, maintain, operate and replace its facilities in accordance with its tariff and in conformance with the applicable provisions of the National Electric Safety Code or such comparable standards as may be adopted by the cooperative, provided such comparable standards are not in conflict with the National Electric Safety Code. Cooperative shall comply with applicable laws and standards. 
E.  Town may request that cooperative place new facilities underground, provided that, if cooperative otherwise would, pursuant to its tariff, construct those facilities overhead, the town or property developer shall (a) bear the cost differential between overhead and underground construction and facilities and (b) specify and provide, in compliance with the cooperative's reasonable specifications and requirements, a location for such underground facilities. 
F.  Cooperative and town have agreed that cooperative shall not be obligated to provide maps identifying all cooperative facilities within the town boundaries, provided however, that cooperative agrees to provide reproducible copies of maps showing the location of all cooperative primary electric lines within the public rights-of-way at least annually upon request by town. The maps shall be provided in electronic digital format, if available. In addition, upon request, cooperative shall cooperate with the town by identifying and locating, at locations specified by the town, cooperative's existing facilities such as underground conduits, manholes to access such underground conduits, and other appurtenances and by providing information to the town regarding cooperative's plans for future facilities. Maps provided to town by cooperative shall be maintained as confidential by the town as provided in section 15 hereof. Upon request, the town shall cooperate with the cooperative by identifying and locating, at locations specified by the cooperative, town's existing facilities such as water and sewer lines, storm drains, communications lines, and appurtenances. 
G.  Any and all excavations and obstructions in and upon the Public Rights-of-Way and other public places in the Town caused by the Cooperative's operations under the Franchise granted herein shall be repaired and removed as quickly as is reasonably possible, under the circumstances. All excavations shall be repaired in a good and workmanlike manner and restored to at least the condition that existed prior to the excavation. All utilities, irrigation equipment, utility equipment, and any other improvements located in the public rights-of-way and disturbed by the cooperative's operations under the franchise granted herein shall likewise be restored within a reasonable time to as good a condition as existed before the commencement of the work to the satisfaction of the town and in accordance with TCEQ stabilization regulations, as contained in the Texas Administrative Code, as amended. Replacement of sod is to be of like kind, smoothed, shaped, rolled and compacted for proper landscape maintenance. Cooperative warrants that any such restoration work performed in the public rights-of-way shall be in satisfactory condition for a period of two years after completion of restoration, to the extent that such restoration work has not been disturbed by others. In the event that the cooperative fails to repair or restore an excavation site within 14 calendar days after receipt of written notice from the town of a deficiency, the town may, at its option, perform the needed repair or restoration and the cooperative shall promptly reimburse the town for the cost of such repair or restoration. 
H.  Town shall have the right to inspect all reconstruction or installation work and to make such tests as it deems necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this ordinance, or other applicable town ordinances or pertinent provisions of law. 
I.  The public shall be protected by barriers and lights placed, erected, marked and maintained by the cooperative in accordance with standards set forth in the current Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as well as any other applicable local, state and federal requirements. Except for repairs, day-to-day maintenance, or in cases of emergency conditions, work conducted within the public rights-of-way shall require an approved permit issued by the town prior to commencement of work. In no instance shall cooperative be required to pay fees or post bonds related to its use of the public rights-of-way. 
J.  Cooperative shall have the authority to trim or remove trees and vegetation upon or overhanging its system that may endanger or interfere with the system and its operation, and to prevent the vegetation and the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the system. The cooperative's vegetation management practices shall be consistent with the safety requirements for pruning, repairing, maintaining, and removing trees endorsed by the American National Standards Institute (specifically the ANSI A300, titled "Best Management Practices, Utility Pruning of Trees"); NESC Section 218; and state law. Except during an emergency or the recovery after an emergency, cooperative shall notify the town and its residents at least three days prior to entering onto property to perform any tree trimming activities. Within one year after acceptance of the franchise granted herein, and on a yearly basis thereafter, the cooperative will engage in a campaign to educate its customers within the town through bill inserts or other reasonable methods regarding prudent tree selection and planting around power lines. The town will encourage new developments to make prudent tree selection and planting decisions around power lines. 
K.  Upon the written request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the town, cooperative shall remove, raise or lower its wires temporarily to permit the moving of a house, building or other bulky structure. The reasonable expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering shall be paid by the benefitted person or persons and cooperative may require such payment in advance. Cooperative shall be given not less than 48 hours advance notice in writing to arrange for such temporary removal, raising or lowering. 
L.  Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to require any pole attachments for electric light or power wires or electrical facilities or systems not provided by cooperative, or any non-electric wires, facilities or systems, to be attached to cooperative's poles or other physical plant. If the town or any other person or entity desires pole attachments for any such electric or non-electric wires, facilities or systems not provided by cooperative, then a further separate, non-contingent agreement shall be prerequisite to such attachments or such use of any trench space. Nothing herein shall prohibit cooperative from requiring reasonable, non-discriminatory terms and from charging just compensation pursuant to a pole attachment or joint use agreement; however, any pole attachment or joint use agreement with a third party shall not be enforceable by the town. 
M.  In areas of the town where the town finds that the public rights-of-way will not readily accommodate further facilities, the town may require cooperative to share trench space with the town or any other person authorized to use such public rights-of-way for the placement of its cables or ducts. Ducts, cables, or wires not owned by cooperative shall be placed in trenches in compliance with applicable safety and construction standards in a manner that does not interfere with cooperative's ducts, conduit, cables or wires. Nothing herein shall prohibit cooperative from requiring reasonable, non-discriminatory terms and from charging just compensation for the use of its facilities or trench space; however, any such agreement with a third party shall not be enforceable by the town. 
N.  The cooperative shall hold itself ready to furnish, subject to section 4(L) above, such space as may be required from time to time by the town upon the poles now owned or hereafter erected by the cooperative in the town for the use of the town's police, fire alarm, communications, and traffic signal systems (for purposes of this section hereafter referred to as "town systems"); provided that such town use and placement shall be in compliance with applicable safety and construction standards and shall not interfere with cooperative's system. The location on the poles of the town systems shall be determined on specific applications for space, at the time the applications are received from the town, and will be allotted in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code. In its wire construction on cooperative's poles, the town shall comply with the applicable suggestions, standards and requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code and such construction shall not interfere with or cause damage to the cooperative's system. 
O.  Town shall not sell, lease or otherwise make available any rights granted by cooperative to town to use cooperative's facilities to any third party. Such rights are provided solely for the non-commercial, governmental use by the town.  
Sec. 5. - Relocation of facilities. 
A.  The town reserves the right to lay, and permit to be laid, storm, sewer, gas, water, wastewater and other pipe lines, cable, and conduits, or other improvements and to do and permit to be done any underground or overhead work that may be necessary or proper in, across, along, over, or under public rights-of-way occupied by cooperative. 
B.  The town also reserves the right to change in any manner any curb, sidewalk, highway, alley, public way, street, utility lines, storm sewers, drainage basins, drainage ditches, and other public improvements. Upon request by town, cooperative shall relocate, remove, or alter its facilities at its expense whenever such relocation, removal, or alteration is made necessary by public right-of-way or other public improvements, provided that the town shall provide cooperative with at least 30 days prior written notice and shall specify and provide a new location for such facilities within the public rights-of-way. If cooperative believes that the cost is excessive to relocate, remove, or alter its facilities per the town request, cooperative shall have the opportunity to present alternative proposals for the town's consideration. Town may request that cooperative relocate existing overhead facilities underground when cooperative is required to relocate facilities under this section 5(B), provided that the town or property developer shall (a) bear the cost differential between overhead and underground construction and facilities and (b) specify and provide, in compliance with the cooperative's reasonable specifications and requirements, a new location for such facilities. 
C.  When cooperative is required by town to remove or relocate its poles, towers, conduits, cables, and other facilities to accommodate public right-of-way improvements, and cooperative is eligible under federal, state, county, town or other local agencies or programs for reimbursement of costs and expenses incurred by cooperative as a result of such removal or relocation and such reimbursement is required to be handled through town, the cooperative's costs and expenses shall be included in any application by town for reimbursement, if cooperative submits its cost and expense documentation to town prior to the filing of the application. Town shall provide reasonable notice to cooperative of the deadline for cooperative to submit documentation of the costs and expenses of such removal or relocation to town. 
D.  If a public right-of-way in which cooperative has facilities is proposed to be vacated, eliminated, discontinued, or closed, cooperative shall be notified of same at least 60 days prior to such event, and all rights of cooperative under this ordinance to use same shall terminate, provided that a reasonable alternate route within the public right-of-way is available for relocation of such facilities. Cooperative shall, as soon as reasonably possible, remove the electric distribution system from such public right-of-way unless cooperative obtains any necessary easements from the affected property owner to use the former public right-of-way, or a court orders the provision of such easements. Where reasonably possible and to the extent consistent with the treatment of other utility facilities in the former public right-of-way, town shall reserve easements for cooperative to continue to use the former public right-of-way. Cooperative shall bear the cost of any removal or relocation of the electric distribution system unless the vacation, elimination, discontinuance or closure is primarily for the benefit of a private party, in which case the private party shall bear such costs. 
E.  If the town requires the cooperative to adapt or conform its facilities, or in any manner to alter, relocate, or change its property to enable any other entity to use, or use with greater convenience, said public rights-of-way, the cooperative shall not be bound to make such changes until such other entity shall have undertaken, with good and sufficient bond, to reimburse the cooperative for any costs, loss, or expense which will be caused by, or arises out of such change, alteration, or relocation of cooperative's property or facilities.  
Sec. 6. - Indemnity. 
A.  In consideration of the franchise granted herein, cooperative shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold the town, and its past and present officers, agents, and employees (the "indemnitees") harmless against any and all liability arising from any claim, lawsuit, judgments, or action brought or made for or on account of any death, injuries to, or damages received or sustained by any person or persons or for damage to or loss of property arising out of, or occasioned by cooperative's or any of its officers, agents, or employees, intentional and/or negligent acts or omissions in connection with cooperative's construction, maintenance and operation of cooperative's system in the public rights-of-way, including any court costs, expenses and defenses thereof. 
B.  This indemnity shall only apply to the extent that the loss, damage or injury is attributable to the negligence or wrongful act or omission of the cooperative, its officers, agents or employees, and does not apply to the extent such loss, damage or injury is attributable to the negligence or wrongful act or omission of the town, or the town's agents, representatives or employees or any other person or entity. This provision is not intended to create a cause of action or liability for the benefit of third parties but is solely for the benefit of the cooperative and the town. 
C.  In the event of joint and concurrent negligence or fault of both the cooperative and the town, responsibility and indemnity, if any, shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas without, however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the town under Texas law and without waiving any of the defenses of the parties under Texas law. Further, in the event of joint and concurrent negligence or fault of both the cooperative and the town, responsibility for all costs of defense shall be apportioned between the town and cooperative based upon the comparative fault of each. 
D.  In fulfilling its obligations to defend and indemnify town, cooperative shall have the right to select defense counsel, subject to town's approval, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld. Cooperative shall retain defense counsel within seven business days of town's written notice that town is invoking its right to indemnification under this section 6. If cooperative fails to retain counsel within such time period, town shall have the right to retain defense counsel on its own behalf, and cooperative shall be liable for all reasonable defense costs incurred by town.  
Sec. 7. - Liability insurance. 
Cooperative shall, at its sole cost and expense, obtain, maintain, or cause to be maintained, and provide, throughout the term of the franchise granted herein, insurance in the amounts, types and coverages set forth below. Such insurance may be in the form of self-insurance to the extent not precluded by applicable law or by obtaining insurance, as follows: 
A.  Commercial general or excess liability on an occurrence or claims made form with minimum limits of not less than $5,000,000.00 per occurrence and not less than $10,000,000.00 aggregate. To the extent that coverage is maintained on a claims made form, the minimum limits are not less than $10,000,000.00 per occurrence and not less than $20,000,000.00 aggregate. This coverage shall include the following: 
1.  Products/completed operations to be maintained for the warranty period specified in section 4(G), provided however that no bond shall be required. 
2.  Personal and advertising injury. 
3.  Contractual liability. 
4.  Explosion, collapse, or underground (XCU) hazards. 
B.  Automobile liability coverage with a minimum policy limit of not less than $1,000,000.00 combined single limit each accident. This coverage shall include all owned, hired and non-owned automobiles. 
C.  Statutory workers' compensation benefits in accordance with the statutes and regulations of the State of Texas. Cooperative must provide the town with a waiver of subrogation for workers' compensation claims. 
D.  Cooperative must name the town, which includes all authorities, commissions, divisions, and departments, as well as elected and appointed officials, agents, and volunteers, as additional insureds under the coverage required herein, except workers' compensation coverage. The certificate of insurance must state that the town is an additional insured. 
E.  Cooperative will require its contractors and subcontractors performing work within the public rights-of-way to maintain, at their sole cost and expense, commercial general or excess liability on an occurrence or claims made form with minimum limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and not less than $2,000,000.00 aggregate. Such insurance shall be required under the same conditions as specified herein for cooperative. Cooperative will maintain at all times, and will provide to town upon request, proof of its contractors' and subcontractors' compliance with this requirement. 
F.  The cooperative will provide proof of insurance in accordance with this ordinance within 30 days of the effective date hereof and annually thereafter. Cooperative will not be required to furnish separate proof when applying for permits. 
G.  All polices shall be endorsed to read: 
"THIS POLICY WILL NOT BE CANCELLED OR NON-RENEWED WITHOUT 30 DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE TOWN EXCEPT WHEN THIS POLICY IS BEING CANCELLED FOR NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH CASE TEN (10) DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE IS REQUIRED.  
Sec. 8. - Non-exclusive franchise. 
The franchise granted herein is not exclusive, and nothing herein contained shall be construed so as to prevent the town from granting other like or similar rights, privileges and franchises to any other person, firm, or corporation.  
Sec. 9. - Compensation to the town. 
A.  In consideration of the grant of said right, privilege and franchise by the town and as full payment for the right, privilege and franchise of using and occupying the said public rights-of-way, cooperative shall pay to the town a franchise fee as set forth herein ("franchise fee"). 
1.  The franchise fee shall be in lieu of any and all occupation taxes, assessments, municipal charges, fees, easement taxes, franchise taxes, license, permit and inspection fees or charges, street taxes, bonds, street or alley rentals, and all other taxes, charges, levies, fees and rentals of whatsoever kind and character which the town may impose or hereafter be authorized or empowered to levy and collect, excepting only the usual general or special ad valorem taxes which the town is authorized to levy and impose upon real and personal property, sales and use taxes, and special assessments for public improvements. 
2.  The franchise fee on gross revenues and CIAC shall be paid quarterly, within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter (i.e., by May 15, August 15, November 15, and February 15 of each year of this franchise term); and the franchise fee on pole attachment revenue shall be paid annually by May 15. 
3.  Quarterly payments shall be a sum comprised of the following: 
(a)  A sum equal to five percent of gross revenues received by cooperative for the immediately preceding calendar quarter; and 
(b)  A sum equal to four percent of CIAC received by cooperative for the immediately preceding calendar quarter. 
4.  The franchise fee on pole attachment revenue shall be four percent of pole attachment revenue received by cooperative for the immediately preceding calendar year. 
5.  Payments shall continue in like manner for any extension of the franchise granted herein as provided in section 13 hereof. 
B.  With each payment of compensation required by section 9(A), cooperative shall furnish to the town a statement, executed by an authorized officer of cooperative or designee, in sufficient detail to show how each component of the payment described herein was arrived at and how the amount paid to the town was determined for the pertinent quarter. 
C.  If either party discovers that cooperative has failed to pay the entire or correct amount of compensation due, the correct amount shall be determined by mutual agreement between the town and cooperative and the town shall be paid by cooperative within 30 calendar days of such determination or such additional time as mutually agreed to by the town and cooperative. Any overpayment to the town through error or otherwise will, at the sole option of the town, either be refunded or offset against the next payment due from cooperative. Acceptance by the town of any payment due under this section shall not be deemed to be a waiver by the town of any breach of this ordinance, nor shall the acceptance by the town of any such payments preclude the town from later establishing that a larger amount was actually due or from collecting any balance due to the town. 
D.  Interest on late payments and underpayments shall be calculated in accordance with the interest rate for customer deposits established by the Public Utility Commission of Texas in accordance with Texas Utilities Code § 183.003, as amended, for the time period involved. 
E.  No taxes, fees, or other payments by cooperative to the town, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, shall reduce the franchise fees payable to the town hereunder, except as agreed to in writing by the town in section 9. 
F.  Within 30 days after the effective date of this ordinance, the town shall provide cooperative (at the notice address specified in section 18) with maps clearly showing the location of the boundaries of the town. Within 30 days after town annexes property into, or disannexes property from, the territory of town, town shall provide cooperative (at the notice address specified in section 18) with maps clearly showing the location of the boundaries of such annexed or disannexed property. Within 60 days, or such additional time as mutually agreed to by the town and cooperative, after cooperative's receipt by certified mail of: (i) written notice from the town that the town has annexed territory into the town; and (ii) Maps showing clearly the areas annexed, the cooperative shall revise its accounting records to include the annexed territory, and cooperative's customers therein, within the town. 
After such time period, each kilowatt hour of electricity delivered by cooperative to each retail customer whose consuming facility's point of delivery is located within such annexed area shall be included in the calculation of the amount described in section 9(A) above. 
G.  Cooperative is hereby authorized to surcharge to customers within the town all or any portion of the franchise fee that is the subject of this ordinance. All bills for service rendered within the town may be adjusted so as to recover the franchise fee that is the subject of this ordinance, less any percentage that is recovered by cooperative through base rates or other charges.  
Sec. 10. - Accounting matters. 
A.  Cooperative shall keep accurate books of account at its principal office for the purpose of determining the franchise fee amount due to the town under this ordinance. Cooperative shall retain such books, records, and documents and other evidence pertaining to the franchise granted herein and franchise fee payments due hereunder for a period of not less than five years, except if an audit is in progress or audit findings are yet unresolved, in which case records shall be kept until all audit tasks are completed and resolved. Each of the terms "books," "records," "documents," and "other evidence" as used herein shall be construed to include electronic files. 
B.  The town may conduct an audit or other inquiry in relation to a franchise fee payment made by cooperative or may pursue a cause of action in relation to cooperative's payment of any franchise fee only if such audit, inquiry, or pursuit of a cause of action concerns a payment made less than two years before the commencement of such audit, inquiry, or pursuit of a cause of action. Provided, the town shall not, after the effective date of this ordinance, initiate an audit of or seek any other remedies related to the franchise fee payments by the cooperative for any period prior to the effective date of this ordinance. The town may, if it sees fit, upon reasonable notice to the cooperative, examine, audit, and obtain copies of the books and records of the cooperative related to the franchise fee. Cooperative shall make available all requested books, records, documents and other evidence within 30 calendar days of town's written request for same. 
C.  If the results of any audit indicate that cooperative (i) paid the correct franchise fee, (ii) overpaid the franchise fee and is entitled to a refund or credit, or (iii) underpaid the franchise fee by five percent or less, then the town shall pay the costs of the audit. If the results of the audit indicate the cooperative underpaid the franchise fee by more than five percent, then the cooperative shall pay the reasonable costs of the audit. 
D.  Upon the reasonable request of the town, the cooperative shall use commercially reasonable efforts to make available to the auditor at the cooperative's offices where such records are maintained and such personnel are located, during the cooperative's regular business hours and upon reasonable notice, such personnel and records as the cooperative, in its reasonable discretion, determines are necessary or appropriate to the town's request in order to complete such audit, and shall make no charge to the town therefor; provided, however, any copy expenses or other out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the cooperative as a result of requests by the town or its auditor, shall be the responsibility of the town and the town shall promptly pay the reasonable cost thereof to the cooperative. 
1.  If as the result of any town audit, cooperative is refunded/credited for an overpayment or pays the town for an underpayment of the franchise fee, such refund/credit or payment shall be made pursuant to the terms established in sections 9(C) and 9(D). 
2.  If as a result of a subsequent audit, initiated within two years of an audit which resulted in cooperative making a payment to the town due to an underpayment of the franchise fee of more than five percent, cooperative makes another payment to the town due to an underpayment of the franchise fee of more than five percent, the town may also recover interest on the total amount of underpayment at the interest rate in effect on the date of the invoice (calculated as provided in Section 9(D) hereof), plus two percent on the entire amount from the date of invoice. 
3.  If the results of the audit indicate that the cooperative underpaid the franchise fee by more than five percent, and the cooperative is unable to produce reasonable evidence that the results of the audit are not accurate, then the cooperative shall pay to the town a penalty equal to five percent of the total amount underpaid in addition to the total amount underpaid. No penalty shall be assessed for uncollected franchise fees by cooperative; however, the cooperative shall provide evidence of the actual amount of uncollected franchise fees. Interest on the total amount of underpayment shall be paid at the interest rate in effect on the date the original payment was due (calculated as provided in section 9(D) hereof), plus two percent, and interest shall be calculated from the time the original amount was due. Any additional amount due to town hereunder shall be paid within 30 days from the date of invoice. Any amount not paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice will cause interest to be payable at the interest rate in effect on the date of the invoice (calculated as provided in section 9(D) hereof), plus two percent on the entire amount from the date of invoice. 
E.  The cooperative shall assist the town in its review by responding to all requests for information no later than 30 days after receipt of a request unless a different schedule is agreed to by the town and cooperative.  
Sec. 11. - Right of renegotiation. 
A.  Should either cooperative or the town have cause to believe that a change in circumstances relating to the terms of the franchise granted herein may exist, it may request that the other party provide it with a reasonable amount of information to assist in determining whether a change in circumstances has taken place. If the cooperative elects to participate in customer choice (i.e., retail competition), it shall notify the town within 30 days of the cooperative's election to so participate. 
B.  Should either party hereto determine that based on a change in circumstances, it is in such party's best interest to renegotiate all or some of the provisions of this ordinance, then the other party agrees to enter into good faith negotiations. Said negotiations shall involve reasonable, diligent, and timely discussions about the pertinent issues and a resolute attempt to settle those issues. The obligation to engage in such negotiations does not obligate either party to agree to an amendment of this ordinance as a result of such negotiations. A failure to agree does not show a lack of good faith. If, as a result of renegotiation, the town and cooperative agree to a change in a provision of this ordinance, the change shall become effective upon passage of an ordinance by the town in accordance with the town charter and acceptance of the ordinance by cooperative.  
Sec. 12. - Transfer and assignment. 
The franchise granted herein shall not be assigned or transferred without the written consent of the town, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, provided, however, that cooperative may assign its rights under this ordinance to a parent, subsidiary, affiliate or successor entity without such consent, so long as (i) such parent, subsidiary, affiliate or successor assumes all obligations of cooperative hereunder; and (ii) is bound to the same extent as cooperative hereunder. Cooperative shall give the town 60 days prior written notice of any assignment to a parent, subsidiary, affiliate or successor entity. Any required consent shall be expressed by an ordinance that fully recites the terms and conditions, if any, upon which such consent is given. Any assignment or transfer effected prior to the town's approval thereof, if required, shall authorize the town to treat such assignment or transfer as an uncured event of default and immediately implement the provisions of section 14, including the right to terminate the franchise granted herein.  
Sec. 13. - Term. 
This ordinance shall become effective on the effective date and shall expire on December 31, 2022; provided that, unless written notice of non-renewal is given by either party hereto to the other not less than six months before the expiration of the Franchise granted herein, it shall be automatically renewed for an additional period of one year from such expiration date and shall be automatically renewed thereafter for like periods until canceled by written notice given not less than six months before the expiration of any such renewal period.  
Sec. 14. - Default, remedies and termination. 
A.  Events of default. The occurrence, at any time during the term of the franchise granted herein, of any one or more of the following events, shall constitute an event of default by cooperative under this ordinance: 
1.  The failure of cooperative to pay the franchise fee on or before the due dates specified herein. 
2.  Cooperative's breach or violation of any terms, covenants, representations or warranties contained herein or cooperative's failure to perform any material obligation contained herein. 
B.  Uncured events of default. 
1.  Upon the occurrence of an event of default which can be cured by the immediate payment of money to town or a third party, cooperative shall have 30 calendar days after receipt of written notice from town of an occurrence of such event of default (or such longer time as the town may specify in such notice) to cure same before town may exercise any of its rights or remedies pursuant to section 14(C). 
2.  Upon the occurrence of an event of default by cooperative which cannot be cured by the immediate payment of money to town or a third party, cooperative shall have 60 calendar days (or such additional time as may be agreed to by the town) after receipt of written notice from town of an occurrence of such event of default to cure same before town may exercise any of its rights or remedies pursuant to section 14(C). 
3.  If the event of default is not cured within the time period allowed for curing the event of default as provided for herein, such event of default shall, without additional notice, become an uncured event of default, which shall entitle town to exercise the remedies pursuant to section 14(C). 
C.  Remedies. Upon receipt of a notice of an alleged uncured event of Default as described in section 14(B), which notice shall specify the alleged failure with reasonable particularity, the cooperative shall, within the time periods specified in section 14(B) or such longer period of time as the town may specify in such notice, either cure such alleged failure or, in a written response to the town, present facts and arguments in refuting or defending such alleged failure, or state that such alleged failure will be cured and set forth the method and time schedule for accomplishing such cure. In the event that such cure is not forthcoming or the town determines that an unexcused uncured event of default has occurred, town shall be entitled to exercise any and all of the following cumulative remedies: 
1.  The commencement of an action against cooperative at law for monetary damages. 
2.  The commencement of an action in equity seeking injunctive relief or the specific performance of any of the provisions, which as a matter of equity, are specifically enforceable. 
3.  The termination of the franchise granted herein. 
D.  Remedies not exclusive. The rights and remedies of town and cooperative set forth in this ordinance shall be in addition to, and not in limitation of, any other rights and remedies provided by law or in equity. Town and cooperative understand and intend that such remedies shall be cumulative to the maximum extent permitted by law and the exercise by town of any one or more of such remedies shall not preclude the exercise by town, at the same or different times, of any other such remedies for the same failure to cure. However, notwithstanding this section or any other provision of this ordinance, Town shall not recover both liquidated damages and actual damages for the same violation, breach, or noncompliance, either under this section or under any other provision of this ordinance. 
E.  Termination. The franchise granted herein may be terminated only in accordance with the provisions of section 14(C). Town shall notify cooperative in writing at least 30 business days in advance of the town council meeting at which the questions of termination shall be considered, and cooperative shall have the right to appear before the town council in person or by counsel and raise any objections or defenses cooperative may have that are relevant to the proposed forfeiture or termination. The final decision of the town council may be appealed to any court or regulatory authority having jurisdiction. Upon timely appeal by cooperative of the town council's decision terminating the franchise granted herein, the effective date of such termination shall be either when such appeal is withdrawn or a court order upholding the termination becomes final and unappealable. If no appeal is filed, the effective date of such termination shall be the 30th day following the date of the final termination decision of the town council. Until the termination becomes effective the provisions of the franchise granted herein shall remain in effect for all purposes. 
F.  The failure of the town to insist in any one or more instances upon the strict performance of any one or more of the terms or provisions of this ordinance shall not be construed as a waiver or relinquishment for the future of any such term or provision, and the same shall continue in full force and effect. No waiver or relinquishment shall be deemed to have been made by the town unless said waiver or relinquishment is in writing and signed by the town.  
Sec. 15. - Public information. 
If the cooperative provides confidential or proprietary information to the town, the cooperative shall be solely responsible for identifying such information with markings calculated to bring the town's attention to the proprietary or confidential nature of the information, provided it is expressly understood and agreed that all maps and all information concerning franchise fee calculation and payments and audit information furnished by or on behalf of the cooperative to the town or its auditors or consultants shall be deemed strictly confidential and subject to the town's agreement in the next sentence. The town agrees to maintain the confidentiality of any information obtained from cooperative so designated to the fullest extent allowed by law. If the town is not permitted by applicable law to maintain such confidentiality, the town shall notify the cooperative of such fact at the time the town requests any such information from the cooperative or, in all other events, prior to receiving such information from the cooperative. Town shall not be liable to cooperative for the release of any information the town is required to release by law. Town shall provide notice to cooperative of any request for release of information designated as confidential or proprietary prior to releasing the information so as to allow cooperative adequate time to pursue available remedies for protection. If the town receives a request under the Texas Public Information Act that includes information designated by cooperative as proprietary or confidential, town will notify the Texas Attorney General of the asserted proprietary or confidential nature of the document(s). The town also will provide cooperative with a copy of such notification to the Texas Attorney General, and thereafter Cooperative is responsible for establishing that an exception under the Texas Public Information Act allows the town to withhold the information.  
Sec. 16. - Public purpose. 
All of the provisions contained in this ordinance are hereby declared to be for a public purpose, and are in the interests of the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.  
Sec. 17. - Severability; ordinance controlling. 
If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, void or invalid (or for any reason unenforceable), the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby, it being the intent of the parties in adopting this ordinance that no provision hereof shall be inoperative or fail by reason of any unconstitutionality or invalidity of any other portion, provision, or regulation, and to that end, all provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. Both the cooperative and the town expressly recognize that this ordinance creates a binding and enforceable contract between them, which contract may not be amended without written consent of both the cooperative and the town. Should the town enact an ordinance or ordinances that create an inconsistency or conflict between the provisions of this ordinance and such other ordinance or ordinances during the term of this franchise, then the provisions of this ordinance shall control to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict to the extent not prohibited by law.  
Sec. 18. - Notice. 
Any notices required or desired to be given from one party to the other party to this ordinance shall be in writing and shall be given and shall be deemed to have been served and received if: (i) delivered in person to the address set forth below; (ii) deposited in an official depository under the regular care and custody of the United States Postal Service located within the confines of the United States of America and sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, and addressed to such party at the address hereinafter specified; or (iii) delivered to such party by courier receipted delivery. Either party may designate another address within the confines of the continental United States of America for notice, but until written notice of such change is deemed served and received by the other party as provided above, the last address of such party designated for notice shall remain such party's address for notice. 
TOWN 
Town of Flower Mound 
2121 Cross Timbers Road 
Flower Mound, Texas 75028 
Attention: Town Manager 
COOPERATIVE 
Denton County Electric Cooperative, Inc. 
d/b/a CoServ Electric 
7701 S. Stemmons Freeway 
Corinth, Texas 76210-1842 
Attention: President  
Sec. 19. - Acceptance. 
A.  In order to accept the franchise granted herein, cooperative must file with the town secretary its written acceptance of this ordinance within 60 days after the town provides written notice to cooperative of this ordinance's final passage and approval by town (the "town adoption notice"). Cooperative shall reimburse town for any publication expense incurred by town in connection with town publishing the caption of this ordinance for purposes of public notification of the accepted franchise. 
B.  Upon cooperative's written acceptance of the terms of this ordinance, all claims of town and cooperative under any prior franchise ordinance or other agreement between the parties that were or could have been made by either party shall be forever waived and extinguished.  
Sec. 20. - Future amendments. 
This ordinance may be amended only by an ordinance adopted by the town and accepted by the cooperative in writing.  
Sec. 21. - Ordinance passed at public meeting. 
It is hereby officially found that the meeting at which this ordinance is passed is open to the public and that due notice of this meeting was posted, all as required by law.  
Sec. 22. - Effective date. 
Upon the filing of cooperative's written acceptance of the franchise granted herein, this ordinance shall become effective as of the first day of the calendar month that is not less than 60 days after the final adoption of this ordinance by the town.  
Sec. 23. - Repeal. 
This ordinance shall supersede any and all other franchises granted by the town to cooperative, its predecessors and assigns. 
Passed, approved, and adopted on first reading the 15th day of October, 2012. 
Passed, approved, and adopted on second reading the 5th day of November, 2012. 
	      Thomas E. Hayden, Mayor 
 	 
Attest: 
      Theresa Scott, Town Secretary 	
 	 
Approved as to form: 
      Terrence S. Welch, 
      Town Attorney 	
 	 
 
DIVISION 4. - ONCOR ELECTRIC DELIVERY COMPANY LLC[15] 
ORDINANCE NO. 39-16 
An Ordinance granting to Oncor Electric Delivery Company LLC, its successors and assigns, an electric power franchise to use the present and future streets, alleys, highways, public utility easements, public ways and other public property (public rights-of-way) of Flower Mound, Texas, providing for the repeal of all prior franchise ordinances to Oncor Electric Delivery Company LLC, its predecessors and assigns, providing for compensation therefor, providing for an effective date and a term of said franchise, providing for written acceptance of this franchise, and finding that the meeting at which this ordinance is passed is open to the public. 
Be it ordained by the Town Council of Flower Mound, Texas: 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the electric franchise with Oncor Electric Delivery Company LLC, as adopted by Ordinance No. 39-16 on July 18, 2016. Amendments to said ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Section 1. - Grant of Authority. 
A.  The Town of Flower Mound, Texas ("Town") hereby grants to Oncor Electric Delivery Company LLC, its successors and assigns (herein called "Company"), the right, privilege and franchise to construct, extend, maintain and operate in, along, under and across the present and future streets, alleys, highways, public utility easements, public ways, and other public property ("Public Rights-of-Way") of Flower Mound, electric power lines, with all necessary or desirable appurtenances (including underground conduits, poles, towers, wires, transmission lines and other structures, and telephone and communication lines solely for Company's own use), for the purpose of delivering electricity to the Town, the inhabitants thereof, and persons, firms and corporations beyond the corporate limits thereof, for the term set out in Section 10, subject to this consent by the Town in accordance with Texas Utilities Code, Section 181.043 and in accordance with the Public Utility Regulatory Act (PURA) and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
B.  The provisions set forth in this ordinance represent the terms and conditions under which Company shall construct, operate, and maintain its system facilities within the Public Rights-of-Way of the Town. This franchise agreement shall in no way affect or impair the rights, obligations or remedies of the parties under PURA, other state, local, or federal laws, rules or regulations, or the Texas Constitution. Nothing herein shall be deemed a waiver, release or relinquishment of either party's right to contest, appeal, or file suit with respect to any action or decision of the other party, including ordinances adopted by the Town, that Company believes is in violation of any federal, state, or local laws, rules or regulations. The Town shall provide Company notice and opportunity to review and comment upon proposed ordinances relating to the Public Rights-of-Way. 
C.  This Franchise does not grant to the Company the right, privilege or authority to engage in any other activities within the Town other than as specified in this Franchise.  
Section 2. - Use of Public Rights-of-Way. 
A.  The poles, towers and other structures shall be so erected as not to unreasonably interfere with traffic over streets, alleys and highways. 
B.  Company shall, except in cases of (i) emergency conditions or (ii) routine maintenance and repair of facilities that do not involve any of the following (a) cutting or breaking of pavement or (b) closure of traffic lane for longer than 24 hours or (c) boring or (d) excavation greater than 100 cubic feet or (iii) connection of real property to a utility service on the same side of the Public Rights-of-Way if connection does not require a pavement cut in the Public Rights-of-Way or (iv) replacement of a single damaged pole and associated work within a ten (10) foot radius of the damaged pole or (v) installation of aerial lines on less than 11 existing poles or installation of aerial lines on less than 11 new poles, provide Town reasonable advance notice, and obtain a permit, (if required by Town Ordinance), prior to performing work in the Public Rights-of-Way, except in no instance shall Company be required to pay fees or bonds related to its use of the Public Rights-of-Way, despite the Town's enactment of any ordinance providing the contrary. Company shall construct and maintain its facilities in conformance with the applicable provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code or such comparable standards as may be adopted, and in a good and workmanlike manner. 
C.  The Town retains the right to make visual, non-invasive inspections of the Company's facilities and upon reasonable notice and request, to require the Company to make available for inspection available records or data to demonstrate its current compliance with the terms of this Franchise. 
D.  The location of Company's facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way shall be subject to approval by the Town Manager or the Town Manger's designated representative (the "Manager") prior to construction; provided however, said approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. This approval will be obtained through the Town's permitting process (if required by Town Ordinance). In the event of a conflict between the location of the proposed facilities of Company and the locations of the facilities of Town or other Public Rights-of-Way users which exist or have been authorized by the Town, the Manager shall resolve the conflict and determine the location of the respective facilities within the Town's Public Rights-of-Way. To avoid a facilities location conflict, the Manager will designate a reasonable alternate location within the Town's Public Rights-of-Way for Company's facilities if a reasonable alternate location exists. The Company will use reasonable efforts to work with the Town to avoid installing its facilities in park or Town property other than utility easements or street, alley, or highway Right-of-Way. Company has the right to request Town Council review of this or any actions concerning Company's use of the Public Rights-of-Way. Company also has the right to request review of any Town action by any court or regulatory agency having jurisdiction. 
E.  The Company shall restore at the Company's expense, all work within the Town Rights-of-Way, to a condition equally as good as it was immediately prior to being disturbed by Company's construction, excavation, repair or removal or to a condition agreed upon by Town and Company. If Town or Company believe that there are extenuating circumstances that do not allow for restoration of all work within the Town Rights-of-Way to a condition equally as good as it was immediately prior to being disturbed by Company, Town and Company will negotiate an alternative restoration plan (in writing) to remedy the situation. Absent an agreement to an alternative restoration plan, either party has a right to request review of the matter by any court or regulatory agency having jurisdiction. 
F.  Company shall cooperate with the Town in providing information regarding the location of current and future overhead and underground wires and poles within Town's Public Rights-of-Way. Reproducible copies of maps showing the location of all overhead and underground wires and poles within the Public Rights-of-Way shall be furnished to the Town upon reasonable request, if available. The maps shall be provided in electronic digital format, if available.  
Section 3. - Relocation and Abandonment. 
The Town reserves the right to lay, and permit to be laid, storm, sewer, gas, water, wastewater and other pipe lines, cables, and conduits, or other improvements or to do and permit to be done any underground or overhead work that Town in its sole discretion determines may be necessary or proper in, across, along, over, or under Public Rights-of-Way occupied by Company. The Town also reserves the right to change in any manner any curb, sidewalk, highway, alley, public way, street, utility lines, storm sewers, drainage basins, drainage ditches, and the like. 
Upon request by Town, Company shall relocate its facilities at the expense of the Town except as otherwise required by Section 37.101(c) of PURA, which statutory provision currently states the governing body of a municipality may require an electric utility to relocate the utility's facility at the utility's expense to permit the widening or straightening of a street. Town and Company further agree that widening and straightening of a street includes the addition of any acceleration, deceleration, center or side turn lanes, and sidewalks (meaning sidewalks done in conjunction with widening or straightening of a street), provided that the Town shall provide Company with at least thirty (30) days notice and shall specify a new location for such facilities along the Public Rights-of-Way of the street. 
If the Town requires the Company to adapt or conform its Facilities, or in any manner to alter, relocate, or change its Facilities to enable any other corporation or person to use, or use with greater convenience, said street, alley, highway, or public way, the Company shall not be bound to make such changes until such other corporation or person shall have undertaken, with good and sufficient bond, to reimburse the Company for any costs, loss, or expense which will be caused by, or arises out of such change, alteration, or relocation of Company's Facilities. 
If Town abandons any Public Rights-of-Way in which Company has facilities such abandonment shall be conditioned on Company's right to maintain its use of the former Public Rights-of-Way and on the obligation of the party to whom the Public Rights-of-Way is abandoned to reimburse Company for all removal or relocation expenses if Company agrees to the removal or relocation of its facilities following abandonment of the Public Rights-of-Way. If the party to whom the Public Rights-of-Way is abandoned requests the Company to remove or relocate its facilities and Company agrees to such removal or relocation, such removal or relocation shall be done within a reasonable time at the expense of the party requesting the removal or relocation. If relocation cannot practically be made to another Public Rights-of-Way, the expense of any right-of-way acquisition shall be considered a relocation expense to be reimbursed by the party requesting the relocation.  
Section 4. - Indemnification. 
A.  In consideration of the granting of this Franchise, Company shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold the Town, and its past and present officers, agents and employees harmless against any and all liability arising from suits, actions or claims regarding injury or death to any person or persons, or damages to any property arising out of, or occasioned by the intentional and/or negligent acts or omissions of the Company or any of its officers, agents, or employees, in connection with Company's construction, maintenance and operation of Company's System in the Public Rights-of-Way, including any court costs, reasonable expenses and reasonable defenses thereof. 
B.  This indemnity shall only apply to the extent that the loss, damage or injury is attributable to the negligence or wrongful act or omission of the Company, its officers, agents or employees, and does not apply to the extent such loss, damage or injury is attributable to the negligence or wrongful act or omission of the Town, or the Town's officers, agents, or employees or any other person or entity. This provision is not intended to create a cause of action or liability for the benefit of third parties but is solely for the benefit of the Company and the Town. 
C.  In the event of joint and concurrent negligence or fault of both the Company and the Town, responsibility and indemnity, if any, shall be apportioned comparatively between the Town and Company in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas without, however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the Town under Texas law and without waiving any of the defenses of the parties under Texas law. Further, in the event of joint and concurrent negligence or fault of both the Company and the Town, responsibility for all costs of defense shall be apportioned between the Town and Company based upon the comparative fault of each. 
D.  In fulfilling its obligation to defend and indemnify Town, Company shall have the right to select defense counsel, subject to Town's approval, which will not be unreasonably withheld. Company shall retain defense counsel within seven (7) business days of Town's written notice that Town is invoking its right to indemnification under this Franchise. If Company fails to retain Counsel within such time period, Town shall have the right to retain defense counsel on its own behalf, and Company shall be liable for all reasonable defense costs incurred by Town, except as otherwise provided in Section 4.B and 4.C.  
Section 5. - Liability Insurance. 
Company shall, at its sole cost and expense, obtain, maintain, or cause to be maintained, and provide, throughout the term of this Franchise, insurance in the amounts, types and coverages in accordance with the following requirements. Such insurance may be in the form of self-insurance to the extent permitted by applicable law or by obtaining insurance, as follows: 
A.  Commercial general or excess liability on an occurrence or claims made form with minimum limits of five million dollars ($5,000,000) per occurrence and ten million dollars ($10,000,000) aggregate. This coverage shall include the following: 
(1)  Products/completed operations to be maintained for the warranty period. 
(2)  Personal and advertising injury. 
(3)  Contractual liability. 
(4)  Explosion, collapse, or underground (XCU) hazards. 
B.  Automobile liability coverage with a minimum policy limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limit each accident. This coverage shall include all owned, hired and non-owned automobiles. 
C.  Workers compensation and employers liability coverage. Statutory coverage limits for Coverage A and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) bodily injury each accident, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) each employee bodily injury by disease, and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) policy limit bodily injury by disease Coverage B employers' liability are required. Company must provide the Town with a waiver of subrogation for worker's compensation claims. 
D.  Company must name the Town, which includes all authorities, commissions, divisions and departments, as well as elected and appointed officials, agents, employees and volunteers, as additional insureds under the coverage required herein, except Worker's Compensation Coverage. The certificate of insurance must state that the Town is an additional insured. 
E.  Coverages required to be maintained under Sections 5.A, 5.B, and 5.C shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the Town, its officers, agents and employees. 
F.  Company will require its contractors and subcontractors to maintain, at their sole cost and expense, a minimum of three million dollars ($3,000,000) each occurrence or each accident general liability and automobile liability throughout the course of work performed. Also, contractors and subcontractors will be required to maintain statutory workers' compensation benefits in accordance with the regulations of the State of Texas or state of jurisdiction as applicable. The minimum limits for employers' liability insurance will be five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) bodily injury each accident, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) each employee bodily injury by disease, and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) policy limit bodily injury by disease. 
The Company will provide proof of its insurance in accordance with this Franchise within 30 days of the effective date of the Franchise and annually thereafter as applicable insurance coverages renew. Company will not be required to furnish separate proof when applying for permits.  
Section 6. - Non-Exclusivity. 
This franchise is not exclusive, and nothing herein contained shall be construed so as to prevent the Town from granting other like or similar rights, privileges and franchises to any other person, firm, or corporation.  
Section 7. - Consideration. 
In consideration of the grant of said right, privilege and franchise by the Town and as full payment for the right, privilege and franchise of using and occupying the said Public Rights-of-Way, and in lieu of any and all occupation taxes, assessments, municipal charges, fees, easement taxes, franchise taxes, license, permit and inspection fees or charges, street taxes, bonds, street or alley rentals, and all other taxes, charges, levies, fees and rentals of whatsoever kind and character which the Town may impose or hereafter be authorized or empowered to levy and collect, excepting only the usual general or special ad valorem taxes which the Town is authorized to levy and impose upon real and personal property, sales and use taxes, and special assessments for public improvements, Company shall pay to the Town the following: 
A.  A final quarterly payment was made on or before January 1, 2016 for the basis period of August 1, 2015 through October 31, 2015 and the privilege period of October 1, 2016 through December 31, 2016 in accordance with the provisions in the previous franchise. 
B.  As authorized by Section 33.008(b) of PURA, the original franchise fee factor calculated for the Town in 2002 was 0.003031 (the "Base Factor"), multiplied by each kilowatt hour of electricity delivered by Company to each retail customer whose consuming facility's point of delivery is located within the Town's municipal boundaries for determining franchise payments going forward. 
Due to a 2006 agreement between Company and Town the franchise fee factor was increased to a franchise fee factor of 0.003183 (the "Current Factor"), multiplied by each kilowatt hour of electricity delivered by Company to each retail customer whose consuming facility's point of delivery is located within the Town's municipal boundaries on a quarterly basis. 
However, consistent with the 2006 agreement, should the Public Utility Commission of Texas at any time disallow Company's recovery through rates of the higher franchise payments made under the Current Factor as compared to the Base Factor, then the franchise fee factor shall immediately revert to the Base Factor of 0.003031 and all future payments, irrespective of the time period that is covered by the payment, will be made using the Base Factor. 
1.  Company shall make quarterly pre-pay payments as follows: 
Payment 
Due Date 	Basis Period 	Privilege Period 
(Following Year) 
April 1 	Nov. 1—Jan. 31 	Jan. 1—Mar. 31 
July 1 	Feb. 1—Apr. 30 	Apr. 1—Jun. 30 
October 1 	May 1—Jul. 31 	Jul. 1—Sept. 30 
January 1 	Aug. 1—Oct. 31 	Oct. 1—Dec. 31 
 
2.  The first quarterly payment hereunder shall be due and payable on or before April 1, 2016, and will cover the basis period of November 1, 2015 through January 31, 2016 and the privilege period of January 1, 2017 through March 31, 2017. If this Franchise is not effective prior to the first quarterly payment date, Company will pay any payments due within 30 days of the effective date of this agreement. The final payment under this Franchise is due on or before January 1, 2036 and covers the basis period of August 1, 2035 through October 31, 2035 and the privilege period of October 1, 2036 through December 31, 2036. 
3.  After the final payment date of January 1, 2036, Company may continue to make additional quarterly payments in accordance with the above schedule. Town acknowledges that such continued payments will correspond to privilege periods that extend beyond the term of this Franchise and that such continued payments will be recognized in any subsequent franchise as full payment for the relevant quarterly periods. 
C.  A sum equal to four percent (4%) of gross revenues received by Company from services identified as DD1 through DD24 in Section 6.1.2 "Discretionary Service Charges," in Oncor's Tariff for Retail Delivery Service (Tariff), effective 1/1/2002, that are for the account and benefit of an end-use retail electric consumer. Company will, upon request by Town, provide a cross reference to Discretionary Service Charge numbering changes that are contained in Company's current approved Tariff. 
1.  The franchise fee amounts based on "Discretionary Service Charges" shall be calculated on an annual calendar year basis, i.e., from January 1 through December 31 of each calendar year. 
2.  The franchise fee amounts that are due based on "Discretionary Service Charges" shall be paid at least once annually on or before April 30 each year based on the total "Discretionary Service Charges", as set out in Section 7.C, received during the preceding calendar year. The initial Discretionary Service Charge franchise fee amount will be paid on or before April, 30 2016 and will be based on the calendar year January 1 through December 31, 2015. The final Discretionary Service Charge franchise fee amount will be paid on or before April 30, 2037 and will be based on the calendar year of January 1 through December 31, 2036. 
3.  Company may file a tariff or tariff amendment(s) to provide for the recovery of the franchise fee on Discretionary Service Charges. 
4.  Town agrees (i) to the extent the Town acts as regulatory authority, to adopt and approve that portion of any tariff which provides for 100% recovery of the franchise fee on Discretionary Service Charges; (ii) in the event the Town intervenes in any regulatory proceeding before a federal or state agency in which the recovery of the franchise fees on such Discretionary Service Charges is an issue, the Town will take an affirmative position supporting the 100% recovery of such franchise fees by Company and; (iii) in the event of an appeal of any such regulatory proceeding in which the Town has intervened, the Town will take an affirmative position in any such appeals in support of the 100% recovery of such franchise fees by Company. 
5.  Town agrees that it will take no action, nor cause any other person or entity to take any action, to prohibit the recovery of such franchise fees by Company. 
6.  In the event of a regulatory disallowance of the recovery of the franchise fees on the Discretionary Service Charges, Company will not be required to continue payment of such franchise fees. 
D.  With each payment of compensation required by Section 7.B, Company shall furnish to Town a statement that provides the franchise basis period, the total amount of kilowatt hours of electricity delivered during the franchise basis period by the Company to retail customers whose consuming facility's point of delivery is located within the Town's municipal boundaries, and the privilege period covered by the payment. The parties agree that any information exchanged or provided to the other party is true and correct to the best of their knowledge. 
E.  With each payment of compensation required by Section 7.C, Company shall furnish to the Town a statement reflecting the total amount of gross revenues received by Company within the Town's municipal boundaries for services identified in its Tariff, Section 6.1.2, "Discretionary Service Charges," Items DD1 through DD24. The parties agree that any information exchanged or provided to the other party is true and correct to the best of their knowledge.  
Section 8. - Most Favored Nations. 
A.  This Section 8 applies only if, after the effective date of this Franchise Agreement, Company enters into a new municipal franchise agreement or renews an existing municipal franchise agreement with another municipality that provides for a different method of calculation of franchise fees for use of the Public Rights-of-Way than the calculation under PURA, Section 33.008(b), which, if applied to the Town, would result in a greater amount of franchise fees owed the Town than under this Franchise Agreement. 
B.  In the event of an occurrence as described in Section 8 hereof, Town shall have the option to: 
1.  Have Company select, within 30 days of the Town's request, any or all portions of the franchise agreement with the other municipality or comparable provisions that, at Company's sole discretion, must be considered in conjunction with the different method of the calculation of franchise fees included in that other franchise agreement; and 
2.  Modify this franchise agreement to include both the different method of calculation of franchise fee found in the franchise agreement with the other municipality and all of the other provisions identified by Company pursuant to Section 8.B.1. In no event shall Town be able to modify the franchise to include the different method of calculation of franchise fee found in the franchise agreement with the other municipality without this franchise also being modified to include all of the other provisions identified by Company pursuant to Section 8.B.1. 
C.  Town may not exercise the option provided in Section 8 if any of the provisions that would be included in this franchise are, in Company's sole opinion, inconsistent with or in any manner contrary to any then-current rule, regulation, ordinance, law, Code, or Town Charter. 
D.  In the event of a regulatory disallowance of the increase in franchise fees paid pursuant to Town's exercise of its option under Section 8, then at any time after the regulatory authority's entry of an order disallowing recovery of the additional franchise fee expense in rates, Company shall have the right to cancel the modification of the franchise made pursuant to Section 8, and the terms of the Franchise shall immediately revert to those in place prior to Town's exercise of its option under Section 8. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this franchise, should the Town exercise the option provided in Section 8.B, and then adopt any rule, regulation, ordinance, law, Code, or Town Charter that, in Company's sole opinion, is inconsistent with or in any manner contrary to the provisions included in this franchise pursuant to Section 8.B, then Company shall have the right to cancel all of the modifications to this franchise made pursuant to Section 8 and, effective as of the date of the Town's adoption of the inconsistent provision, the terms of the franchise shall revert to those in place prior to the Town's exercise of its option under Section 8. 
F.  The provisions of Section 8 apply only to the amount of the franchise fee to be paid and do not apply to other franchise fee payment provisions, such as the timing of such payments. The provisions of Section 8 do not apply to differences in the franchise fee factor that result from the application of the methodology set out in Section 33.008(b) of PURA or a successor methodology.  
Section 9. - Records and Reports. 
A.  Company shall keep accurate books of account at its principal office for the purpose of determining the amount due to the Town under this Franchise. 
B.  Pursuant to Section 33.008(e) of the Texas Utilities Code, the Town may conduct an audit or other inquiry in relation to a payment made by Company less than two (2) years before the commencement of such audit or inquiry. The Town may, if it sees fit, and upon reasonable notice to the Company, have the books and records of the Company examined by a representative of the Town to ascertain the correctness of the reports agreed to be filed herein. 
C.  The Company shall make available to the auditor during the Company's regular business hours and upon reasonable notice, such personnel and records as the Town may, in its reasonable discretion, request in order to complete such audit, and shall make no charge to the Town therefore. 
1.  If as the result of any Town audit, Company is refunded/credited for an overpayment, or pays the Town for an underpayment, of the Franchise Fee, such refund/credit or payment shall be made pursuant to the payment terms established in Section 7. 
D.  The Company shall assist the Town in its review by responding to all requests for information no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of a request. 
E.  The Town agrees to maintain the confidentiality of any non-public information obtained from Company to the extent allowed by law if Company identifies the information as non-public prior to providing the information to Town. Town shall not be liable to Company for the release of any information the Town is required by law to release. Town shall provide notice to Company of any request for release of non-public information prior to releasing the information so as to allow Company adequate time to pursue available remedies for protection. If the Town receives a request under the Texas Public Information Act that includes information Company has identified as Company's proprietary information, Town will notify the Texas Attorney General of the proprietary nature of the document(s). The Town also will provide Company with a copy of this notification, and thereafter Company is responsible for establishing that an exception under the Act allows the Town to withhold the information. 
F.  If either party discovers that the Company has either overpaid the Town or failed to pay the entire or correct amount of compensation due the Town, the correct amount shall be mutually determined by the Town and Company and shall be paid by the responsible party within thirty (30) calendar days of such mutual determination. Such underpayments or overpayments shall include interest calculated in accordance with the interest rate for customer deposits established by the PUC in accordance with Texas Utilities Code Section 183.003. Any overpayment to the Town by Company through error or otherwise, will, at the option of the Town, either be refunded within thirty (30) days of the mutual determination or be offset against the next payment due from Company. If neither party can mutually agree on either the underpayment due the Town or an overpayment due the Company, both the Town and Company may seek any other rights and remedies provided by law or in equity. Acceptance by the Town or Company of any payment due under this Section shall not be deemed to be a waiver by the Town or Company of any breach of this Franchise, nor shall the acceptance by the Town or Company of any such payments preclude the Town or Company from later establishing that a larger amount was actually due or from collecting any balance due.  
Section 10. - Term. 
This Ordinance shall become effective upon Company's written acceptance hereof, said written acceptance to be filed by Company with the Town Secretary within sixty (60) days after final passage and approval by the Town hereof but not prior to thirty (30) days after passage by Town. The right, privilege and franchise granted hereby shall expire on December 31, 2036 provided that, unless written notice of cancelation is given by either party hereto to the other not less than sixty (60) days before the expiration of this franchise agreement, it shall be automatically renewed for an additional period of six (6) months from such expiration date and shall be automatically renewed thereafter for like periods until canceled by written notice given not less than sixty (60) days before the expiration of any such renewal period.  
Section 11. - Repealer Clause. 
This Ordinance shall supersede any and all other franchises granted by the Town to Company, its predecessors and assigns, provided the parties agree any claim, action or complaint by either party that arose under or pursuant to any such previous franchise ordinance shall be preserved and saved from repeal, subject to all applicable statutes of limitations.  
Section 12. - Default, Remedies, Termination. 
A.  Events of Default. The occurrence, at any time during the term of the Franchise Agreement, of any one or more of the following events, shall constitute an Event of Default by Company under this Franchise: 
1.  The failure of Company to pay the franchise fee on or before the due dates specified herein. 
2.  Company's material breach or material violation of any material terms, covenants, representations or warranties contained herein. 
B.  Uncured Events of Default. 
1.  Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default which can be cured by the immediate payment of money to Town, Company shall have thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of written notice from Town of an occurrence of such Event of Default to cure same before Town may exercise any of its rights or remedies provided for in Section 12.C. 
2.  Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default by Company which cannot be cured by the immediate payment of money to Town, Company shall have sixty (60) calendar days (or such additional time as may be agreed to by the Town) from receipt of written notice from Town of an occurrence of such Event of Default to cure same before Town may exercise any of its rights or remedies provided for in Section 12.C. 
3.  If the Event of Default is not cured within the time period allowed for curing the Event of Default as provided for herein, such Event of Default shall, without additional notice, become an Uncured Event of Default, which shall entitle Town to exercise the remedies provided for in Section 12.C. 
C.  Remedies. The Town shall notify the Company in writing of an alleged Uncured Event of Default as described in Section 12.B, which notice shall specify the alleged failure with reasonable particularity. The Company shall, within thirty (30) business days after receipt of such notice or such longer period of time as the Town may specify in such notice, either cure such alleged failure or in a written response to the Town either present facts and arguments in refuting or defending such alleged failure or state that such alleged failure will be cured and set forth the method and time schedule for accomplishing such cure. In the event that such cure is not forthcoming, Town shall be entitled to exercise any and all of the following cumulative remedies: 
1.  The commencement of an action against Company at law for monetary damages. 
2.  The commencement of an action in equity seeking injunctive relief or the specific performance of any of the provisions that as a matter of equity, are specifically enforceable. 
3.  The termination of this Franchise. 
D.  The rights and remedies of Town and Company set forth in this Franchise Agreement shall be in addition to, and not in limitation of, any other rights and remedies provided by law or in equity. Town and Company understand and intend that such remedies shall be cumulative to the maximum extent permitted by law and the exercise by Town of any one or more of such remedies shall not preclude the exercise by Town, at the same or different times, of any other such remedies for the same failure to cure. However, notwithstanding this Section or any other provision of this Franchise, Town shall not recover both liquidated damages and actual damages for the same violation, breach, or noncompliance, either under this Section or under any other provision of this Franchise. 
E.  Termination. In accordance with the provisions of Section 12.C, this Franchise may be terminated upon thirty (30) business day's prior written notice to Company. Town shall notify Company in writing at least fifteen (15) business days in advance of the Town Council meeting at which the question of forfeiture or termination shall be considered, and Company shall have the right to appear before the Town Council in person or by counsel and raise any objections or defenses Company may have that are relevant to the proposed forfeiture or termination. The final decision of the Town Council may be appealed to any court or regulatory authority having jurisdiction. Upon timely appeal by Company of the Town Council's decision terminating the Franchise, the effective date of such termination shall be either when such appeal is withdrawn or an order upholding the termination becomes final and unappealable. Until the termination becomes effective the provisions of this Franchise shall remain in effect for all purposes. The Town recognizes Company's right and obligation to provide service in accordance with the Certificate of Convenience and Necessity authorized by the Public Utility Commission of Texas in accordance with the Texas Utilities Code. 
F.  This Franchise Ordinance shall be construed and governed by the laws of the State of Texas. Town and Company agree that any lawsuit between the Town and the Company concerning this Ordinance will be filed in the state of Texas. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the Town from filing an action related to this Ordinance in Tarrant County, Texas.  
Section 13. - Notices. 
Notices, reports or demands required to be given under this franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered in writing, whether by email (with proof of delivery) or personally to the person designated below, or when five days have elapsed after it is deposited in the United States Mail with registered or certified mail postage prepaid to the person designated below, or on the next business day if sent by Express Mail or overnight air courier addressed to the person designated below: 
If to Town: 
Town Manager 
Town of Flower Mound 
2121 Cross Timbers 
Flower Mound, Texas 75028 
If to the Company: 
Regulatory Affairs 
Oncor Electric Delivery Company LLC 
1616 Woodall Rodgers Fwy, 6th floor 
Dallas, Texas 75202-1234  
Section 14. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the ordinance.  
Section 15. - Public Notice. 
It is hereby officially found that the meeting at which this Ordinance is passed is open to the public and that due notice of this meeting was posted by the Town, all as required by law.  
Section 16. - Publication. 
The Town Secretary will, after its passage, publish the full text of this Ordinance in the official Town newspaper once each week for two consecutive weeks, at the expense of Company. 
Duly passed and approved on the 1st vote by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas by a vote of 4 to 0 on this 20th day of June, 2016. 
Duly passed and approved on the 2nd and final vote by the Town Council of the Town of Flower Mound, Texas by a vote of 5 to 0 on this 18th day of July, 2016. 
APPROVED: 
/s/   
      Thomas E. Hayden, 
      MAYOR 	
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Theresa Scott, 
      TOWN SECRETARY 	
 	 
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY: 
/s/   
      Bryn Meredith, 
      TOWN ATTORNEY 	
 	 
 
ARTICLE V. - SOLID WASTE  
DIVISION 1. - ALLIED WASTE SERVICES[16] 
Allied Waste Services of Fort Worth, LLC dba Republic Services, is hereby granted a franchise, license, and privilege within the territorial jurisdiction of the Town and shall furnish all personnel, labor, equipment, trucks, and all other items necessary to provide refuse collection, removal, and disposal services and recyclable materials collection as specified and to perform all of the work called for and described in the franchise agreement between the Town of Flower Mound and Allied Waste Services of Fort Worth, LLC dba Republic Services, which will not be codified, but shall be kept on file in the Town Secretary's Office and is made effective in accordance with this Ordinance [ Ord. No. 26-16 ] and made a part of said Ordinance by reference. 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Effective from and after Oct. 1, 2016, former Div. 1 was repealed in its entirety by Ord. No. 26-16 , § 5, adopted May 16, 2016. The former Div. 1, §§ 1—27, pertained to Trinity Waste Services, Inc. and derived from Ord. No. 38-01, adopted July 15, 2001.   Subsequently, § 2 of Ord. No. 26-16 granted a franchise to Allied Waste Services of Fort Worth, LLC dba Republic Services, as set out herein as new Div. 1, at the editor's discretion. 

