CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF FARMERS BRANCH, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: May 7, 2001 
Effective: May 7, 2001 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FARMERS BRANCH, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Bob Phelps 
Mayor 
____________ 
Bill Moses 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Calla Lea Davis 
Deputy Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Charlie Bird 
Jim Robbs 
Paul Walden 
City Council 
____________ 
Richard Escalante 
City Manager 
____________ 
John F. Boyle, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Cindee Peters 
City Secretary 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FARMERS BRANCH, TEXAS 
____________ 
Bob Phelps 
Mayor 
____________ 
Charlie Bird 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Ben Robinson 
Deputy Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Junie Smith 
Bill Moses 
Tim O'Hare 
City Council 
____________ 
Linda Groomer 
City Manager 
____________ 
John F. Boyle, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Cindee Peters 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1969 Code, as supplemented through May 3, 1976, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1969 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and William Eddy and Robert MacNaughton, Editors, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Linda Tidwell-Groomer, Assistant City Manager, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 2001. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2599 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FARMERS BRANCH, TEXAS, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF FARMERS BRANCH, TEXAS, PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT THEREWITH; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
WHEREAS, it is the desire of the City Council of the City of Farmers Branch that the ordinances of the City of Farmers Branch be codified; and, 
WHEREAS, the City of Farmers Branch contracted with Municipal Code Corporation, who, in concert with the city attorney and city staff of the City of Farmers Branch, has compiled the ordinances of the city and performed a legal review thereof, resulting in a codification of those ordinances of the City duly passed and adopted on or before October 16, 2000; and, 
WHEREAS, that codification of ordinances has been presented to the City Council of the City of Farmers Branch for review and adoption; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FARMERS BRANCH, TEXAS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Farmers Branch, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 94, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 16, 2000, which are in conflict with the Code, are repealed. All non-conflicting ordinances not included in the Code, are recognized and continued in force by reference therein, shall remain in full force and effect. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense relating to fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, nor to exceed $500.00 for each offense for all other violations; provided, however, that where the offense is one for which penalty is fixed by state law, the penalty for such offense shall be the same as fixed by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 16, 2000, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage by the City Council of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
DULY PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FARMERS BRANCH, TEXAS, ON THE 7TH OF MAY, 2001. 
ATTEST: 
      City Secretary 	
 	 
APPROVED: 
	      Mayor 
 	 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
      City Attorney 	
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the City of Farmers Branch Home Rule Charter, as adopted by referendum on December 8, 1956. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, capitalization has been made consistent and a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT: POWERS 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
The inhabitants of the City of Farmers Branch, Dallas County, Texas, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of the "City of Farmers Branch." 
(Amd. no. 1, 5-1-1999)  
Sec. 1.02. - Boundary. 
Boundary description: (Omitted). 
Editor's note— Section 1.02 sets out the metes and bounds description of the city limits. Since subsequent boundary changes may have rendered the description obsolete, it has been omitted.  
Sec. 1.03. - Annexation of property. 
The City may annex and disannex property by following the procedure and requirements set out in the Texas Local Government Code and other applicable state statutes as they are from time to time amended. 
(Amd. no. 1, 1-15-1983; amd. no. 27, 1-21-1989; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
[Sec. 1.04. - Reserved.]  
Sec. 1.05. - Form of government. 
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "council-manager form of government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the Texas Constitution, and the laws of the State of Texas, and by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as "the Council", which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, appoint the judge of the municipal court, and appoint the City Manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the City. All powers of the City shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(Amd. no. 1, 5-1-1999; amd. no. 14, 5-9-2009)  
Sec. 1.06. - Powers of city. 
The City shall have all powers that now are or hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the constitution or laws of the State of Texas, and all such powers, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed by this Charter, and when not prescribed therein, in such manner as may be provided by ordinance or resolution of the City Council of the City of Farmers Branch. 
(Amd. no. 1, 5-1-1999)  
Sec. 1.07. - General powers adopted. 
The enumeration of particular powers in the Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby to appropriate to the exercise thereof, the City shall have and may exercise all other powers which, under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for the Charter specifically to enumerate. The City of Farmers Branch shall have and exercise all the powers conferred upon cities by what is known as the Home Rule Amendment to the constitution of the State of Texas and the enabling act relative thereto, passed by the Thirty-Third Legislature of the State of Texas, found in the published laws of said Legislature, Regular Session, pages 307 to 317, and effective July 7, 1913, and all other laws passed [by] the legislature of the State of Texas, relating thereto, or which may hereafter be passed by said legislature in relation to such matters.  
Sec. 1.08. - Power to acquire property for public purposes. 
The City of Farmers Branch shall have the power to acquire, by condemnation, either private or public property located inside or outside of the corporate limits for the extension, improvement and enlargement of its water system, including riparian rights, water supply reservoirs, standpipes, water sheds, dams, the laying, building, maintenance and construction of water mains and the laying, erection, establishment or maintenance and construction of water mains and the laying, erection, establishment or maintenance of any appurtenances or facilities which will furnish to the inhabitants of the City an abundant supply of wholesome water; for sewerage plants and systems; rights-of-way for water and sewer lines; parks, playgrounds and schools, hospitals, fire stations, police stations, burial grounds and cemeteries, incinerators or other garbage disposal plants, streets, boulevards and alleys or other public ways, city jails, city halls and other municipal buildings or any right-of-way needed in connection with any property used for any purpose herein-above named; for the straightening or improving of the channel of any stream, branch or drain and for any other public purpose or public use. The procedure to be followed in any condemnation proceeding hereunder and authorized herein shall be in accordance with the provisions of the State law with reference to eminent domain. 
(Amd. no. 27, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 1, 5-9-2009)  
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 2.01. - Number, selection, term. 
The Council shall consist of six members, a mayor and five Councilmembers. The mayor shall be elected by the voters from the City at large in the manner provided in Article VII, for a term of three years or until a successor has been elected and takes office as provided in Section 2.04. The five Councilmembers shall be elected by the voters residing in a particular district, Districts 1 through 5, respectively, in the manner provided in Article VII, for a term of three years or until their successors have been elected and take office as provided in Section 2.04. 
(Amd. nos. 2, 28, 1-21-1989; Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
Sec. 2.02. - Qualifications; code of ethics; removal from office. 
(a)  The members of the Council shall be qualified voters of the City who have been residents of the City for at least one (1) year and, except for the mayor, a resident of the Councilmember district from which the person seeks election for at least six (6) months, prior to the date of election and who shall never have been convicted of a felony offense. A person elected to office of Councilmember from a district must continuously reside in the district during the person's term of office. Members of the Council shall hold no other public office except that of a Notary Public or they may be a member of the National Guard or naval or military reserve. When any elective or appointed official of the City, including members of appointed commissions or boards, files for election for any elected office or position, including but not limited to Federal, State, County or City office, other than the position presently held by that person and where the term of said position does not expire either before or simultaneously with the commencement of the term of the office or position that is being sought, his or her existing office shall be deemed vacated as of the date of filing. A former employee of the City shall not be eligible to be elected or appointed to the Council until at least two (2) years has elapsed since the termination of such person's employment with the City. 
(Amd. no. 1, 4-20-1968; amd. no. 1, 4-3-1971; amd. no. 3, 1-15-1983; amd. nos. 3, 28, 1-21-1989; amd. nos. 1, 3, 5-1-1999; amd. No. 14, 5-9-2009; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 ; Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 ) 
State Law reference— Conflicts of interest, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 171.001 et seq.  
Sec. 2.03. - Compensation; expenditures; and travel policy. 
(a)  Members of the Council shall serve without pay or compensation provided, however, they shall be entitled to reimbursement of necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties from funds budgeted for such purposes. 
(b)  The City Council shall by ordinance adopt a policy addressing expenditures by members of the Council in the performance of their official duties and providing methods for reporting and verifying such expenditures. The policy shall include provisions addressing expenditures for travel by members of the Council and their spouses. 
( Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 2.04. - Vacancies in council. 
Vacancies occurring in all Council positions shall be filled by a special election to be held within one hundred twenty (120) days after the vacancy occurred or as may otherwise be required by the Texas Constitution; provided however a vacancy on the Council may be filled by appointment by the Council if the vacancy created is for an unexpired term of office of twelve (12) months or less. The Council member thus elected or appointed shall serve for the unexpired portion of the vacated position. 
(Amd. no. 2, 4-3-1971; amd. no. 4, 1-15-1983; amd. nos. 2, 4, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 2, 5-1-1999; amd. no. 2, 5-9-2009; Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
Sec. 2.05. - Presiding officer; Mayor; Mayor Pro Tempore; Deputy Mayor Pro Tempore. 
The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council, and shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties. The Mayor may participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the Council, but shall not be entitled to vote on legislative or other matters except in case of a tie, when the Mayor shall have the right to cast the deciding vote, or unless such right to vote in other specific cases is expressly provided for in this Charter. The Council shall elect from among the Councilmembers a Mayor Pro Tempore and a Deputy Mayor Pro Tempore who shall perform the duties of Mayor in case of the absence or disability of the Mayor. In case of the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore, [and] the Deputy Mayor Pro Tempore, the remaining members of the Council shall elect one of their members to act as Mayor temporarily during such absence or disability. The Mayor Pro Tempore or Deputy Mayor Pro Tempore shall not be deprived of the right to vote on matters coming before the Council when acting as mayor. A vacancy in the office of Mayor shall be filled by the Council in the same manner as provided in section 2.04. 
(Amd. no. 3, 4-3-1971; amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 4, 5-1-1999)  
Sec. 2.06. - Powers. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, all powers of the City and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the Council. Without limitation of the foregoing powers of the Council, the Council shall also have the power to: 
(1)  Appoint and remove the City Manager and the City Judge; 
(2)  Upon the recommendation of the City Manager, establish other administrative departments and distribute the work of divisions; 
(3)  Adopt the budget of the City; 
(4)  Authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance; 
(5)  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the City and make investigations as to municipal affairs; 
(6)  Appoint the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission; 
(7)  Appoint the members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment; 
(8)  Adopt and modify the official map of the City; 
(9)  Regulate and restrict the area, height, and number of stories of buildings and other structures, the size of yards and courts, the density of populations and the location and use of buildings for trade, industry, business, residence or other purpose, and such other zoning regulations as may be authorized by law; 
(10)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission for the replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any area or district; 
(11)  Provide for an independent audit; 
(12)  Appoint any and all other committees, commissions, and advisory boards it deems necessary; 
(13)  Exercise all other powers authorized under State law for Home Rule Cities. 
In exercising its authority pursuant to paragraphs (6), (7), and (12) of this section, the City Council may not appoint a former employee of the City to serve on any board, commission, committee, or corporation that has a board of directors appointed in whole or in part by the City Council that is operating under the direct authority of or subject to the direct control of the City Council, until at least six (6) months has elapsed since the termination of such person's employment with the City. 
(Amd. no. 4, 4-3-1971; amd. no. 5, 1-15-1983; amd. no. 27, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 5, 5-1-1999; Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
Sec. 2.07. - Appointment of city manager. 
The Council, including the Mayor (who shall have the right to vote), upon the affirmative vote of four (4) members (which may include the Mayor), shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term who shall be the chief administrator and executive officer of the City. No member or former member of the Council shall ever be appointed City Manager. The City Manager shall have no authority over any appointive board or committee, which is appointed by the Council and receives its authority from the Council. 
(Amd. 4-20-1968; amd. no. 5, 4-3-1971; amd. no. 6, 1-15-1983; amd. no. 14, 5-9-2009; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 2.08. - Removal of city manager. 
The Council, including the Mayor (who shall have the right to vote), may, upon the affirmative vote of four (4) members, remove the City Manager from office. The action of the Council in removing the City Manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such removal in the Council. 
(Amd. no. 6, 4-3-1971; amd. no. 6, 1-15-1983)  
Sec. 2.09. - Removal of other appointive officials. 
The Council may, upon affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the Council, remove members of its appointive boards or commissions without notice, except to the extent that such removal shall be otherwise controlled by State law. 
(Amd. no. 7, 1-15-1983)  
Sec. 2.10. - Council not to interfere in city manager's appointments or removals. 
Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment to or removal from office of any person by the City Manager or any of the City Manager's subordinates. However, the Council may consult with and advise the City Manager, make inquiry regarding the appointments or removals and may express their opinion in regard thereto. In regard to administrative and executive duties under the City Manager, the Council and its members shall deal solely through the City Manager and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager, either publicly or privately. Willful violations of the foregoing provision shall constitute an act of official misconduct and a ground for removal as set out in section 2.02. 
(Amd. no. 7, 4-3-1971; amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 2.11. - Creation of new departments or offices. 
The Council, upon the recommendation of the City Manager, may, by ordinance, create, change, and abolish offices, departments or agencies, other than the offices, departments and agencies established by this Charter. 
( Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 2.12. - Municipal Court Judge. 
The Council shall appoint a judge of the Municipal Court to serve a term of two (2) years. The Municipal Court Judge may be removed by the Council at any time for incompetence, misconduct, malfeasance, and nonfeasance, or disability. The Municipal Court Judge shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the Council from time to time. The Council may appoint one or more alternate municipal court judges who shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the Council. Any person or persons so appointed as Municipal Court Judge or alternate Municipal Court Judge shall be an attorney duly licensed to practice law in the State of Texas and whose license is currently in good standing. 
(Amd. no. 8, 4-3-1971; amd. no. 8, 1-15-1983; amd. no. 8, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 2, 5-1-1999; Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
Sec. 2.13. - Induction of council into office; meetings. 
The first meeting of each newly elected Council, for induction into office, shall be on the first Tuesday following its election or the earliest date authorized by the Texas Election Code for the canvassing of local elections if such date is later than the first Tuesday following the election.. At such meeting, the first order of business shall be the canvassing of returns, declaring the results and the swearing in of such newly elected Councilmembers. The Council shall meet regularly at such times as it may decide, but not less frequently than once each month. Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or any two Councilmembers giving written notice of such meetings to the City Secretary, who shall notify each member of the Council and the City Manager of the time and place of each meeting and the purpose for which it was called. All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public except as provided by State law. 
(Amd. no. 9, 4-3-1971; amd. nos. 5, 28, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 3, 5-9-2009)  
Sec. 2.14. - Quorum; voting. 
Any four (4) members of the Council (which may include the Mayor) shall constitute a quorum necessary for the transaction of official business at any meeting of the Council. Voting shall be by "aye" or "no" on roll call or by a show of hands and a simple majority shall be required to carry a motion, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this Charter or by state law. Any member may call for a roll call vote at any time on any matter being voted on by the Council, and the vote of each member shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. Any Councilmember abstaining from voting, except when disqualified, shall be taken as an affirmative vote. 
(Amd. no. 10, 4-3-1971)  
Sec. 2.15. - Rules of procedure; minutes. 
The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business. It shall keep minutes of its proceedings and the minutes shall be open to public inspection. Minutes of all meetings of the Council shall be prepared for review and acceptance by the Council at its next subsequent regular meeting. Upon their acceptance by the Council, the minutes shall be entered in the minute book of the Council and the City Secretary shall at the same time provide a permanent and adequate index showing the action of the Council in regard to all matters submitted to it at both regular and special meetings. 
(Amd. no. 6, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 14, 5-9-2009)  
Sec. 2.16. - Ordinances. 
In addition to such acts of the Council as are required by statute or by this Charter to be by Ordinance, every act of the Council establishing a fine or other penalty or for the contracting of indebtedness, shall be by Ordinance. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Farmers Branch." 
( Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
Sec. 2.17. - Publication of ordinances. 
All ordinances required to be published in a newspaper by State Law shall be published in accordance with the law. 
(Amd. no. 6, 5-1-1999)  
Sec. 2.18. - Independent annual audit. 
Prior to the end of each fiscal year as defined in section 4.01 of this Charter, the Council shall designate certified public accountants who, as of the end of the fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the City government and shall submit their report to the Council and to the City Manager. Such accountants shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City government or of any of its officers. They shall not maintain any accounts or records of the city business, but, within specifications approved by the Council, shall postaudit the books and documents kept by the Department of Finance and any separate subordinate accounts kept by any other office, department or agency of the City Government. A copy of such audit shall be kept in the Office of the City Secretary subject to inspection by any citizen and officer during regular office hours. 
(Amd. no. 7, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 1, 5-1-1999)  
Sec. 2.19. - Council to be judge of qualifications of its members: procedure for removal. 
The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members. If a member of the Council is charged with a ground for removal, as set out in Section 2.02, such charges shall be set for hearing not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days from the date on which the written charges are presented. At such hearing, the accused shall have the right to present evidence in his or her defense, but shall be disqualified from voting as to his or her innocence or guilt. At the conclusion of the evidence, a vote shall be taken, and upon the affirmative vote of four (4) Councilmembers, the accused member shall be removed from office and the member's seat declared vacant. The Mayor shall be authorized to vote on the matter of removal of a Councilmember pursuant to this Section 2.19 unless the Mayor is the person whose removal is the subject of the vote. The Council shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and require the production of records, but the decision of the Council in the exercise of such power shall be subject to review by the courts. 
(Amd. no. 11, 4-3-1971; amd. nos. 8, 28, 1-21-1989; Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
ARTICLE III. - THE CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 3.01. - The city manager; qualifications. 
The City Manager shall be chosen by the Council solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative training, experience and ability, and without regard to political consideration. The City Manager need not when appointed be a resident of the City of Farmers Branch or the State of Texas, but during his or her tenure of office shall reside in the City of Farmers Branch. 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 3.02. - The city manager; powers and duties. 
The City Manager shall be chief executive officer and the head of the administrative branch of the City government. The City Manager shall be responsible to the Council for proper administration of all affairs of the City under the City Manager's jurisdiction and, to that end, shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Appoint and when necessary for the welfare of the City, remove any officer or employee of the City except as otherwise provided by this Charter and except as the City Manager may authorize the head of a department to appoint and remove subordinates in such department; 
(2)  Prepare and submit to the Council an annual budget and be responsible for its administration after adoption; 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year. The report shall be prepared on a basis prescribed by generally accepted accounting principles as applied to municipal governments. The report shall be submitted to the Council within 120 days of the end of the fiscal year. An extension of this deadline may be granted by the Council at its discretion; 
(4)  Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations as may seem desirable; 
(5)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required by the Council, not inconsistent with this Charter; 
(6)  Attend all meetings of the City Council, except when the City Manager is under discussion, with the right to take part in the discussions, but having no vote; and he shall be notified of all special meetings of the Council; 
(7)  Establish and maintain, for submission to the council, basic organizational charts setting forth department heads, responsibilities and duties of each and a brief job description of all employees under such department heads; 
(8)  Submit a report to the City Council no later than ninety (90) days after the independent auditor's report has been submitted to the Council. The City Manager's report shall outline actions to be taken concerning the auditor's recommendations, including, but not limited to, specific responses to any internal control weakness identified by the auditors. The report shall include expected dates of implementations of any remedial action warranted; 
(9)  Provide recommendations to the City Council for the establishments of departments. 
(Amd. no. 12, 4-3-1971; amd. nos. 9, 10, 28, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 1, 5-1-1999; amd. no. 14, 5-9-2009; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 3.03. - Absence of city manager. 
To perform the City Manager's duties during his or her temporary absence or disability, the City Manager may designate by letter filed with the City Secretary a qualified administrative officer of the City. In the event of failure of the Manager to make such designation, the Council may by resolution appoint an officer of the City to perform the duties of the City Manager until the City Manager returns or his or her disability shall cease. 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 1, 5-1-1999; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 3.04. - Administrative departments. 
The City Council shall establish departments by ordinance upon the recommendation of the City Manager. 
(Amd. no. 7, 5-1-1999)  
Sec. 3.05. - Directors of departments. 
At the head of each department there shall be a director, who shall be an officer of the City and shall have supervision and control of the department subject to the City Manager. Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual, the City Manager may head one or more departments, and directors of departments may also serve as chiefs of divisions. 
( Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 3.06. - City secretary. 
The City Manager shall appoint an officer of the City, who shall have the title of the City Secretary, shall give notice of the Council meetings, shall keep minutes of its proceedings, shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a book kept for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions and shall perform such other duties as shall be required by this Charter or by the City Manager. 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989)  
ARTICLE IV. - BUDGET 
 
Sec. 4.01. - Fiscal year: Budget year: Accounting year. 
The fiscal year of the City government shall begin on the first day of October and shall end on the last day of September of each calendar year. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget and the accounting year.  
Sec. 4.02. - Preparation and submission of budget. 
Prior to the 1st day of August in each year, the City Manager shall prepare, file with the City Secretary, and furnish to each member of the Council a carefully itemized budget outlining anticipated receipts and proposed expenditures of the City, showing as definitely as possible appropriations desired for each project and the operation for the next succeeding fiscal year, comparing the same with the budget of the then current fiscal year, and stating the estimated receipts and expenditures of the current year. Concurrently with the submission of an operating budget, the City Manager shall prepare and present a capital projects budget outlining all proposed capital projects and sources of funding for a period of at least three years. The City Manager shall also outline all debt service payments and sources of funding. Each employee, officer, board and department shall furnish the City Manager such information as may be required by the City Manager for the proper preparation of each budget. The proposed budget shall contain an estimate of the rate of tax required for the then current calendar year. 
(Amd. no. 10, 1-15-1983; amd. nos. 11, 12, 28, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 8, 5-1-1999; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 4.03. - Budget form. 
At the head of the budget there shall appear a summary of the budget in such a manner as to present to taxpayers a simple and clear summary of the detailed estimates of the budget. The City Manager shall at the same time submit a budget message explaining the need of the requested appropriations and stating what pending capital projects, if any, will likely require the issuance of bonds or warrants. 
(Amd. no. 14, 5-9-2009)  
Sec. 4.04. - Budget a public record. 
The budget and budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the office of the City Secretary open to public inspection by anyone.  
Sec. 4.05. - Publication and notice of public hearing. 
The budget shall be filed with the City Secretary before the 30th day before the City establishes and sets its tax rate. The City Council shall call and hold a public hearing on the budget after the 25th day after the budget is filed with the City Secretary. Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation not earlier than thirty (30) days nor later than ten (10) days before the date of the public hearing. 
(Amd. no. 5, 4-20-1968; amd. no. 2, 5-1-1999)  
Sec. 4.06. - Hearing and adoption of budget. 
At the time advertised or at any time to which public hearing shall be adjourned, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against the estimates or any item therein. After the conclusion of such public hearing, the Council may make such changes, if any, in the budget as in their judgment the law warrants and the best interests of the taxpayers of the City demand. The budget, as amended, if there be changes, shall then be adopted by Ordinance which shall also fix the tax rate per $100.00 assessed value which shall apply to the current tax year. The City Manager shall file a copy of the budget with the County Clerk of Dallas County and with the Comptroller of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 4.07. - Budget establishes appropriations and amount to be raised by ad valorem taxation. 
The budget shall state the amount of money to be raised by ad valorem taxation. 
(Amd. nos. 13, 14, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 4.08. - Unallocated reserve fund. 
When recommended by the City Manager and in the discretion of the Council, the budget may contain a reasonable sum set aside as an unallocated reserve fund to meet unexpected and unforeseen contingencies in current operating costs of any budget project.  
Sec. 4.09. - Amendment and supplemental budgets. 
In case of grave public necessity, emergency expenditures to meet unusual and unforeseen conditions which could not, by reasonable diligent thought and attention, have been included in the original budget may from time to time be authorized, upon the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the Council, as amendments or supplements to the original budget. Such supplements and amendments shall be approved in an Ordinance and shall be filed with the original budget. 
(Amd. no. 10, 1-15-1983)  
Sec. 4.10. - Defect shall not invalidate tax levy. 
Defects in the form or preparation of the budget or the failure to perform any procedural requirement shall not invalidate any tax levy or the tax roll.  
Sec. 4.11. - Budget establishes appropriations; transfer of unencumbered appropriations. 
Amounts set forth in the budget as approved expenditures shall be appropriated to the objects and purposes identified therein. The City Council may authorize the City Manager to transfer unencumbered appropriations within a department to an extent identified by the Council in its grant of such authorization. The Council, by ordinance, may amend the budget by transferring any unencumbered amounts within any fund of the City. 
(Amd. no. 14, 1-21-1989)  
ARTICLE V. - BONDS, WARRANTS AND OTHER EVIDENCES OF INDEBTEDNESS 
 
Sec. 5.01. - Power to issue. 
In keeping with the Constitution of the State of Texas, and not contrary thereto, the City of Farmers Branch, shall have the right to issue all tax bonds, revenue bonds, funding and refunding bonds, time warrants and other evidences of indebtedness for any public purpose, so long as not prohibited by the general laws of the State of Texas, including, but not limited to, bonds or other evidences of indebtedness to promote or finance economic development within the City. 
( Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 5.02. - Manner of issuance. 
Bonds and warrants of the City of Farmers Branch shall be issued in the manner provided by the general laws of the State of Texas applicable to cities and towns.  
ARTICLE VI. - ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Article VI, sections 6.01 through 6.08 inclusive, were amended at an election held January 21, 1989. 
 
Sec. 6.01. - Power to tax. 
(a)  The Council shall have the power to levy, assess, and collect any tax authorized by the Constitution and the general laws of the State of Texas to be levied, assessed, and collected by a municipal corporation. 
(b)  The council shall have the power to grant tax exemptions in accordance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 6.02. - Where payable. 
(a)  All taxes shall be payable at the Office of the Assessor and Collector of Taxes in the City of Farmers Branch at the City Hall Building or at such places both within and without the City of Farmers Branch as may be specifically designated by the Council. 
(b)  No demand for such taxes shall be necessary, but it is the duty of the taxpayer to make payment of all such taxes in cash within the time specified.  
Sec. 6.03. - Property subject to tax. 
All real and tangible personal property located in the City of Farmers Branch on January 1 of each year is taxable by the City unless exempt by law.  
Sec. 6.04. - Appraisal of property; method of assessment. 
All taxable property located within the corporate limits of the City of Farmers Branch shall be appraised and assessed in accordance with the Texas Property Tax Code.  
Sec. 6.05. - Tax liens, liabilities and suits. 
All taxable property located in the City on January 1 of each year shall stand charged from that date with a lien as allowed by the Texas Property Tax Code in favor of the City for the taxes due.  
Sec. 6.06. - Ratification. 
All taxes heretofore assessed are ratified and all ordinances relating to taxes now in force shall continue until amended or repealed by the Council.  
Sec. 6.07. - General powers. 
Unless otherwise provided by this Charter and by ordinances passed hereunder or by the Property Tax Code of the State of Texas, all property in the City liable for taxation shall be assessed in accordance with the general laws of the State of Texas insofar as applicable. In addition to the powers herein conferred with reference to the assessment and collection of taxes, the City of Farmers Branch shall have and may exercise all powers and authority now conferred or which may hereafter be conferred upon cities having a population of more than 5,000 inhabitants by the general laws of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 6.08. - Assessor and collector of taxes. 
The City Manager shall appoint a Tax Assessor and Collector for the City who meets all statutory requirements for the position. The Tax Assessor and Collector shall give bonds as may be required by the Council.  
ARTICLE VII. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Elections. 
The regular City election shall be held annually on the uniform election date in May of each year as set by State law, at which time officers will be elected to fill those offices which become vacant that year. The City Council shall fix the hours and place for holding such election in accordance with State law. The City Council may, by resolution, order a special election, fix the time and place for holding same, and provide all means for holding such special election as set by State Law. 
(Amd. no. 1, 4-4-1964; amd. nos. 16, 17, 1-21-1989; Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
Sec. 7.02. - Regulation of elections. 
The City Council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this Charter or the laws of the State of Texas, for the conduct of municipal elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections and for the recount of ballots in case of doubt or fraud. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election authorities as specified in section 7.09 who shall also have power to make regulations not inconsistent with this Charter or with any regulations made by the Council or the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amd. no. 1, 5-1-1999)  
Sec. 7.03. - Nominations. 
Any person, having the qualifications required by this Charter, may be nominated for the Council by petition of sufficient number of qualified voters of the City, in the case of a person seeking election to the office of mayor, or by petition of sufficient number of qualified voters of the District in which the person resides, in the case of person seeking election to the office of Councilmember Districts 1 through 5, respectively, to satisfy the requirements of State law, who shall be designated as the candidate's sponsors. Such petition must comply in all respects with the requirements of this Charter and State law. No voter shall sign more than one such petition for any one Council place, and should a voter do so, the voter's signature shall be void except as to the petition first filed. With each signature shall be stated the place of residence of the signer, giving the street and number or other description sufficient to identify it and such other information as shall be required by State law. Nominating petitions shall be signed and filed not earlier than ninety days nor later than thirty (30) days before the election with the City Secretary. Nominations shall be accepted in writing by the nominees, and shall be acknowledged by such nominee before the City Secretary or other person authorized to administer oaths under the law of the State of Texas. The petition shall be in substantially the following form: 
"We, the undersigned voters of the City of Farmers Branch, hereby nominate and sponsor ____________, whose residence is ____________, for the office of [insert Mayor place or District No.____ as applicable], to be voted for at the election to be held on the ________ day of ____________, 20 ___; and we individually certify that we are qualified to vote for the candidate for the Council hereby nominated and that during the current election we have not signed any other nominating petition for the council place for which we are now nominating the above candidate." 
Name, Street Number and Address from which last registered (if different) 
____________ Date of Signing 
(SPACES FOR SIGNATURES AND REQUIRED DATA) 
Acceptance of Nomination 
"I do hereby declare that I accept the nomination for the Council and agree to serve if elected. I am ____________ years of age, a qualified voter of the City of Farmers Branch, a resident of the United States, and have been a resident of the City of Farmers Branch or an area now within the corporate limits of the City for at least one year. I am not in arrears in the payment of any taxes or other liability due the City. At the present time I reside at ____________ Street in the City of Farmers Branch." 
Signature of candidate ____________ 
Date and hour of filing ____________ 
Received by _____________________ 
(Signature of city secretary) 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF DALLAS 
BEFORE ME the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ____________ known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument and who acknowledged to me that the same was subscribed as his or her free act and deed for the purposes and consideration therein expressed. 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE THIS ______ Day of ___________, 20____________. 
_________________________ 
Notary Public, State of Texas 
(Amd. no. 14, 4-3-1971; amd. nos. 18, 28, 1-21-1989; Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
Sec. 7.04. - Number, selection and term of city council. 
The Council, consisting of a Mayor and five Councilmembers, shall be selected as follows: 
(a)  The Mayor shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified voters voting at the election. 
(b)  The five Councilmembers shall be elected to individual districts, designated as District 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively, by a majority vote of the qualified voters residing within the district who vote for the candidate seeking office from district where the voter resides. 
(c)  The Mayor and each Councilmember shall hold office for a period of three years and until his or her successor is duly elected and qualified. 
(d)  Commencing with the regular municipal election held in 2011 and continuing thereafter: 
(1)  No person elected to the office of Mayor may serve in such office for more than two consecutive terms until at least three years have elapsed from the expiration of such person's previous term of office as Mayor; provided however such person is eligible to become a candidate for, and may serve two terms of office as a Councilmember; 
(2)  No person elected to the office of Councilmember may serve in such office for more than two consecutive terms until at least three years have elapsed from the expiration of such person's previous term of office as a Councilmember; provided however such is eligible to become a candidate for, and may serve two terms of office as Mayor; 
(3)  No person elected to the Council may serve more than two consecutive terms of office as Mayor and two consecutive terms of office as a Councilmember, or a maximum of four consecutive terms of office on the Council whether as Mayor or as a Councilmember, until at least three years have elapsed from the expiration of such person's previous term of office on the Council, whether as Mayor or as a Councilmember. 
(Amd. nos. 2, 28, 1-21-1989; Ord. No. 3141, 5-25-2011; Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
Sec. 7.05. - The official ballot. 
The names of all candidates for office, except such as may have been withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be placed on the ballot without party designations and in the order determined in a drawing of lots conducted by the City Council.  
Sec. 7.06. - Qualified voter. 
Every person resident in the City of Farmers Branch who is a qualified voter under the laws of the State of Texas shall be entitled to vote in any City election. 
(Amd. no. 12, 1-15-1983; amd. no. 1, 5-1-1999)  
Sec. 7.07. - Laws governing city elections. 
All City elections shall be governed, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, by the laws of the State of Texas governing general and municipal elections.  
Sec. 7.08. - Conducting and canvassing elections; runoff elections. 
The election judges and other necessary election officials for conducting all such elections shall be appointed by the City Council. The election judges shall conduct the elections, determine, record and report the results as provided by the general election laws of the State of Texas. In accordance with the provisions of the Texas Election Code, the City Council shall meet after election day, open the returns, canvass and officially declare the results of the election as to candidates and questions and issue certificates of election to candidates elected as hereinbefore provided. In the event no candidate for a given office has received the necessary majority, the Mayor shall, on the first day following the completion of the official canvas, call a second election to be held on a date authorized for such purpose by State law as adopted by resolution of the City Council. At the second election, the ballot shall list the names of the two (2) candidates receiving the first and second highest number of votes for a given office (in the first election) in the order determined in a drawing of lots conducted by the City Council. Should one of such candidates withdraw, die, or become ineligible, the other shall be declared elected to office without a second election. Any tie shall be decided by lot. All elections shall be governed by the Texas Election Code and the laws applicable to municipal elections. 
(Amd. no. 13, 1-15-1983; amd. no. 19, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 2, 5-1-1999; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 7.09. - Oath of office. 
Every officer of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of the office, take and subscribe to the statement of elected or appointed officer and the oath of office pursuant to the Texas Constitution Art. XVI, Sec. 1(e) and (f). 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 2, 5-1-1999)  
Sec. 7.10. - Establishment, review and revision of Council District boundaries. 
(a)  The City is divided into five (5) districts, known as Districts 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 as described in the Judgment of United States District Court in Fabela v. City of Farmers Branch, No. 3:10-CV-1425-D (N.D. Tex.) (January 31, 2018). 
(b)  The Council shall appoint a redistricting commission, starting in January 2022, and every ten (10) years thereafter, to review the District boundaries in order to maintain a substantial equality of population in each District. The redistricting commission shall advise the Council, which shall within six (6) months after appointment fix the boundaries of the Districts by ordinance, if necessary. The Mayor and each member of the Council shall appoint at least one member of the redistricting commission. The Council shall designate the chair of the redistricting commission. In making such appointments, the Council shall, as nearly as may be practicable, provide fair and balanced representation of all geographical areas of the city in the redistricting process and provide a total membership that reflects the racial and ethnic makeup of the city's population. Members of the redistricting commission shall be appointed to serve a term that will end upon completion of the redistricting commission's work. Persons appointed to the redistricting commission must be qualified voters and meet the qualifications for service on a City board. A member of the Council is not eligible for appointment to the redistricting commission. A member of the redistricting commission is not eligible to be a candidate for Council in the next succeeding general election of the city, and may not be appointed or elected to the Council for a period of one year after service on the redistricting commission. 
(c)  The redistricting commission shall draw the districts in compliance with the following guidelines: 
(1)  The districts shall be substantially equal in population according to the total population count as presented in the census data, except where deviation is required to comply with federal law or is allowable by law; 
(2)  In addition to the requirements of federal law, there shall be no discrimination on the basis of race, color, or membership in a language minority group, and the voting strength of racial, ethnic, and language minorities in the districts shall not be diluted to deprive minority voters of an equal opportunity to elect a candidate of their choice; 
(3)  The districts shall be geographically compact, to the extent possible, and composed of contiguous territory; 
(4)  The reconfiguration of districts shall be neutral as to incumbents or potential candidates; and 
(5)  To the extent practicable, communities of interest shall be placed in a single district and attempts should be made to avoid splitting neighborhoods, where possible, without violating the other requirements or applicable laws. 
( Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
ARTICLE VIII. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Powers of the city. 
In addition to the city's power to buy, own, construct, maintain, and operate utilities, within or without the City limits, and to manufacture and distribute electricity, gas, or anything else that may be needed or used by the public, the City shall have further powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 8.02. - Franchises, use of city property, power of council. 
The City Council shall have power to control and to grant, amend, renew or extend by ordinance all franchises, and all use of the City's property, owned in fee title or otherwise, streets, alleys, easements, right-of-ways and all commercial and business uses of said City property by public utilities and all providers of radio, television transmission, cable, internet communications, telecommunications service, electronic communication and all other uses of City property. The City's exercise of power shall be in conformity with applicable Federal and State laws, rules and regulations and applicable City ordinances that implement this section. 
(Amd. No. 10, 5-1-1999)  
Sec. 8.03. - Franchise value not to be allowed. 
In fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility service within the City and in determining the just compensation to be paid by the City for public utility property which the City may acquire by condemnation or otherwise, nothing shall be included as the value of any franchise granted by the City under this Charter.  
Sec. 8.04. - Right of regulation. 
All grants, renewals, extensions, or amendments or public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the City: 
(1)  To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or for failure otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after due notice and hearing. 
(2)  To require an adequate and reasonable extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the standard necessary to render the highest reasonable quality of utility service to the public. 
(3)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
(4)  (a) 
To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each such utility; provided, that if the utility shall keep its accounts in accordance with the uniform system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the National Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the Federal Power Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Railroad Commission of Texas, or their successors, or other State or Federal utility regulating agencies, this shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this paragraph. 
(b)  At any time to examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility and to require annual and other reports, including reports on local operations by each such public utility. 
(5)  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public.  
Sec. 8.05. - Consent of property owners. 
The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility; but nothing in this Charter or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owners of any right of action for damage or injury to his or her property as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 8.06. - Extensions. 
All extensions of public utilities within the City limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as provided in section 8.04(1). In case of an extension of public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant.  
Sec. 8.07. - Temporary permits. 
Permits unconditionally revocable at the will of the governing body for minor or temporary privileges in the streets, public ways and public places of the city may be granted and revoked by ordinance from time to time, and such permits shall not be deemed franchises as the term is used in this Charter.  
Sec. 8.08. - Other conditions. 
All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City of Farmers Branch and the grantee, and the contractual rights as contained in any such franchises, shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that the power of the City of Farmers Branch to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of any utility property is in all things reserved, as is the right to require adequate and reasonable extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant fixtures at the standard necessary to render the highest reasonable quality of utility service to the public. Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this article to the full extent permitted by State and Federal law whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchises. Nothing in this Charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the council of the electors of the City in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable and lawful in connection with any franchise grant, including the right to require such compensation or rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas and the United States. 
(Amd. nos. 20, 27, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 8.09. - Franchise records. 
Within six months after this Charter takes effect, every public utility and every owner of public utility franchises shall file with the City, as may be prescribed by ordinance, certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed, or under which such utility is operated in the City of Farmers Branch. The City shall compile and maintain a public record of public utility franchises.  
Sec. 8.10. - Accounts of municipally owned utilities. 
Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such city ownership and operation, including all assets, appropriately subdivided into different classes, all liability subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves, and surplus; also revenues; operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rental, and other disposition of annual income. The accounts shall show the actual capital cost to the City of each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions, and improvements and the source of the funds, expended for such capital purposes. They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or rendered by any such utility to any other City or governmental department. The Council shall annually cause to be made by a certified public accountant, and shall publish, a report showing the financial condition of said public utility and the financial results of such City ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section and such additional data as the council shall deem expedient.  
Sec. 8.11. - Relations of rates and services. 
The City Council shall have all powers now or hereafter granted to municipalities by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, to regulate by ordinance the rates and service of every public utility operating in the City of Farmers Branch. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Public Utility Regulatory Act of Texas as it shall from time to time be amended, or any succeeding legislation, shall control where applicable. 
(Amd. no. 14, 1-15-1983; amd. no. 20, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 8.12. - Rate changes. 
No person or corporation enjoying any franchise to operate a public utility within the City of Farmers Branch shall ever make any change to fix any rate for public service to its patrons or the inhabitants of the City of Farmers Branch without first being authorized by the governing body of the City by an ordinance or order approving the same, and no public utility shall contest any rate or charge or order fixed by the governing body of the City under the authority otherwise conferred in the Charter of the City in any suit or cause of action in any court until after such utility has filed a motion for a rehearing with the governing body of the City specifically setting out the grounds of complaint or charge and until the governing body of the City shall have passed upon the said motion for rehearing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Public Utility Regulatory Act of Texas shall control where applicable. 
(Amd. no. 14, 1-15-1983)  
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 9.01. - No officer or employee to accept gift, etc., from public utility. 
No officer or employee of the City of Farmers Branch shall ever accept, directly or indirectly, any gift, favor, privilege or employment from any public utility corporation enjoying a grant of any franchise, privilege or easement from said City, during the term of office of such officer, or during such employment of such employee, except as may be authorized by law or ordinance. Any officer or employee of the City who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by any fine that may be prescribed by ordinance for this offense, and shall forthwith be removed from office.  
Sec. 9.02. - Personal financial interest in contracts or sales to the city; disclosure; violations. 
(a)  No City officer or employee shall have a personal financial interest, whether direct or indirect, in any contract with or sale to the city of land, materials, supplies or services, provided, however, the term "personal financial interest" does not include employee wages, salaries or benefits and no City officer or employee shall act as agent, broker or representative for other persons or corporations in dealing with the City, whether financially remunerated or not for performing such services. Any City officer or employee who has such a personal financial interest, whether direct or indirect, shall declare that interest to the council or board or department involved and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his or her capacity as a City officer or employee in the making of a sale or in the making or performing of such contract or in appearing or acting in such representative capacity. Any City officer or employee who willfully conceals such a personal financial interest or willfully violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his or her office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracted with or making a sale to the City shall render the contract or sale voidable by the City Manager or the City Council. 
(b)  A City officer having a personal interest in a matter other than as described in Subsection (a) hereof shall use individual discretion in deciding whether to abstain from voting on the matter. Officers shall adhere to the highest ethical standards in making such determination. An officer who abstains from voting because of any personal interest described in this section 9.02 shall be "disqualified" within the meaning of section 2.14 hereof. 
(Amd. no. 6, 4-20-1968; amd. nos. 21, 22, 28, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 9.03. - Church and school property not exempt from special assessments. 
No property owned by any party or entity shall be exempt from any special taxes, assessments, permit fees, impact fees, or similar charges or fees authorized by this Charter or City Ordinance. 
(Amd. no. 5, 5-9-2009)  
Sec. 9.04. - Notice of damage or injury required. 
The City shall receive written verified notice as a condition precedent to the filing of a claim or law suit against the City not later than six (6) months after the day that the incident occurred. The notice shall be filed with the City Secretary and shall describe the following: (1) damage or injury claim; (2) time, date and location where incident occurred; (3) description of incident; (4) estimate of damages. 
The City of Farmers Branch shall never be liable on account of any damage or injury to person or to personal property arising from or occasioned by any defect in any public street, highway, alley, grounds or public work of the City of Farmers Branch unless the specific defect causing the damage or injury shall have been actually known to the City Manager at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage or unless the attention of the City Manager shall have been called thereto by a notice thereof in writing at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage and proper diligence has not been exercised to rectify the defect. The notice herein required to be given to the City Manager of the specific defect causing the damage or injury shall apply where the defect arose from any omission of the City itself, through its agents, servants or employees, or acts of third parties. 
(Amd. no. 23, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 6, 5-9-2009; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 9.05. - City exempt from appeal bonds. 
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City of Farmers Branch is a part, for any bond, undertaking or security to be executed in behalf of said City, but all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given, and said City shall be liable as if such obligation had been duly given and executed.  
Sec. 9.06. - Execution, garnishment and assignment. 
The property, real and personal, belonging to said City shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill, nor shall the funds belonging to said City, in the hands of any person, be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe to funds it may have on hand due any person, nor shall the City or any of its officers or agents be required to answer to writ of garnishment on any account whatsoever, nor shall said City be liable to the assignee of any wages of any officer, agent or employee of said City, whether earned or unearned, upon any claim or account whatsoever, and as to the City such assignment shall be absolutely void.  
Sec. 9.07. - No lien on public property; contractors, etc., to notify city of claims. 
No lien of any kind can ever exist against the public buildings, public halls, parks or public works of the City of Farmers Branch. All subcontractors, materialmen, mechanics and laborers upon any public works of the City of Farmers Branch are hereby required to notify the City of all claims they may have on account of such work against the City, and when such notice has been given, the City shall have required a statutory Payment Bond and the City may retain an amount from any funds due the contractor sufficient to satisfy all valid claims; provided that such notice shall be given timely as it relates to the Payment Bond and prior to any final settlement. 
(Amd. no. 7, 5-9-2009)  
Sec. 9.08. - Bonds of contractors. 
The governing body of the City shall require good and sufficient bonds of all contractors in accordance with applicable state statutes and to the extent the governing body deems it necessary and advisable. 
(Amd. no. 15, 1-15-1983; amd. no. 27, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 9.09. - Condemnation of dangerous structures. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the governing body of the City, any building, fence, shed, awning or structure of any kind or part thereof is liable to fall down and injure persons or property, the governing body may order the owner or agent of the same, or occupant of the premises, to take down and remove the same within such time as it may direct, and may punish by fine all persons failing so to do. Upon failure to comply, the governing body shall have the additional power to remove the same at the expense of the City on account of the owner of the property and assess the expenses thereof, including condemnation proceedings, as a special tax against the land, and the same may be collected as other special taxes provided for in this Charter, or by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
The governing body of the City shall have full power to condemn all dangerous buildings or obstructions of any kind and may provide regulations therefor by Ordinance. 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 9.10. - Building permits. 
The City of Farmers Branch shall have power to prohibit the erection or construction of any building or structure of any kind within the City of Farmers Branch without a permit first having been issued by the City for the construction or erection of such building or structure, and may authorize a fee to be charged for such permit, and in pursuance of said authority may authorize the inspection by the City of all buildings or structures during the progress of their construction and may require that all buildings shall be constructed in conformity with the building regulations which exist in said City or which shall hereafter be passed.  
Sec. 9.11. - Bonds of city official, employee or department director. 
In addition to any bonding provisions herein provided, the City Council may require any City official, department director or City employee, before entering upon his or her duties, to execute a good and sufficient bond with a surety company doing business in the State of Texas, and approved by the City Council, as surety thereon, said bond to be in such amount as the Council may demand, payable to the City of Farmers Branch, and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office; premium of such bond to be paid by the City. 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 9.12. - When provisions take effect. 
This Charter and all amendments thereto shall be in effect from and after approval by the voters of the City and the approval of an ordinance of the City by the City Council declaring the same adopted. 
(Amd. no. 12, 5-1-1999)  
Sec. 9.13. - Right to amend the Charter. 
This Charter may be amended no more than once every two years as provided by the laws of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 9.14. - Ordinances, rules and relations validated. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City of Farmers Branch heretofore ordained, passed or enacted, that are in force at the time this Charter becomes effective, and which are not in conflict with such Charter, shall remain in full force and vigor until altered, amended or repealed by the governing body of the City after such Charter takes effect.  
Sec. 9.15. - Separability clause. 
If any section or part of [a] section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of [a] section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of [a] section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part to which holding shall directly apply.  
Sec. 9.16. - Nepotism. 
(a)  No person shall be hired to be an employee of the City, or appointed to any paid office of the City, if that person's relationship to the Mayor, any member of the City Council, or the City Manager is any of the following: (1) Spouse; (2) Father; (3) Mother; (4) Stepfather; (5) Stepmother; (6) Daughter; (7) Son; (8) Sister; (9) Brother; (10) Stepbrother; (11) Stepsister; (12) Brother-in-law; (13) Sister-in-law; (14) Grandfather; (15) Grandmother; (16) Granddaughter; (17) Grandson; (18) Aunt; (19) Uncle; (20) Nephew; (21) Niece; (22) First Cousin; (23) Great Grandfather; (24) Great Grandmother; (25) Great Granddaughter; (26) Great Grandson; (27) Great Uncle; (28) Great Aunt; (29) Great Nephew; (30) Great Niece; (31) Second Cousin; or (32) Stepchild. 
(b)  No person shall be hired to be an employee of the City, or appointed to any paid office of the City, if the relationship of that person's spouse to the Mayor, any member of the City Council, or the City Manager is any of the following: 
(1) Father; (2) Mother; (3) Brother; (4) Sister; (5) Daughter; (6) Son; (7) Grandmother; (8) Grandfather; (9) Granddaughter; (10) Grandson; (11) Aunt; (12) Uncle; (13) Nephew; (14) Niece; or (15) First Cousin. 
(Amd. no. 15, 4-3-1971; amd. no. 24, 1-21-1989; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 9.17. - Incompetency. 
By "incompetency", as used herein, is meant gross ignorance of official duties, or gross carelessness in the discharge of them; or an officer may be found to be incompetent when, by reason of some serious physical or mental defect, not existing at the time of the officer's election, he or she has become unfit or unable to discharge promptly and properly the duties of his or her office. 
(Amd. no. 16, 4-3-1971; amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 9.18. - Official misconduct. 
By "official misconduct", as used herein with reference to City officials, is meant any unlawful behavior in relation to the duties of office, which is willful in its character and includes any willful or corrupt failure, refusal or neglect of an officer to perform any duty enjoined on such officer by law and also shall include knowing violation of the City Council's Code of Ethics. 
(Amd. no. 17, 4-3-1971; amd. nos. 3, 28, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 9.19. - Indemnification of officials and employees. 
The City Council shall purchase or provide and maintain liability insurance to protect City employees and elected and appointed officers in connection with claims brought against such persons arising out of acts or omissions of such persons in the course and scope of the performance of their City duties. 
(Amd. no. 25, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 9.20. - Charter review. 
The City Council shall appoint a committee at least every five (5) years to review this Charter and to make appropriate recommendations to the City Council. The committee shall consist of at least thirteen (13) members with at least two (2) members appointed from each City Council District, and up to at least two (2) members nominated by the Mayor. The City Council shall select the chair person for the committee. The Mayor shall be entitled to vote on the appointment of members to the Committee. 
(Amd. no. 26, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 13, 5-1-1999; Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
Sec. 9.21. - Charter renumbering. 
The City Council shall have the power, by ordinance, to renumber articles, sections, subsections, and subparagraphs of this Charter or any amendment thereto, as it shall deem appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
ARTICLE X. - RECALL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Article X, sections 10.01 through 10.11 were added at an election held April 20, 1968. 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Scope of recall. 
Any elected City official shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the qualified voters of the City eligible to vote to elect people to the office which is the subject of the recall on grounds of incompetency, misconduct or malfeasance in office. 
(Amd. no. 2, 5-1-1999; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 10.02. - Petitions for recall. 
Before an election may be called for the recall of an elected member of the Council, a petition addressed to the Council demanding such question shall be first filed with the City Secretary or the person performing the duties of City Secretary; which petition shall be signed by qualified voters equal in number to at least fifteen percent (15%) of the qualified voters eligible to vote for the office which is the subject of said petition on the date of the last regular municipal election for such office even if the election was canceled for such office because of an unopposed candidate. The number of qualified voters shall be determined from the list of qualified voters maintained by the designated authority of Dallas County. Each signer of such recall petition shall personally sign his or her name thereto in ink or indelible pencil, and shall write after his or her name and place of residence, giving name of street and number, or place of residence, and shall also write thereon the day, the month and the year his or her signature was affixed. 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 ; Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
Sec. 10.03. - Form of recall petition. 
The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the Council of the City of Farmers Branch, must distinctly and specifically point out the ground or grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there be more than one ground, such as for incompetency, misconduct or malfeasance in office, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to be removed notice of the matters and things with which he or she is charged. The signature shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF DALLAS 
I, ___________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
___________ 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this day of ________, 20___. 
_____
Notary Public, Dallas County, Texas 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 10.04. - Various papers constituting petition. 
The petition may consist of one or more copies, or subscription lists, circulated separately, and the signatures thereto may be upon the paper or papers containing the form of petition, or upon other paper attached thereto. Verifications provided for in the next preceding section of this article may be made by one or more petitioners, and the several parts of copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons, but no signatures to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which were placed thereon more than forty-five (45) days prior to the filing of such petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of City Secretary. All papers comprising a recall petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of City Secretary on the same day, and the said secretary shall immediately notify, in writing, the officer so sought to be removed, by mailing such notice to his or her Farmers Branch address.  
Sec. 10.05. - Presentation of petition to the council. 
Within fifteen (15) days after the date of the filing of the papers constituting the recall petition, the person performing the duties of City Secretary shall verify the petition and the signatures and certify the petition as to all of the legal requirements as established by this Charter and State law. The City Secretary shall submit the petition and the certification of same to the City Council. The City Secretary's certification shall be final and not subject to change or challenge. 
(Amd. no. 8, 5-9-2009)  
Sec. 10.06. - Public hearing to be held. 
The officer whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been presented to council, request that a public hearing be held to permit the officer to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the Council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing. 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 10.07. - Election to be called. 
If the petition has been certified to be in accordance with the Charter, and the officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall be the duty of the City Council to order an election for the next uniform election date as authorized by the Texas Election Code. 
(Amd. no. 4, 1-15-1983; amd. no. 9, 5-9-2009)  
Sec. 10.08. - Ballots in recall election. 
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: 
"Shall ___________ be removed from the office of ___________ by recall? 
(2)  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the following words, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"Yes" "No"  
Sec. 10.09. - Result of recall election. 
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be "No", that is, against the recall of the person named on the ballot, he or she shall continue in office for the remainder of his or her unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be "Yes", that is, for the recall of the person named on the ballot, he or she shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy be filled as vacancies in the council are filled, as provided in this Charter. 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989)  
Sec. 10.10. - Recall, restrictions thereon. 
No recall petition shall be filed against the mayor or council member within three (3) months after such person's election, nor within three (3) months after an election for such person's recall. No recall petition shall be filed against the mayor or council member during the term of the person's office if the person is appointed to fill a vacancy in such a position pursuant to this Charter. 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989; Ord. No. 3503, Exh. A, 5-15-2018 )  
Sec. 10.11. - Failure of the council to call an election. 
In case all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the Council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed upon said Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then the County Judge of Dallas County, Texas, shall discharge any of such duties herein provided to be discharged by the person performing the duties of City Secretary or by the Council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the dates of all City elections shall be governed by the Texas Election Code. 
(Amd. no. 4, 1-15-1983)  
ARTICLE XI. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Article XI, sections 11.00 through 11.13 were added at an election April 20, 1968. 
 
Sec. 11.01. - General power of initiative and referendum. 
The qualified voters of the City of Farmers Branch, in addition to the method of legislation hereinbefore provided, shall have the power of direct legislation by the initiative and referendum.  
Sec. 11.02. - Initiative. 
Qualified voters of the City may initiate legislation by submitting a petition addressed to the Council which requests the submission of a proposed ordinance or resolution to a vote of the qualified voters of the City said petition must be signed by qualified voters equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of those who were qualified voters on the date of the last regular municipal election as determined from the list of qualified voters maintained by the designated authority of Dallas County, and each copy of the petition shall have attached to it a copy of the proposed legislation. Each signer of such petition shall personally sign his or her name and address in ink or indelible pencil, and shall write after his or her name, place of residence, giving the name of the street and number, or place of residence, and shall also write thereon the date, the month and the year his signature was affixed. 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 11, 5-9-2009; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 11.03. - Form of initiative and referendum petition. 
The petition mentioned above must be addressed to the City Council of the City of Farmers Branch, and must have attached to it a copy of the proposed legislation. The signature shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF DALLAS 
I, ___________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition: and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this ________ day of ________ 20___. 
_____
Notary Public, Dallas County, Texas  
Sec. 11.04. - Various papers constituting petition. 
The petition may consist of one (1) or more copies, or subscription lists, circulated separately, and the signatures thereto may be upon the paper or papers containing the form of petition, or upon other paper attached thereto. Verifications provided for in the next preceding section of this article may be made by one or more petitioners, and the several parts of copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons; but no signatures to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which were placed thereon more than forty-five (45) days prior to the filing of such petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of City Secretary. All papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of City Secretary on the same day. Within fifteen (15) days after the filing of such petition, the person performing the duties of City Secretary shall verify the petition and the signatures and certify the petition as to all of the legal requirements as established by this Charter and State law. The City Secretary shall submit the petition and the certification of same to the City Council. 
Upon receipt of the petition, certification and ordinance or resolution, it shall become the duty of the City Council, within twenty (20) days after the receipt thereof, to pass and adopt such ordinance or resolution without alteration except with the written approval of all of the circulators of the petition (Section 11.03), or to call a special election on the next uniform election date on the question of adopting or rejecting the proposed ordinance or resolution. 
(Amd. no. 4, 1-15-1983; amd. no. 12, 5-9-2009)  
Sec. 11.05. - Referendum. 
Qualified voters of the City of Farmers Branch may require that any ordinance or resolution, with the exception of ordinances or resolutions appropriating money, fixing salaries or levying taxes, zoning or granting of franchises passed by the Council be submitted to the voters of the City for approval or disapproval, by submitting a petition for this purpose within forty-five (45) days after the final passage of said ordinance or resolution, or within forty-five (45) days after its publication. Said petition must be signed by qualified voters equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of those who were qualified voters on the date of the last regular municipal election as determined from a list of qualified voters maintained by the designated authority of Dallas County. Each signer of such petition shall personally sign his or her name and address in ink or indelible pencil, and shall write after his or her name his or her place or residence, giving the name of the street and number, or place of residence, and shall write thereon the date, the month and the year his signature was affixed. Said petition shall be submitted to the person performing the duties of City Secretary. Immediately upon the filing of said petition, the person performing the duties of City Secretary shall verify the petition and the signatures and certify the petition as to all of the legal requirements as established by this Charter and State law. The City Secretary shall submit the petition and the certification of same to the City Council. The City Secretary's certification shall be final and not subject to change or challenge. Thereupon, the Council shall immediately reconsider such ordinance or resolution and, if it does not entirely repeal the same, shall submit it to a proper vote as provided in Section 11.04 of this Charter. Such ordinance or resolution shall remain in effect unless the majority of the qualified voters voting thereon at such election shall vote against such ordinance or resolution. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the dates of all City elections shall be governed by the Texas Election Code. 
(Amd. no. 28, 1-21-1989; amd. no. 2, 5-1-1999; amd. no. 13, 5-9-2009; Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 11.06. - Voluntary submission of legislation. 
The Council, upon its motion and by a majority vote of its members, may submit to popular vote at any election for adoption or rejection any proposed ordinance, resolution or measure or may submit for repeal any existing ordinance, resolution or measure, in the same manner and with the same force and effect as provided in this article for submission on petition, and may in its discretion call a special election for this purpose.  
Sec. 11.07. - Form of ballots. 
The ballots used when voting upon such proposed and referred ordinance, resolution or measure shall set forth their nature sufficiently to identity them and shall also set forth upon separate lines the words: 
"For the Ordinance" and "Against the Ordinance" or "For the Resolution" and "Against the Resolution".  
Sec. 11.08. - Publication of proposed and referred ordinances. 
The person performing the duties of City Secretary shall publish at least once in the official newspaper of the City and on the City's Internet web site the proposed or referred ordinance or resolution within fifteen (15) days before the date of the election, and shall give such other notices and do such other things relative to such election as are required in general municipal elections or by the ordinance or resolution calling said election. 
( Ord. No. 3240, Exh. A, 8-20-2013 ; Ord. No. 3252, Exh. A, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 11.09. - Adoption of ordinances. 
If a majority of the qualified voters voting on any proposed ordinance or resolution or measure shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon, or at any time fixed therein, become effective as a law or as a mandatory order to the Council.  
Sec. 11.10. - Inconsistent ordinances. 
If the provisions of two (2) to [or] more proposed ordinances or resolutions approved at the same election are inconsistent, the ordinance or resolution receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail.  
Sec. 11.11. - Ordinances passed by popular vote, repeal or amendment. 
No ordinance or resolution which may have been passed by the Council upon a petition or adopted by popular vote under the provisions of this article shall be repealed or amended except by the Council in response to the referendum petition or submission as provided in section 11.05 of this Charter.  
Sec. 11.12. - Further regulations by the council. 
The Council may pass ordinances or resolutions providing other and further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this article consistent herewith.  
Sec. 11.13. - Franchise ordinances. 
Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to be in conflict with any of the provisions of this Charter, pertaining to ordinances granting franchises when valuable rights shall have accrued thereunder.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Farmers Branch, Texas" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1969, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal Code of Ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas, as printed in part I of this volume. 
City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Farmers Branch in the County of Dallas and State of Texas. 
City council. Whenever the words "city council" or "the council" are used, they shall mean the city council of the City of Farmers Branch in the County of Dallas and the State of Texas. 
City officers, departments, boards, commissions and other agencies. Any reference to a city officer, department, board, commission or any other agency, unless otherwise indicated, shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas." 
Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal Code of Ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall be counted. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.014. 
County. The term "county" shall mean the County of Dallas, Texas. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears in this Code requiring or authorizing any officer or employee of the city, other than the mayor, any councilmember or the city council to do some act or perform certain duties, it shall be construed as authorizing such officer or employee to designate, delegate or authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section shall provide otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.012(c), 312.003(c). 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.012(b), 312.003(b). 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed". 
Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(2). 
Preceding and following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Shall. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature and subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The word "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.012(a), 312.003(a). 
V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." shall mean and refer to the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." shall mean the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005 et seq. 
(Code 1969, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1969, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
All references to chapters, articles, divisions or sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code so far as they are the same as those of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas, 1969, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not new enactments.  
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses; rights; contracts; penalties incurred. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeals. 
The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not revive any ordinance or portion of this Code in force before or at the time the provision repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the provision repealed.  
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when consistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinance or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance adopting the annual budget. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(8)  Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles, or loading zones. 
(9)  Any land use, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map. 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations. 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinances. 
(16)  Any ordinance calling an election. 
(17)  Any ordinance authorizing street maintenance agreements. 
(18)  Any ordinance regarding the charges, fees or rates. 
(19)  Any ordinance regarding airport zoning regulations. 
(20)  Any ordinance regarding the Texas Municipal Retirement System or Federal Old Age and Survivor's Insurance or other employee benefits. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. All ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office.  
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Farmers Branch, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:…" 
(c)  The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Farmers Branch, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ________ which said section reads as follows:…" The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1969, § 1-4) 
Charter reference— Enacting clause of all ordinances, § 2.16.  
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1969, § 1-6) 
Charter reference— Ordinance form and adoption procedure, §§ 2.16, 2.17.  
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized by city personnel or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ________ through ________." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal Code of Ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq.  
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punishable by a fine in a sum not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense relating to fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, nor to exceed $500.00 for each offense for all other violations; provided, however, that where the offense is one for which a penalty is fixed by state law, the penalty for such offense shall be the same as fixed by state law. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city shall occur or continue shall constitute a separate offense unless otherwise provided. 
(c)  Minimum fines established for violations of this Code shall be doubled for the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month period and trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense within any 24-month period. At no time shall the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine established in this section. 
(Code 1969, § 1-5; Ord. No. 1756, § 1(1-5), 2-1-1988; Ord. No. 2801, § 2, 1-10-2005) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violations of Code of Ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Form of government, § 1.05; general powers of city, § 1.06; home rule powers of the city, § 1.07; powers and duties of city council generally, art. II; general powers and duties of mayor, § 2.05; appointment and duties of city secretary, § 3.06; city manager, art. III; elections, art. VII; employee bonds, § 9.11; nepotism, § 9.16; indemnification, § 9.19; recall of elected officials, art. X. 
Cross reference— Administration of the animal regulations, § 18-41 et seq.; administration of the buildings and building regulations, § 22-31 et seq.; administration of the substandard building regulations, § 22-436 et seq.; administration and enforcement of the property maintenance regulations, § 56-41 et seq.; administration and enforcement of the dangerous buildings regulations, § 22-596 et seq.; administration and enforcement of the erosion and sedimentation control regulations, § 34-56 et seq.; administration and enforcement of the industrial waste pretreatment regulations, § 86-126 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, AND COMMISSIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The city's zoning ordinance establishes a zoning board of adjustment. The zoning ordinance is not printed in this volume but is on file in the city secretary's office. 
Charter reference— City council to establish and appoint board, committees and commissions, § 2.06(12). 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Removal of certain board or commission members by city council; absences. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code or state law, the city council may remove members of board and commissions as provided in section 2.09 of the City Charter. 
(b)  Any person appointed by the city council to a board or commission as either a regular member or alternate member shall be automatically considered for removal by the city council after such person has been absent from two regular or special meetings of the board or commission to which the person is appointed during any period of 12 consecutive months which absences have not been excused by an affirmative vote of the board or commission to which the person is appointed. 
(c)  Not later than ten days after each regular and special meeting of a board or commission, the chairperson of each board and commission shall report any absences of regular and alternate members from such meeting to the city secretary. 
(d)  Each board or commission shall act on a request to excuse the absence of a regular or alternate member at the next regular meeting of the board or commission occurring following the meeting at which the absence occurred. 
(Code 1969, § 2-6; Ord. No. 3563, § 1(A), 4-2-2019 ) 
Charter reference— City council removal of board members, § 2.09.  
Sec. 2-32. - Board member emeritus created. 
(a)  The honorary position of board member emeritus is hereby created for designated city boards including the library board, the parks and recreation board, the historical preservation and restoration board, the housing finance corporation board, the industrial development corporation board and the senior advisory board. 
(b)  City council may, at their discretion, appoint individuals to become a board member emeritus for certain designated city boards. 
(c)  To be qualified to be appointed as a board member emeritus an individual must be a resident of the city, have a cumulative total of at least 15 years of dedicated and distinguished service to the city boards and commissions; may be recommended to city council by a city board or commission; and must be appointed as a board member emeritus by action of the city council. 
(d)  An individual appointed as a board member emeritus is an honorary non-voting board member; shall receive all information that regular board members of the respective board receive; may attend all board functions of the appointed board, may participate in all discussions related to board matters; may serve on committees; shall not be a voting member of the board nor of any committee of the board; shall not fill in as a voting board member when other members are absent; and shall abide by the provisions of the ethics ordinance as applicable to regular board members. 
(e)  A board member emeritus shall continue as a resident of the city in order to maintain the title of board member emeritus. 
(f)  Attendance of a board member emeritus at a board meeting shall not be counted toward completing a quorum of the board nor toward completing a quorum on any committee of the board; attendance at board meetings for a board member emeritus is optional to the emeritus member. 
(g)  Due to the legal nature of the business conducted by certain boards and commissions of the city, this section shall be applicable only to the library board, the parks and recreation board, the historical preservation and restoration board, the housing finance corporation board, the industrial development corporation board and the senior advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 2668, §§ 1—7, 7-22-2002)  
Sec. 2-33. - Criminal history checks of board and commission applicant. 
(a)  Any person making application for appointment to a position on any board, commission, agency, or committee to which the city council has the final authority to make such appointment shall consent to a criminal history check prior to consideration of the person's application. 
(b)  Failure to consent to a criminal history check as required by this section shall be grounds for disqualification for consideration for appointment by the city council. 
(c)  The city shall cause a criminal history check to be conducted on each applicant for appointment to a position described in subsection (a) of this section. If upon review of a criminal history check an applicant is found to have been convicted of any of the following offenses, the applicant shall not be considered for appointment: 
(1)  A felony or a misdemeanor classified as an offense against a person; 
(2)  A felony or misdemeanor classified as an offense against public administration or official misconduct; 
(3)  A felony or misdemeanor classified as an offense against public order or decency; 
(4)  A felony or misdemeanor violation of any law intended to control the possession or distribution of any controlled substance; or 
(5)  Any offense involving moral turpitude. 
(d)  The provisions of this section are administrative in nature and not subject to criminal penalties. 
(Ord. No. 3113, § 2(A), 11-16-2010)  
Sec. 2-34. - Delinquent payments by applicants. 
No person shall be qualified to be appointed to a position on any board, commission, agency, or committee to which the city council has the final authority to make such appointment if at the time of appointment the person, or any legal entity over which the person has sufficient management control to make the final decision regarding the payment of the entity's debt obligations, is delinquent on the payment of any amount due and owing to the city including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Any criminal or civil fines or penalties related to criminal or civil cases or administrative proceedings that are final and not appealable; 
(2)  Ad valorem taxes on property located within the city, and/or any related penalties, interest, court costs, or attorneys fees related to such delinquent amounts; 
(3)  City sales and uses; 
(4)  City hotel occupancy tax; or 
(5)  Payments for goods and services, including utility services, provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3113, § 2(B), 11-16-2010)  
Sec. 2-35. - Term year. 
The phrase "term year," when used in this article II, shall mean a period of time beginning July 1 and ending on June 30 of the immediately following calendar year. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-2-2013 )  
Sec. 2-36. - Continuation of service until replaced. 
Unless otherwise stated in the Charter, this Code, or federal or state law, any person appointed by the city council to a board, commission, or committee established pursuant to the Charter, this Code, other city ordinance, or resolution of the city council shall continue to serve in the position to which the person is appointed, including for periods following the end of the person's term, until the city council appoints another person to fill the position and said other person has otherwise qualified to hold the position. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-2-2013 )  
Sec. 2-37. - Term limits for board and commission members. 
(a)  No person may serve on any board or commission established pursuant to the Charter, this Code, other city ordinance, or resolution of the city council for more than (i) three full consecutive terms, if the length of the term of office for such board or commission is two years or (ii) two full consecutive terms of office, if the term of office for such board or commission is three years or six years, until at least one year has elapsed from the expiration of such person's most recent term of office on such board or commission. 
(b)  Notwithstanding (a), above, a person who is ineligible to be reappointed to serve on a board or commission because of the limitations in (a), above, may be appointed to serve on a different board or commission without waiting the one year required by (a), above, provided such person's length of service on such other board or commission shall be subject to the limits set forth in (a), above. 
(c)  Notwithstanding (a) and (b), above, a person who has served the maximum number of years or terms of office on a single board or commission as allowed in (a) and (b), above, on the effective date of this section may continue to serve in the position to which the person is currently appointed, including for any periods following the expiration of the person's term, until the city council appoints another person to fill the position and said person has otherwise qualified to hold the position. 
(d)  The limits set forth in (a) and (b), above, shall not apply to a person appointed to an alternate positions on a board or commission. Furthermore, the period of time in which a person serves as an alternate member on a board or commission shall not be included in determining the number of terms for which said person subsequently appointed to a regular voting position on such board or commission pursuant to (a) and (b), above. 
(e)  If a person is appointed to serve an unexpired term on a board or commission, the limitations set forth in (a) and (b) above shall not apply to such partial, unexpired term. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, "board or commission" means and includes library board, planning and zoning commission, zoning board of adjustment/building code of appeals, parks and recreation board, historical preservation and restoration board, industrial development corporation, housing finance corporation, senior advisory board, and the family advisory board. "Board or commission" shall not include any ad hoc committee appointed by the city council or the city's appointees to the Valwood Improvement Authority, North Dallas County Water Supply Corporation, City of Farmers Branch Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone No. 1, and City of Farmers Branch Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone No. 2, Farmers Branch Local Government Corporation, Animal Shelter Advisory Committee, Metrocrest Hospital Authority, Municipal Drainage Utility System Advisory Committee, and North Texas Emergency Communications Center Inc. 
( Ord. No. 3331, § 1, 8-18-2015 ; Ord. No. 3502, § 2, 5-15-2018 )  
Sec. 2-38. - Appointment of alternate members; participation; sitting as regular member. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint alternate members to serve on the various boards and commissions as provided in this article, the City Charter, state law, or this Code. 
(b)  Alternate members shall be given an opportunity to fully participate in the deliberation of matters on the agenda of the board or commission to which the alternate member is appointed but shall not have the right to vote on such matters while sitting as an alternate member. Alternate members shall be entitled to attend closed meeting of the board or commission to which the alternate member is appointed and shall be subject to the provisions of the Code of Ethics relating to the disclosure of information received and matters discussed in such closed meeting. 
(c)  An alternate member of the board or commission shall serve in the absence of a regular member. While serving as a replacement for a regular member, an alternate member shall have the right to vote on matters considered by the board or commission. 
(d)  If more than one alternate is present at a meeting where one or more regular members are absent, the alternate member with the longest tenure shall serve first, the second longest tenured alternate shall be placed next, and so on until all places left absent by a regular member have been filled. 
(e)  In the event of a vacancy on a board or commission resulting from the resignation, death, or removal of a regular board member, the alternate member with the longest tenure shall serve as a regular board member for the vacant seat until the city council appoints a person to serve the unexpired term. In the event of a second vacancy on a board or commission resulting from the resignation, death, or removal of another regular board member, the other alternate member shall serve as a regular board member for the vacant seat until the city council appoints a person to serve the unexpired term. 
( Ord. No. 3563, § 1(B), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-39. - Board and commission training. 
(a)  Not later than 90 days after a person who is an officer as defined in section 2-278 has taken the oath of office for a place on a board or commission to which the person has been appointed, such person shall attend board and commission training (including, but not limited to, the sexual harassment training required by section 2-282(b)) provided by the city through the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  If no board and commission training session is scheduled to be presented within 90 days after the person has taken the oath of office, then the person shall attend the first board and commission training session conducted after the person has taken the oath of office. 
(c)  The city secretary shall (i) keep a record of attendance of appointed board and commission members and alternate members at all board and commission training sessions and (ii) report to the city council the names of every appointed board and commission member and alternate member who fails to attend the training required by this section within the time required. 
(d)  Any person appointed by the city council to a board or commission as either a regular member or alternate member shall be automatically considered for removal by the city council if such person fails to attend the training required by this section 2-39 within the time required. 
(e)  Except for the training required by section 2-282(b), board and commission members and alternate members shall only be required to attend board and commission training once after taking the oath of office. 
( Ord. No. 3563, § 1(C), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-40. - Sunset review of certain boards and commission. 
(a)  On June 30 in years ending with "0" and "5," the following boards and commissions shall terminate without further action of the city council unless the city council has affirmatively voted that the board or commission shall continue in existence until the next termination date: 
(1)  Historical preservation and restoration board; 
(2)  Farmers Branch Manske Library Board; 
(3)  Parks and recreation board; 
(4)  Art and culture committee; 
(5)  Senior advisory board; and 
(6)  Sustainability committee. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city council from terminating any board or commission at any time in accordance with the provisions of the City Charter and state law. 
( Ord. No. 3563, § 1(D), 4-2-2019 ; Ord. No. 3567 , § 2, 4-16-2019; Ord. No. 3638 , § 1, 6-9-2020)  
Secs. 2-41—2-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ANIMAL SHELTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Advisory committee, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 823.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Creation; appointment; meetings. 
There is hereby created an animal shelter advisory committee composed of seven regular members and two alternate members appointed by the city council. The animal shelter advisory committee shall meet not less than three times a year upon the call of the chair, city manager, or director of environmental health. 
(Ord. No. 1882, § 1, 4-16-1990; Ord. No. 2915, § 2, 9-4-2007; Ord. No. 3221, § 2, 4-2-2013 ; Ord. No. 3453 , § 1, 7-11-2017; Ord. No. 3563, § 2(A), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-52. - Composition; terms. 
The members of the animal shelter advisory committee shall be composed of the following: 
(1)  At least one licensed veterinarian; 
(2)  One city official; 
(3)  One person whose duties include the daily operation of an animal shelter; 
(4)  One representative from an animal welfare organization; 
(5)  Three qualified voters of the city, who shall serve as regular resident members; and 
(6)  Two qualified voters of the city, who shall serve as alternate resident members. 
The members of the animal shelter advisory committee identified in (a) through (d) of this section and one alternate resident member shall be appointed to serve terms of two term years commencing in even numbered years, and the three regular resident members and other alternate resident member shall be appointed to serve terms of two term years commencing in odd numbered years. 
(Ord. No. 1882, § 2, 4-16-1990; Ord. No. 3563, § 2(B), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-53. - Responsibilities. 
The animal shelter advisory committee shall assist the city in complying with the standards for animal shelters as contained in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 823.005. 
(Ord. No. 1882, § 3, 4-16-1990)  
Sec. 2-54. - Organization. 
The animal shelter advisory committee shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its membership. The committee shall adopt procedures for conducting its meetings. 
(Ord. No. 1882, § 4, 4-16-1990)  
Secs. 2-55—2-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DANGEROUS BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Dangerous buildings, § 22-571 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-76. - Creation; composition; terms. 
(a)  There is hereby created a dangerous building board of appeals which shall hear all appeals for waivers of the provisions of article XI of chapter 22 of this Code. 
(b)  The dangerous building board of appeals shall consist of five regular members and two alternate members, who are not employees of the city, appointed by the city council. Alternate members shall serve only in the absence of one or more of the regular members, when requested to do so by the chairman, or his appointed representative, as the case may be, so that all cases will be heard by a minimum number of five members. 
(c)  Two of the regular members shall be appointed to serve terms of two term years commencing in even numbered years and three of the regular members shall appointed to serve terms of two term years commencing in odd numbered years. 
(d)  One of the alternate members shall be appointed to serve a term of two term years commencing in even numbered years and the other alternate member shall be appointed to serve a term of two term years commencing in odd numbered years. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 14, 8-5-1974; Ord. No. 3221, § 3, 4-2-2013 )  
Sec. 2-77. - Vacancies; terms of alternates; secretary; appointments; rules. 
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any regular or alternate member whose place becomes vacant in the same manner as the original appointment was made. The building official, or his authorized representative, shall be an ex officio member of, and shall act as secretary to, the dangerous building board of appeals. The dangerous building board of appeals may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business and shall render all discussions and findings in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 14, 8-5-1974; Ord. No. 3221, § 3, 4-2-2013 )  
Secs. 2-78—2-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION AND RESTORATION BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 94. 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Creation; composition; terms. 
There is hereby created a historical preservation and restoration board consisting of seven regular members and two alternate members appointed by the city council. Each member and alternate member shall be a qualified voter of the city. Four regular members and one alternate member shall be appointed to serve terms of two term years commencing in even number years, and three regular members and one alternate member shall be appointed to serve terms of two term years commencing in odd number years. 
(Ord. No. 1369, art. II, § A, 11-16-1981; Ord. No. 1373A, § 1, 2-1-1982; Ord. No. 1973, § 1, 2-3-1992; Ord. No. 2915, § 2, 9-4-2007; Ord. No. 3221, § 4, 4-2-2013 ; Ord. No. 3563, § 3(A), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-102. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies to the historical preservation and restoration board shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made for the unexpired term of any regular or alternate member whose place becomes vacant. 
(Ord. No. 1369, art. II, § B, 11-16-1981; Ord. No. 1373A, § 1, 2-1-1982; Ord. No. 2653, § 1, 1-21-2002; Ord. No. 3221, § 4, 4-2-2013 ; Ord. No. 3563, § 3(B), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-103. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3563 , § 3(C), adopted Apr. 2, 2019, repealed § 2-103, which pertained to required attendance; resignation from office for absences, and derived from Ord. No. 1369, art. II, § C, 11-16-1981; Ord. No. 3221, § 4, 4-2-2013.  
Sec. 2-104. - Organization; meetings; quorum; vote. 
The members of the historical preservation and restoration board shall organize, select their officers, hold meetings at stated times on a monthly basis, and designate the time and place of such meetings. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. A majority of the regular members of the board, inclusive of alternate members sitting as regular members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The chairman of the board shall vote only in case of a tie. 
(Ord. No. 1369, art. II, § D, 11-16-1981; Ord. No. 3563, § 3(D), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-105. - Compensation; expenditures; debts. 
The members of the historical preservation and restoration board shall serve without compensation, and when it is deemed necessary by such board to incur any expenses in performing the duties assigned to it, an estimate of such proposed expenses shall be submitted to the city council. No debts of any kind or any character shall be made or incurred by the board, or anyone acting for such board, unless expenditures have been specifically authorized by the city council prior to the time such obligations are incurred. 
(Ord. No. 1369, art. II, § E, 11-16-1981)  
Sec. 2-106. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The historical preservation and restoration board is created to advise the city council on policies and programs relative to the historical preservation and restoration sites. The board shall generally have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Act in an advisory capacity to the city council in matters pertaining to restoration of buildings and make recommendations to the city council regarding appropriate uses of the buildings, the historical preservation and restoration sites, and funding for projects within the historical preservation and restoration sites. 
(2)  Create and stimulate public interest in the historical preservation and restoration sites and its programmed activities by the city. 
(3)  Prepare and submit an annual budget for the acquisition of items for display within historical structures within the historical preservation and restoration sites. 
(4)  Make recommendations concerning the selection of outside consultants such as a historian architect, a landscape architect and a curator. 
(5)  Make recommendations to the city council concerning the historical preservation and restoration sites and its programs so that it is consistent with the city's overall park plan. 
(6)  Make periodic reports to the city council concerning the work of the board, and such special reports as may be requested by the city council. 
(7)  Carry out and perform such other matters as the city council may deem beneficial to the city. 
(8)  Act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to the historical preservation and restoration sites. 
(Ord. No. 1369, art. II, § F, 11-16-1981)  
Sec. 2-107. - Historical preservation and restoration sites. 
(a)  Historical preservation and restoration sites are those properties along Farmers Branch Creek and Rawhide Creek, north and south of Farmers Branch Lane, west of Ford Road and acquired with funds derived from the hotel/motel occupancy tax authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. These properties are as follows: 
(1)  Wilson, approximately eight acres in size with 1856 Gilbert (stone) House and McKee addition and large oak trees as features. 
(2)  Dodson, approximately eight acres with 1936 wood frame house, garage, and smoke house and wooded area as features. 
(3)  Additional buildings include: 1840s Log Culture Area (log house and single crib barn); 1877 Farmers Branch Depot; 1890s Wooden Caboose; 1885 Queen Anne Victorian Cottager; 1891 Church; 1900 Farmers Branch School. 
(4)  Collins, approximately 1.4 acres in size with large trees as features. 
(5)  Ferguson, approximately 3.25 acres in size and very heavily wooded area as a feature. 
(b)  This designation includes buildings and structures currently located on sites described in subsection (a) of this section and any structures that may be placed on such sites in the future and used for historical purposes, such as a museum. 
(Ord. No. 1369, art. I, § B, 11-16-1981)  
Sec. 2-108. - Acceptance of material donations. 
The historical preservation and restoration board, jointly with the city manager, or designated staff representative, may accept donations that do not exceed $500.00, as long as such donation is free and clear of any outstanding debt, undue maintenance or transportation cost. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1984, § G)  
Secs. 2-109—2-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - METROCREST HOSPITAL AUTHORITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Hospital authority act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 262.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Creation; description; name. 
It is to the best interest of the city and its inhabitants to create a hospital authority to be comprised of the territory included within the boundaries of the city. Such hospital authority is hereby created, and such authority shall be a body politic and corporate under the name of "Metrocrest Hospital Authority," which is hereby designated as the name by which the hospital authority shall be known. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 1, 12-15-1975; Ord. No. 1851, § 1, 11-6-1989)  
Sec. 2-132. - Administered by board of directors. 
Metrocrest Hospital Authority shall be governed by a board of directors consisting of ten members. Each of the directors shall, unless other provision is made in the bond resolution or trust indenture executed in connection with the issuance of bonds as provided in the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 262.001 et seq., or some other provision of such act, serve for a term of two years from the date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and until their successors have been appointed by the city council, and have been duly qualified. Each of the directors shall qualify by executing the oath of office required of appointed officials of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 2, 12-15-1975; Ord. No. 1178, § 1, 2-6-1978; Ord. No. 1265, § 1, 10-15-1979; Ord. No. 1851, § 2, 11-6-1989; Ord. No. 2520, § 1, 1-24-2000)  
Sec. 2-133. - Authorization to transact business and exercise power. 
In accordance with this division, the Metrocrest Hospital Authority is authorized to transact business and exercise its power pursuant to the Hospital Authority Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 262.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 12-15-1975)  
Secs. 2-134—2-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - HOUSING ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Minimum housing code, § 22-306 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-156. - Zoning board of adjustment to act as; building official to act as secretary. 
The zoning board of adjustments shall serve as the housing advisory and appeals board and shall perform such duties as provided in section 22-306 et seq. The building official, or his authorized representative, shall be an ex officio member of, and shall act as secretary to, the housing advisory and appeals board. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § II(3), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 2-157. - Adoption of rules; findings to be rendered in writing. 
The housing advisory and appeals board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business. The housing advisory and appeals board shall render all discussions and findings in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § II(3), 11-18-1974)  
Secs. 2-158—2-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - FARMERS BRANCH MANSKE LIBRARY BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3221, § 5, adopted Apr. 2, 2013 , amended Div. 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 7, §§ 2-181—2-188, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Library, ch. 44. 
 
Sec. 2-181. - Creation; composition; membership; terms. 
There is hereby created Farmers Branch Manske Library Board consisting of seven regular members and two alternate members appointed by the city council. Each member shall be a qualified voter of the city. Four regular members and one alternate member of the board shall be appointed to serve terms of two term years commencing in even number years, and three regular members and one alternate member of the board shall be appointed to serve terms of two term years commencing in odd number years. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 5, 4-2-2013 ; Ord. No. 3563, § 4(A), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-182. - Purpose. 
The Farmers Branch Manske Library Board is organized to advise the city council and act as a coordinating agency through which individual citizens, business and industry, government, and private organizations may work together in the best interest of the people of the city concerning the constructive use of the library. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 5, 4-2-2013 )  
Sec. 2-183. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies to the Farmers Branch Manske Library Board shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made for the unexpired term of any board member whose place becomes vacant. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 5, 4-2-2013 )  
Sec. 2-184. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3563 , § 4(B), adopted Apr. 2, 2019, repealed § 2-184, which pertained to attendance; report of absences, and derived from Ord. No. 3221, § 5, 4-2-2013.  
Sec. 2-185. - Officers; meetings; rules; quorum. 
The members of the Farmers Branch Manske Library Board shall organize, select their officers, hold meetings at stated times on a monthly basis, and designate the time and place of such meetings. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings. A majority of the regular members of the board, inclusive of alternate members sitting as regular members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 5, 4-2-2013 ; Ord. No. 3563, § 4(C), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-186. - Compensation; expenditures; incurring debts. 
The members of the Farmers Branch Manske Library Board shall serve without compensation, and, when it is deemed necessary by the board to incur any expenses in performing the duties assigned to it, an estimate of such proposed expenses shall be submitted to the city council. No debts of any kind or character shall be made or incurred by the board, or anyone acting for the board, unless such expenditures have been specifically authorized by the city council prior to the time such obligations are incurred. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 5, 4-2-2013 )  
Sec. 2-187. - Powers and duties. 
The Farmers Branch Manske Library Board shall generally have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to the establishment and use of the library. 
(2)  Receive suggestions and recommendations from the citizens of the city relating to the development and improvement of library services and make recommendations to the city council regarding such development and improvement, if deemed necessary or desirable. 
(3)  Make periodic reports to the city council concerning the work of the board and such special reports as may be requested by the city council. 
(4)  Encourage in every way possible the development and advancement of the public library. 
(5)  Carry out and perform such other matters as the city council may deem beneficial to the city. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 5, 4-2-2013 )  
Secs. 2-188—2-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3221, § 6, adopted Apr. 2, 2013 , amended Div. 8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 8, §§ 2-211—2-216, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 2-211. - Creation; composition; membership; terms. 
There is hereby created a parks and recreation board consisting of seven regular members and two alternate members appointed by the city council. Each member shall be a qualified voter of the city. Four regular members and one alternate member of the board shall be appointed to serve terms of two term years commencing in even numbered years, and three regular members and one alternate member of the board shall be appointed to serve terms of two term years commencing in odd numbered years. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 6, 4-2-2013 ; Ord. No. 3563, § 5(A), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-212. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies to the parks and recreation board shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made for the unexpired term of any board member whose place becomes vacant. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 6, 4-2-2013 )  
Sec. 2-213. - Organization; meetings; rules of procedure; record keeping; quorum; vote. 
The members of the parks and recreation board shall organize, select their officers, hold meetings at stated times on a monthly basis, and designate the time and place of such meetings. The parks and recreation board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings. A majority of the regular members of the parks and recreation board, inclusive of alternate members sitting as regular members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The chairman of the board shall vote only in case of a tie. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 6, 4-2-2013 ; Ord. No. 3563, § 5(B), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-214. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3563 , § 5(C), adopted Apr. 2, 2019, repealed § 2-214, which pertained to attendance; report of absences, and derived from Ord. No. 3221, § 6, 4-2-2013.  
Sec. 2-215. - Compensation; expenditures; debts. 
The members of the parks and recreation board shall serve without compensation, and when it is deemed necessary by the board to incur any expenses in performing the duties assigned to it, an estimate of such proposed expenses shall be submitted to the city council, and no debts of any kind or any character shall be made or incurred by the board, or anyone acting for the board, unless such expenditures have been specifically authorized by the city council prior to the time such obligations are incurred. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 6, 4-2-2013 )  
Sec. 2-216. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The parks and recreation board is organized to advise the city council on policies and programs, and shall generally have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to the parks and recreation activities of the city. 
(2)  Create and stimulate public interest in the parks and recreation activities of the city. 
(3)  Make periodic reports to the city council concerning the work of the board, and such special reports as may be requested by the city council. 
(4)  Carry out and perform such other matters as the city council may deem beneficial to the city. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 6, 4-2-2013 )  
Secs. 2-217—2-235. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3221, § 7, adopted Apr. 2, 2013 , amended Div. 9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 9, §§ 2-236—2-244, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference— Appointment of members of the planning and zoning commission by the city council, § 2.06(6). 
State Law reference— Planning and zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007. 
 
Sec. 2-236. - Creation; composition; membership. 
There is hereby created the planning and zoning commission consisting of seven regular members and two alternate members appointed by the city council. Each member of the commission shall be a qualified voter of the city. Regular and alternate members of the planning and zoning commission shall be appointed to serve terms of three term years, said terms to be staggered so that only three members and/or alternate members are appointed at the beginning of each term year. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 7, 4-2-2013 ; Ord. No. 3509, § 1, 7-17-2018 ; Ord. No. 3563, § 6(A), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-237. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies to the planning and zoning commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made for the unexpired term of any member whose place becomes vacant. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 7, 4-2-2013 )  
Sec. 2-238. - Compensation. 
The members of the planning and zoning commission shall serve without compensation. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 7, 4-2-2013 )  
Sec. 2-239. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3563 , § 6(B), adopted Apr. 2, 2019, repealed § 2-239, which pertained to attendance; report of absences, and derived from Ord. No. 3221, § 7, 4-2-2013.  
Sec. 2-240. - Organization. 
The planning and zoning commission shall: 
(1)  Organize and select its officers. 
(2)  Hold regular meetings at least once in each month, designating the time and place of such meetings. 
(3)  Adopt its own rules of procedure for the conduct of its business. 
(4)  Keep accurate minutes of its meetings, which shall be recorded with the city secretary and shall become a part of the permanent city records. 
(5)  Submit monthly and/or annual reports to the city council, and such other reports as may be requested from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 7, 4-2-2013 )  
Sec. 2-241. - Quorum. 
A majority of the regular members of the planning and zoning commission, inclusive of alternate members sitting as regular members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 7, 4-2-2013 ; Ord. No. 3563, § 6(C), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-242. - Powers and duties. 
The planning and zoning commission shall have the duties and powers as provided in the comprehensive zoning ordinance (Chapter 94 of this Code, as amended), the City of Farmers Branch Subdivision Ordinance (City of Farmers Branch Ordinance No. 1430, as amended), and applicable provisions of state law; and as otherwise conferred and granted from time to time by the city council by ordinance or resolution. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 7, 4-2-2013 ; Ord. No. 3563, § 6(D), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-243. - Incurring debts. 
Whenever it is deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission to incur any expenses in performing the duties assigned to the commission, an estimate of such proposed expenses shall be submitted to the city council prior to incurring any expenses. No debts of any kind or character made or incurred by the commission or anyone acting for the commission shall be paid by the city unless such expenditures have been specifically authorized by the city council prior to the time such obligations are incurred. 
( Ord. No. 3221, § 7, 4-2-2013 )  
Secs. 2-244—2-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9A. - ART AND CULTURE COMMITTEE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3638 , § 1, adopted June 9, 2020, amended the title of Div. 9A to read as herein set out. The former title read "Public Art and Culture Committee." 
 
Sec. 2-251. - Creation; composition; appointment. 
There is hereby created the art and culture committee, which shall consist of seven members and two alternate members composed of the following: 
(1)  One member serving as a representative of the Brookhaven College School of the Arts; 
(2)  One member serving as a representative of the Carrollton/Farmers Branch Independent School District Department of Fine Arts; 
(3)  One member serving as a representative of the Firehouse Theatre; 
(4)  One member representing a business operating at one or more locations within the city; 
(5)  Three members who are residents and qualified voters of the city serving as representatives of non-profit organizations focused on community art; and 
(6)  Two alternate members who shall be residents and qualified voters of the city. 
The regular members of the committee identified in subdivisions (1), (2), and (3) of this section shall be appointed at the discretion of the city council from one or more names received from the President of Brookhaven College, the Superintendent of Schools of the Carrollton/Farmers Branch Independent School District, and the Executive Director of the Firehouse Theatre, respectively. All other members and alternate members of the committee shall be appointed by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 3567 , § 1, 4-16-2019; Ord. No. 3638, § 1, 6-9-2020 )  
Sec. 2-252. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. 
Committee means the art and culture committee. 
Members shall collectively mean regular members and alternate members of the board. 
( Ord. No. 3567 , § 1, 4-16-2019; Ord. No. 3638, § 1, 6-9-2020 )  
Sec. 2-253. - Terms. 
(a)  The members identified in section 2-251(1), (2) and (3) shall serve an indefinite length term commencing on their respective dates of appointment by the city council and ending on the date the person serving in said position (i) is no longer qualified to serve in that position or (ii) is removed by action of the nominating officer of the represented organization or the city council. 
(b)  The member described in section 2-251(4), one regular member identified in section 2-251(5), and one alternate member shall serve a term of two term years with terms beginning in odd numbered years. 
(c)  Two regular members described in section 2-251(5) and one alternate member shall serve a term of two term years with terms beginning in even numbered years. 
( Ord. No. 3567 , § 1, 4-16-2019)  
Sec. 2-254. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies on the committee shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made, such appointee to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of the position that was vacated. 
( Ord. No. 3567 , § 1, 4-16-2019)  
Sec. 2-255. - Organization; meetings; rules of procedures; quorum; vote. 
(a)  The regular members of the committee shall organize and select their own officers each year Only regular members are eligible to serve as officers of the board. 
(b)  The committee shall hold regular meetings and shall designate the time and place of such meetings. 
(c)  The regular members of the committee shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of the committee's meetings and shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(d)  A majority of the voting members of the committee, inclusive of alternate members sitting as regular members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
( Ord. No. 3567 , § 1, 4-16-2019)  
Sec. 2-256. - Compensation; expenditures; debts. 
The members of the committee shall serve without compensation, and, when it is deemed necessary by the committee to incur any expenses in performing the duties assigned to it, an estimate of proposed expenses shall be submitted to the city council, and no debts of any kind or any character shall be made or incurred by the committee, or anyone acting for the board, unless such expenditures have been specifically authorized by the city council prior to the time such obligations are incurred 
( Ord. No. 3567 , § 1, 4-16-2019)  
Sec. 2-257. - Purpose and authority. 
(a)  The purpose and authority of the committee shall be to: 
(1)  Study, consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the selection, acquisition, location, and disposition of public art in accordance with the city's public art policy; 
(2)  Develop and recommend to the city council programs that promote the general community interest, awareness, and participation in the city's public art program, including, but not limited to, the donation of artwork to be accepted as public art; 
(3)  Recommend amendments to the public art policy from time to time; 
(4)  Perform such other tasks assigned to the committee by the city's public art policy; and 
(5)  Perform such other tasks and projects as may from time to time be assigned to the committee by the city council. 
(b)  The committee shall be solely advisory. Neither the committee nor its officers or members individually shall have any authority to take any action which legally binds the city to any contract or other obligation, including, but not limited to, the expenditure of funds or the acceptance of grants or donations. 
( Ord. No. 3567 , § 1, 4-16-2019)  
Secs. 2-258—2-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - SENIOR ADVISORY BOARD[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3254, § 1, adopted Jan. 21, 2014 , amended Div. 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 10, §§ 2-261—2-268, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Created. 
The senior advisory board is hereby created. 
( Ord. No. 3254, § 1, 1-21-2014 )  
Sec. 2-262. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section: 
Board means the senior advisory board. 
Members shall collectively mean regular members and alternate members of the board. 
Senior advisory board site means the property located at 14055 Dennis Lane. 
( Ord. No. 3254, § 1, 1-21-2014 )  
Sec. 2-263. - Membership; appointment. 
The senior advisory board shall consist of seven regular members and two alternate members appointed by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 3254, § 1, 1-21-2014 ; Ord. No. 3563, § 7(A), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-264. - Qualifications of members; terms of office. 
(a)  The members of the senior advisory board shall be residents of the city, at least 50 years of age at the time of their appointment, a registered participant of the branch connection, and shall be appointed by the city council for staggered terms commencing as follows: 
(1)  Four regular members and one alternate member being appointed for terms of two term years commencing in odd numbered years. 
(2)  Three regular members and one alternate member being appointed for terms of two term years commencing in even numbered years. 
(b)  All vacant board positions shall be filled by the city council. The appointee is to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of the position which was vacated. 
( Ord. No. 3254, § 1, 1-21-2014 ; Ord. No. 3563, § 7(B), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-265. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3563 , § 7(C), adopted Apr. 2, 2019, repealed § 2-265, which pertained to removal from office, and derived from Ord. No. 3254, § 1, 1-21-2014.  
Sec. 2-266. - Organization; meetings; rules of procedures; quorum; vote. 
(a)  The regular members of the senior advisory board shall organize and select their own officers each year. The election of officers shall take place at the regular board meeting in September. Willingness of nominees to stand for election to a board office shall be confirmed before his name is placed in nomination. Only regular members are eligible to serve as officers of the board. 
(b)  The board shall hold regular monthly meetings except July and August and shall designate the time and place of such meetings. Board meetings may be held in July and August if deemed necessary. Board meetings shall be public in nature. 
(c)  The regular members of the board shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of the board's meetings and shall keep a record of its proceedings. A majority of the regular members of the board, inclusive of alternate members sitting as regular members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The chair of the board shall only vote in case of a tie. 
( Ord. No. 3254, § 1, 1-21-2014 ; Ord. No. 3563, § 7(D), 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-267. - Compensation; expenditures; debts. 
The members of the senior advisory board shall serve without compensation, and, when it is deemed necessary by the board to incur any expenses in performing the duties assigned to it, an estimate of proposed expenses shall be submitted to the city council, and no debts of any kind or any character shall be made or incurred by the board, or anyone acting for the board, unless such expenditures have been specifically authorized by the city council prior to the time such obligations are incurred. 
( Ord. No. 3254, § 1, 1-21-2014 )  
Sec. 2-268. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The senior advisory board is created to advise the city council on programs relative to the senior center. The board shall generally have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Assist at the monthly breakfast sponsored by the board. Assist in planning and implementing any other events sponsored by the board. 
(2)  Participate in activities sponsored by the senior center whenever possible. 
(3)  Represent the needs and desires of the senior center users by making recommendations and periodic reports regarding the facility and programming to city staff and the city council. 
(4)  Carry out and perform such other matters as the city council may deem beneficial to the city. 
(b)  Elected officers of the board shall be a chair, a vice-chair, treasurer, and secretary. Duties of each officer are as follows: 
(1)  The chair shall preside at all meetings of the board; shall receive all communication directed to the board; and shall advise and inform members of pertinent information. He will make all necessary committee appointments. 
(2)  The vice-chair shall preside at all meetings of the board in the absence of the chair; if the office of the chair becomes vacant between appointments, the vice-chair shall complete the term of the chair. 
(3)  The treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all collections and disbursements and shall report at each regular board meeting the balance on hand. 
(4)  The secretary shall keep an accurate account of all proceedings of the board and shall be appointed custodian of all documents and records belonging to the board. The secretary must submit minutes from the board meeting within one week following the meeting date. 
( Ord. No. 3254, § 1, 1-21-2014 )  
Secs. 2-269, 2-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - SUSTAINABILITY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-271. - Creation; composition; membership; terms. 
(a)  There is hereby created a sustainability committee consisting of seven regular members and two alternate members appointed by the city council. Each member shall be a resident of the city. Members of the sustainability committee shall be appointed to serve terms of three term years each, said terms to be staggered so that only four members and one alternate member are appointed in a single term year and three members and one alternate member in another term year. 
(b)  The person employed by Brookhaven College in the position of director of sustainability or similar or successor position shall serve as an ex-officio non-voting member of the sustainability committee. 
( Ord. No. 3563, § 8, 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-272. - Organization; meetings; rules of procedure; record keeping; quorum; vote. 
The members of the sustainability committee shall organize, select their officers, hold meetings at stated times, designate the time and place of such meetings, adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings. A majority of the voting members of the sustainability committee, inclusive of alternate members sitting as regular members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
( Ord. No. 3563, § 8, 4-2-2019 )  
Sec. 2-273. - Purpose and responsibilities. 
The sustainability committee will research and review in detail possible projects and will submit recommended projects or initiatives for city council consideration. The sustainability committee shall have such time as is reasonably necessary to assess current city facilities and needs, identify projects for consideration, determine costs and prioritize possible projects. The sustainability committee shall, following completion of its assessment process, prepare and submit a written report presenting its recommendations to the city council. 
( Ord. No. 3563, § 8, 4-2-2019 )  
Secs. 2-274, 2-275. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CODE OF ETHICS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3479 , § 1, adopted Jan. 23, 2018, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 2-276—2-287, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3349, § 1, 11-17-2015. 
Charter reference— Code of ethics to be adopted by the city council, § 2.02(b); personal financial interest in contract or sales, § 9.02. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-276. - Purpose. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of the city; that no officer shall permit any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engagement in any business, transaction or professional activity to conflict with the proper discharge of such person's duties in the public interest; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the city council at all times shall be maintained as a nonpartisan body. To implement such a policy, the city council deems it advisable to enact a code of ethics for officials, as defined in this article, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, to serve not only as a guide for official conduct of the city's public servants, but also as a basis for discipline for those who refuse to abide by its terms, the over-riding interest being that such officers of the city shall at all times strive to avoid even the appearance of impropriety. 
( Ord. No. 3479 , § 1, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 2-277. - Title; application. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the code of ethics. 
(b)  This code of ethics shall apply to all officials as defined in this article. 
(c)  This code of ethics does not apply to employees, including those individuals employed on a full-time, part-time or internship basis (including those who may serve on a city board, committee or commission) nor to independent contractors of the city. The standards of conduct for employees are governed by the City of Farmers Branch Personnel Policies and the City Charter. 
(d)  This code of ethics applies to members of all city boards, committees or commissions as defined in this article. 
(e)  This code of ethics applies to the conduct or actions of public officers, as defined in this article which occurs in whole or in part after the date of adoption of this article. 
(f)  This code of ethics applies to officers only while such persons hold such position or office. 
( Ord. No. 3479 , § 1, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 2-278. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Benefit means anything reasonably regarded as pecuniary or economic gain or pecuniary or economic advantage, including benefit to any other person in whose welfare the beneficiary has a direct and substantial interest. 
Business entity means any person, entity, corporation (whether for-profit or nonprofit), general or limited partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, unincorporated association or firm, institution, trust, foundation, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, or other entity recognized by law, whether or not organized for profit, which has an economic interest, or seeking such, in conducting business with the city. Business entity also includes any business entity that represents a party conducting or seeking to conduct business with the city. 
City means the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
City council means the governing body of the city. 
Confidential information means any information to which an official has access in such person's official capacity which may not be disclosed to the public except pursuant to state and/or federal law and which is not otherwise a matter of public record or public knowledge. Confidential information includes the following information, however transmitted: (i) any information from a meeting closed to the public pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act or other law regardless of whether disclosure violates the Texas Open Meetings Act or Texas Public Information Act; (ii) any information protected by attorney client, attorney work product, or other applicable legal privilege; and (iii) any information deemed confidential by law. 
Contract means any lease, claim, account or demand against or agreement with any entity or person, whether express or implied, executed or executory, oral or written. 
Corporation means any corporation that has a board of directors appointed in whole or in part by the city council that is operating under the direct authority of or subject to the direct control of the city council. 
Employee means any person employed by the city, including those individuals on a part-time or internship basis, but does not include independent contractors. 
Gift means anything of value, regardless of form, offered or given in the absence of adequate and lawful consideration. It does not include the receipt or acceptance of campaign contributions which are regulated by federal, state, and/or local laws or ordinances. 
Knowingly means a person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to the nature of the person's conduct or to circumstances surrounding the conduct when the person is aware of the nature of the conduct or that the circumstances exist. A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to a result of the person's conduct whether the person is aware that the conduct is reasonably certain to cause the result. 
Officer or official means the mayor any member of the city council and any appointed member of a city board, commission or committee established by ordinance, charter, state law or otherwise, on a temporary or permanent basis, operating either under the direct or indirect authority or subject to either the direct or indirect control of the city council. Such term includes, but is not limited to, the members of the planning and zoning commission, the zoning board of adjustment, the Valwood Improvement Authority, the Metrocrest Hospital Authority, the tax increment financing reinvestment zone board of directors, the library board, the parks and recreation board, the animal shelter advisory committee, the municipal drainage utility system advisory committee, and the historical preservation and restoration board. Such term also includes the members of the boards of directors of corporations, such as the North Dallas Water Supply Corporation, the housing finance corporation, the industrial development corporation, and any of the local government corporation to which the city appoints a board of director, unless such person is an employee of the city. 
Relative means any person related to an officer within the second degree by consanguinity or affinity. This relationship includes the spouse, parents, children, stepchildren, father and mother-in-law, or son and daughter-in-law, grandparents, grandchildren, sisters and brothers of the officer. 
Special privileges means a right, advantage or favor of or for a particular person, occasion or purpose not otherwise available to others. 
Substantial interest means (i) the ownership of ten percent or more of the voting stock or shares of a business entity; (ii) the ownership of ten percent or more, or $15,000.00 or more of the fair market value of a business entity; or (iii) funds received from the business entity exceed ten percent of the person's gross income for the previous year, and action on the matter involving the business entity will have a special economic effect on the business entity that is distinguishable from the effect on the public. It is expressly provided herein that an investment or ownership in a publicly held company, in an amount less than $15,000.00 does not constitute a substantial interest. Substantial interest in real property means the person has an interest in the real property that is equitable or legal ownership with a fair market value of $2,500.00 or more; and it is reasonably foreseeable that an action on a matter involving the real property will have a special economic effect on the value of the real property distinguishable from its effect on the public. (Ownership includes any partnership, joint or corporate ownership or any equitable or beneficial interest as a beneficiary of a trust.) An officer is considered to have a substantial interest under this code of ethics if a person related to the officer in the second degree of consanguinity or affinity has a substantial interest under this code of ethics. A relationship within the second degree by affinity (marriage) includes the officer's spouse, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepchild, sister-in-law (brother's spouse or spouse's sister), brother-in-law (sister's spouse or spouse's brother), spouse's grandmother, spouse's grandfather, spouse's granddaughter, and spouse's grandson. A relationship within the second degree by consanguinity (blood) includes the officer's father, mother, daughter, son, sister, brother, grandparent and grandchild. 
( Ord. No. 3479 , § 1, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 2-279. - Standards of conduct. 
No officer of the city or a relative thereof shall: 
(1)  Have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city nor shall such person be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, or rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies or service. The "financial interest" contemplated under this section requires that such person receive an actual financial benefit from the transaction with the city. An actual financial benefit from the transaction shall include: 
a.  An ownership in the entity transacting business with the city where the ownership interest is more than ten percent. 
b.  Compensation as an employee, officer or director of the entity transacting business with the city where such compensation is affected by the entity's transaction with the city. 
(2)  Participate in a vote or decision on any matter in which the officer has a substantial interest. 
(3)  Represent or appear in behalf of private interests of others before the city council, or any agency, board, commission, corporation, or committee of the city, nor shall represent any private interests of others in any action or proceeding involving the city, nor voluntarily participate on behalf of others in any litigation to which the city is, or might be, an adverse party. The restrictions of this subsection do not prohibit an officer, or relative of an officer, who is the president, vice president or officer of a homeowners association from appearing before the city council, or any agency, board, commission, or committee of the city to represent such homeowners association, except that no such officer or relative of such officer shall appear before the agency, board, commission or committee of the city of which such officer is a member. 
(4)  Accept any gift from any person that might reasonably tend to influence such officer in the discharge of such person's official duties. The prohibition against gifts shall not apply to: 
a.  A lawful campaign contribution; 
b.  An honorarium in consideration for services unless the officer would not have been asked to provide the services but for the officer's position; 
c.  Meals, lodging, transportation in connection with services rendered by the officer at a conference, seminar or similar event that is more than merely perfunctory; 
d.  Complimentary copies of trade publications and other related materials; 
e.  Attendance at hospitality functions at local, regional, state or national association meetings and/or conferences; 
f.  Any gift which would have been offered or given to the person if such person was not an officer or employee of the city; 
g.  An occasional item with a value less than $50.00; 
h.  Tee shirts, caps and other similar promotional material; 
i.  Meals, transportation and lodging in connection with a seminar or conference at which the officer is providing services; 
j.  Gifts on account of kinship or a personal, or professional, or business relationship independent of the officer's status; 
k.  Complimentary attendance at political or charitable fund-raising events; and 
l.  Meals, lodging, transportation, or entertainment furnished in connection with public events, appearances or ceremonies related to official city business, if furnished by the sponsor of such public events. 
(5)  Use such person's official position to secure special privileges or benefits for such person or others. 
(6)  Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen, individual, business organization or group beyond that which is normally available to every other citizen, individual, business organization or group. 
(7)  Disclose confidential information. 
(8)  Engage in any outside activities which will conflict with or will be incompatible with such person's official position or duties as an officer of the city. 
(9)  Use city supplies, personnel, property, equipment or facilities (whether tangible or intangible) for any purpose other than the conduct of official city business, unless otherwise provided for by law, ordinance or city policy. 
(10)  Act as a surety on any official bond required for any officer or employee of the city, or for a business that has a contract, work or business with the city. 
(11)  Participation in city vendor reward programs that provide cash, gifts or other items of value to the officer based on city purchases; provided, however, an officer may accept frequent flier miles, car rental reward points, and/or lodging reward points accumulated by the officer for city sponsored or reimbursed travel expenses for official city business. 
(12)  Fail to timely file the written confirmation of compliance with this article as required by section 2-282. 
(13)  Solicit, request or encourage employees while such employees are on duty to engage in political activities. 
( Ord. No. 3479 , § 1, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 2-280. - Additional standards. 
(a)  No member of the city council who is on the board of a nonprofit organization may vote on any funding request by that nonprofit organization, unless the nonprofit organization has a board of directors or trustees appointed in whole or in part by the city council. 
(b)  With the exception of those proceedings allowed under this article, no member of the city council shall personally appear in such person's own behalf before the city council, or any city board, commission, corporation or committee but may designate and be represented by a person of such person's choice in any such personal matter. 
(c)  No member of the city council, the planning and zoning commission, or zoning board of adjustment shall participate in, or vote on, any land use matter in which such officer has a substantial interest in any real property within 200 feet of the real property, the subject of the land use matter. For purposes of this subsection, "land use matter" shall mean zoning, plat approval, site plan or other development approvals or permits, variances or exceptions. The term "land use matter" does not include studies or similar matters that are for the benefit of the city and which are not unique to real property within 200 feet of the real property, the subject of the land use matter, in which the officer has a substantial interest. 
(d)  The mayor and members of the city council shall not direct or request the appointment to or removal from office of any person by the city manager or any of the city manager's subordinates. The mayor or members of the city council may consult with and advise the city manager, make inquiry regarding the appointments or removals and may express their opinion in regard thereto. 
(e)  In regard to administrative and executive duties under the city manager, the mayor and members of the city council shall deal solely through the city manager. The mayor and members of the city council shall not give orders or directions to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
(f)  No officer shall engage in any conduct that is conduct described in and prohibited by the City of Farmers Branch, Texas Ethics Handbook for Elected Official and Advisory Boards adopted by the City Council November 17, 2015, pursuant to Resolution No. 2015-120 ("Ethics Handbook") set forth below. In the event of any irreconcilable conflict between the other provisions of this article and the provisions of the Ethics Handbook, the other provisions of this article shall control. 
I. City of Farmers Branch Ethics Policy 
IT IS THE POLICY of the City of Farmers Branch to uphold, promote and demand the highest standards of ethics from all of its officials, whether elected to City Council or appointed to advisory boards. Accordingly, the City Council, pursuant to Section 2.02 of the City Charter, has enacted a Code of Ethics ("the Code of Ethics") applicable to the City Council and all members of City boards, commissions, committees ("elected officials and advisory board members") in order to better ensure that all City officials maintain the utmost standards of personal integrity, truthfulness, honesty, and fairness in carrying out their public duties, avoid any improprieties in their roles as public servants, comply with all applicable laws, and never use their City position or powers improperly or for personal gain. One of the City's guiding principles is "doing the right things for the right reasons delivers appropriate results." The pursuit of transparency and accountability wherever possible helps achieve this principle and illustrates the City's commitment to good government and high ethical standards. 
The City of Farmers Branch and its elected officials and advisory board members all share a commitment to ethical conduct in service to their community. This handbook has been created to ensure that all elected and appointed officials and advisory board members have clear guidance for carrying out their responsibilities. 
II. Applicable Laws and Policies 
A. General Character 
Elected officials and advisory board members are often called upon to make decisions that affect various groups and individuals adversely. Balancing diverse constituent interests is a difficult task. While someone will always be disappointed in decisions, officials shall adhere to ethical standards that eliminate disappointment borne of dishonesty, conflicts of interest, unfairness or illegality. Preservation of public trust is critical for the preservation of democracy. 
A certain amount of detail is required in any code of ethics so that it serves as a clear guide. However, at the core of ethical behavior are some basic standards that officials shall use to reach a level of conduct that strives to be beyond reproach. Treating others as you would have them treat you is always a good ethical test. Another standard is to reflect on how your actions or decisions might be viewed by persons you or the public holds in high regard because of their ethical integrity. 
1. Honesty and Integrity. 
Honesty and integrity shall be the primary values in all issues. The public trust in the City Council and citizen boards can be a reality only when public officials are truthful. 
2. Fairness and Respect. 
All issues and citizens shall be handled with fairness, impartiality and respect. Elected officials and advisory board members have an obligation to treat all citizens fairly, such as by dividing time reasonably among potential speakers on an issue at a public hearing or meeting. In reviewing, discussing and deciding issues, City Councilmembers and citizen advisory board members have an obligation to be accessible, open and direct, not only with the other members of the City Council or board, but also to the citizens and business representatives who appear before them. The public is entitled to communicate with their public servants and understand the position of the City Council and boards on public issues. 
3. Effort. 
Elected officials and advisory board members have an obligation to attend meetings and to be prepared. It is expected that these officials will review the materials, participate in discussions and make an informed decision on the merits of the issue. 
B. Conflict of Interest 
Elected officials and advisory board members must be constantly on guard against conflicts of interest. In short, elected officials and advisory board members shall not be involved in any activity which conflicts with their responsibilities to the City and its residents. Citizens of Farmers Branch have a right to expect independence and fairness toward all groups without favoring individuals or personal interests. 
1. Self-Dealing and Financial Disclosure. 
Texas conflict-of-interest laws, in particular the provisions of Chapter 171 of the Texas Local Government Code ("Chapter 171"), apply to members of the City Council and other City officers, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. The Code of Ethics incorporates many of the provisions of Chapter 171 and applies them to the members of the City's boards and commissions. As a result, every Councilmember and board and commission member must be consistently aware of any potential issues which may appear to be self-dealing. Officials must not be involved in discussing or deciding any issue over which they have jurisdiction as a City Council or board member which may impact the member, or the member's family, financially. 
The Code of Ethics provides that a City officer (which, for purpose of the Code of Ethics includes Councilmembers and City board and commission members) shall not participate in a vote or decision on any matter in which the officer has a "substantial interest." An officer has a "substantial interest" in the matter if the matter involves a business entity in which the officer: 
• owns 10% or more of the voting stock or shares of the entity 
• owns 10%, or $15,000, of the fair market value of the entity 
• 10% of the officer's gross income for the prior year consisted of funds received from the entity; 
and the action will not have a special economic affect on the entity distinguishable from the public. 
As it relates to real property, an officer has a substantial interest in the matter if the officer owns an equitable or legal interest in the property with a fair market value of $2,500 or more and it is reasonably foreseeable that the matter will have a special economic affect on the value of the real property distinguishable from its affect on the public. For example, in a case involving the zoning of a property, if the officer owns property within 200 of the property being rezoned and receives a public hearing notice regarding that case, it will be presumed the officer's property will be affected in a manner distinguishable from other property in the City. 
The conflict of interest rules also apply to interests a City official's relatives own in a business entity or real estate. Be aware that while Chapter 171 applies only to relatives in the "first degree of consanguinity or affinity" (i.e., parents, spouse, or child), the Code of Ethics extends the rules to also include the officer's relatives within the "second degree of consanguinity or affinity" (i.e., step-children, father or mother-in-law, son or daughter-in-law, grandparents, grandchildren, brothers, and sisters). This is stricter than state law. 
Prior to any meeting where a matter in which the City officer has a conflict of interest under Chapter 171 or the Code of Ethics, Councilmembers and board and commission members must file a conflict-of-interest affidavit with the City Secretary or the board/commission staff liaison, and then refrain from participating in any part of the meeting where the matter at issue will be discussed. This means the member cannot discuss, let alone vote, on the matter. Because any form of communication from the officer, including, but not limited to, emails, text messages, hand gestures, applause, frowns and smiles, etc., might be perceived as the officer's attempt to improperly participate in the discussion of the matter for which a conflicts affidavit has been filed, it is recommended that the officer remove himself from the meeting room during the consideration of the matter. 
2. Disclosure of and Policy on Acceptance of Gifts and Favors and Relationships with Vendors. 
Chapter 176 of the Texas Local Government Code ("Chapter 176") in general requires disclosure by elected officials and members of certain quasi-judicial boards when receiving items of value or any compensation other than their normal salary for any service rendered in connection with that person's duties with the City. The Chapter 176 disclosure requirements may under certain circumstances apply to members of other boards and commissions if as a board or commission member the person acts as an agent of the City by exercising discretion in the planning, recommending, selecting, or contracting of a vendor. 
A conflict-of-interest statement as outlined in Chapter 176 of the Texas Local Government Code must be filed by a City Councilmember or other City officer if the aggregate value of all gifts received by the officer or member of the officer's family from the same vendor exceeds $100 in the twelve months preceding the City entering a contract with the vendor or considers entering a contract with the vendor. For purposes of this disclosure, a "gift" does not include (a) a political contribution; (b) food accepted as a guest; or (c) if the gift is offered on account of kinship or a personal, professional, or business relationship independent of the official status of the recipient. A "gift" would include transportation, lodging, and entertainment, even as a guest. 
Similarly, a Chapter 176 disclosure must be made by a Councilmember or other City officer if the officer or the officer's family member has an employment or other business relationship with the vendor which results in the officer or officer's family member receiving taxable income of more than $2,500 in the twelve months preceding the City entering a contract with the vendor or considers entering a contract with the vendor. The disclosure requirement does not apply if the officer only receives investment income, regardless of amount. 
In addition, a Chapter 176 disclosure is required if the Councilmember or other City officer has a family relationship with the vendor. For purposes of this disclosure, a "family relationship" means a person related (i) within the third degree by blood (e.g. mother, father, son, daughter, brother, sister, grandmother, grandfather, grandson, granddaughter, great-grandfather, great-grandmother, aunt, uncle, nephew, niece, great-grandson and great-granddaughter) or (ii) with the second degree by marriage (e.g. spouse, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepchild, sister-in-law (brother's spouse or spouse's sister), brother-in-law (sister's spouse or spouse's brother), spouse's grandmother, spouse's grandfather, spouse's granddaughter, and spouse's grandson. 
This statement (Form CIS) must be filed with the City Secretary not later than seven (7) days after the Councilmember or other City officer learns of the basis for being required to file the disclosure. The disclosure must also be posted on the City's website. Vendors of the City have a similar disclosure requirement (Form CIQ) if they have a business affiliation or relationship with a local government official. Political contributions are exempt from these requirements and are addressed in Title 15 of the Texas Election Code. 
While Chapter 176 may not require members of all boards and commissions to file the statutory disclosure, the Code of Ethics requires all board and commission members to annually file a statement professing compliance with the Code of Ethics. This would include Section 2-279 of the Code of Ethics which prohibits an officer of the City from having a direct or indirect financial interest in contracts with the City. 
Under no circumstances shall a City Council or board member accept a gift or favor that is a bribe, or reflects, to a reasonable person, an effort to improperly influence the member contrary to that member's responsibility to the public to act impartially and on the merits of a matter. City Council and board members are expressly prohibited from participating in vendor reward programs that provide cash or gifts to the member based on City purchases provided however that the City Council or board member may accept frequent flyer miles car rental or lodging reward points accumulated by the City Council or board member for City sponsored or reimbursed travel expenses for official City business. Additionally, the Farmers Branch City Charter (Section 9.01) specifically prohibits the acceptance of any gift, favor, privilege, or employment from any franchised public utility of the City. The prohibition against receiving gifts does not apply to items of de minimis value and other identified categories of gifts listed in Section 2-279(d) of the Code of Ethics. When in doubt about these requirements, elected officials and advisory board members shall disclose the gift, benefit or favor. 
All disclosures will be kept for public record in the City Secretary's Office. 
Gifts having a value greater than $50 that are donated to the City or a bona fide charity also do not need to be reported. 
Gifts exceeding $50 in value and intended for the City rather than as a personal gift to a Councilmember or board member are not prohibited provided such items are timely delivered to the City's possession and become City property. Unreasonably delayed delivery of the gift to the City may subject the person to accusations that the person is making personal use of public property. 
3. Loyalty. 
Elected officials and advisory board members have an obligation to put the interests of the City of Farmers Branch over all personal considerations. Their goal should be "what is in the best interest for the broadest public good of the City of Farmers Branch, consistent with constitutional and other legal protections for property and other interests." 
4. Nepotism. 
As provided in the City Charter and Personnel Rules, no relative of a sitting Councilmember may be hired by the City, and no relative of a sitting advisory board member may be hired in the City department for which that advisory board member provides guidance. For a listing of relatives that are subject to this prohibition, refer to Section 9.16 of the City Charter. 
5. Purchase of City Property. 
No Councilmember or advisory board member shall purchase any personal property or real estate from the City regardless of the method of purchase excluding electronic computer tablet devices which have been issued to Councilmembers or advisory board members to be used as a resource during public meetings and for public email communications. These devices may be purchased by the user for fair market price at the end of a Councilmember's or advisory board member's term of office. 
6. Subsequent Appointments and Contracts. 
No Councilmember shall be appointed as an advisory board member within six months after the end of the Councilmember's term of office. No Councilmember or advisory board member, or a business entity in which the Councilmember or advisory board member has a substantial interest, shall be approved by Council to enter into a contractual purchase agreement with the City for a period of six months after the end of the person's term of office. 
C. Legal Compliance 
1. Meetings. 
Public Access: Open Meetings and Public Records 
Subject to certain exceptions, discussion of issues which may appear before the City Council or an appointed board are prohibited when a quorum of the members of the City Council or board is present. The Texas Open Meetings Act requires that the deliberations of its elected and, in some cases, appointed governing bodies be open to the public and that proper notice of such meetings be posted and made available to the public not later than 72 hours in advance of the meeting. Attempts by a quorum of the deliberating body to meet and discuss City business without fully complying with the Open Meetings Act is a criminal violation and can also be the basis for a charge of official misconduct pursuant to Section 9.18 of the City Charter. By local policy, all City boards and commissions, not just the City Council and other boards with quasi-judicial authority (e.g. Planning and Zoning Commission and Building Board of Adjustment), must comply with the Open Meetings Act. 
Similarly, though subject to certain exceptions, the City is required to make available to the public upon written request "public information" pursuant to the Public Information Act. "Public information" is information which is written, produced, collected, assembled, or maintained under a law or ordinance or in connection with the transaction of official business by a governmental body or by a third party on behalf of a governmental body. 
Public information can also include emails, text messages, blog and social media pages, and other types of electronic media discussing City matters. Written and electronic communications by Councilmembers or board and commission members relating to City business are often subject to disclosure to the public pursuant to a written request, whether such information is contained on a City-provided device or a personally owned device. Failure of a Councilmember or board or commission member to provide to the City Secretary copies of public information in their possession when a proper request for public information is received could (1) create a presumption that information that would otherwise by confidential to be public information and (2) result in the unlawful withholding of public information from the requesting party. Besides being a violation of the Public Information Act, any such lack of cooperation is likely to be considered contrary to the interest of the City and subject to sanctions under the Code of Ethics. 
2. Attendance. 
Attendance is outlined by the City Charter and is enumerated below: 
a. Mayor and City Council 
The City Charter provides that four (4) councilmembers may discipline another councilmember if the Councilmember misses three (3) regular (or 25% of the regular meetings in any six-month period) duly noticed meetings of the City Council without good cause. Duly noticed meetings of the City Council include regular council meetings, special council meetings, study sessions, policy sessions, executive sessions, budget review meetings, and council committee meetings to which a councilmember is assigned. 
The City Council generally finds that personal illness, family emergencies, military absences, family weddings, family graduation exercises, and bona fide business and vacation trips constitute good cause for nonattendance at council meetings. Whether good cause exists for any other absence shall be determined by vote of the entire City Council at the next regular meeting following the absence. The vote shall be taken after sufficient information is received explaining the reason for the councilmember's absence. 
b. Boards, Commissions and Committees 
The City's attendance policy for members of boards, commissions and committees provides that if a member fails to attend three (3) consecutive and duly noticed meetings of such groups without being excused for good cause, the City Council may declare the seat vacant and appoint a replacement. 
Members of City boards, commissions and committees are expected to attend all regularly scheduled meetings and should make every effort to do so. The City Council appoints members for their experience, background and perspective in a particular policy area, and desires the benefit of knowledgeable consideration and judgment. Moreover, boards, commissions and committees cannot conduct any business unless a quorum is present. Members should notify the chairperson of the board or the staff liaison regarding any meeting missed or to be missed. 
The advisory board, commission or committee shall decide by vote of the entire body at the next regular meeting following the absence, whether the absence was for good cause or not. Advisory boards, commissions and committees shall use the same standard for good cause as set forth above for councilmembers. 
3. Disclosure of Confidential Information. 
Texas law provides that, during a person's service with the City, no member of a City board, commission, committee or the City Council may disclose or use confidential information without appropriate authorization. The information is outlined in the Texas Open Meetings Act (Texas Government Code Chapter 551). For example, confidential information includes discussions during executive sessions and certain economic development information such as prospect leads. Unauthorized disclosure of confidential information to the public is a Class B misdemeanor. 
Likewise, disclosure of public information which is confidential, such as emails or memos consisting of attorney-client communications, documents relating to proposed real estate purchases or sales, or documents relating to pending litigation, is a potential violation of the Public Information Act. 
4. Discrimination, Sexual Harassment, and Harassment. 
Public decision-making must be fair and impartial and shall not be discriminatory. 
The City of Farmers Branch is an Equal Opportunity Employer and does not discriminate in its employment practice on the basis of race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, disability, pregnancy, military or veteran status, citizenship, genetic information, or any other characteristic protected by law, both internally and in the relationships of the elected officials and advisory board members with their constituencies. 
In addition, it is the policy of the City of Farmers Branch that the elected officials and advisory board members strive to create an operating environment internally and in the relationships of the elected officials and advisory board members with their constituencies, that is productive and free from intimidation, hostility or other adversity. Harassment of any sort - verbal, physical, visual - including intentional and unwarranted actions that would constitute sexual harassment were they to occur in an employment relationship, by any elected official or advisory board member, is prohibited and is considered a violation of the Code of Ethics. 
D. Political Activities 
Elected officials and advisory board members shall not use their political or appointed office to advance private interests. City Charter Section 2.02 prohibits the Mayor, Councilmembers, and board members from holding other public offices. 
Elected officials, advisory board members and candidates shall not engage in political campaigning at City meetings or within City buildings. They shall also not use public resources for political campaigning. For example, candidates or supporters of candidates shall refrain from circulating petitions during a City meeting and refrain from soliciting City employees to support their specific cause. City Council and board members are free to express their opinions about the public issues on the agenda before them, but they must not make campaign speeches at council or board meetings touting their, or another's, candidacy nor may they urge residents to vote for them or another, through words, signs, buttons or other means, during duly noticed meetings of the City Council or its citizen advisory boards. 
City Councilmembers shall not solicit, request or encourage employees while on duty to engage in political activities. 
E. Facilities, Resources and Expenses 
1. Expense Reports and Travel. 
When traveling on City business, elected officials shall conduct themselves professionally as representatives of the City of Farmers Branch. Officials are entitled to be reimbursed for actual and necessary travel expenses. Expenses must be documented completely and accurately and approved by a committee of Councilmembers designated for that purpose. Officials are asked to contact the appropriate City staff for assistance in travel plans and expense reports. 
2. Use of Equipment and Facilities. 
Elected officials and advisory board members shall not use City equipment or City facilities for private purposes, except to the same extent that they are available to the public. 
a. Software Management. 
Elected officials and advisory board members shall not make, use, accept or install illegal copies of computer software, documentation or templates. The City conducts periodic audits to ensure compliance with City policies on software installed on City-owned computers. 
The legality of software is ideally established by possession or accountability of the following five items: the original software diskettes, the license, the original manuals, documented evidence of purchase, or copy of the completed product registration. 
b. Electronic Mail. 
City-assigned electronic mail accounts shall be used only for City business or for minor personal use such as setting up medical appointments or communicating occasionally with one's family in a way that does not interfere with City business. City-assigned electronic mail accounts may not be used for personal business or for any campaign purpose. 
All City-assigned electronic mail is considered official City business and must be retained in accordance with the City's records management program. In general, electronic mail communications are public records and subject to disclosure under the public records laws. The Texas Public Information Act is found in Texas Government Code, Chapter 552. Because the Public Information Act has been expanded to include public information retained on private electronic devices such as laptops and cell phones, Councilmembers should do their utmost to only use their office City e-mail address when corresponding with the public or City staff about City business. 
3. Use of Staff. 
Under the council-manager form of government, the City Council appoints a City Manager, who directs the day-to-day operations of all employees. Councilmembers need to be sensitive to the role of the City Manager and City staff. In regard to administrative and executive duties under the City Manager, City Charter Section 2.10 requires the City Council to deal solely through the City Manager and expressly prohibits members of the City Council from privately or publicly giving any orders to City employees who are subordinates of the City Manager. 
Councilmembers may ask other staff members about the status of a matter and may ask for information, but Councilmembers shall not expressly or implicitly give orders or direction to staff, except through their participation on the City Council. They shall not try privately to influence the decisions or recommendations of staff members, but they may share information with staff. City Council and board members shall not intervene directly with staff on behalf of a particular constituent or organization on a pending matter, but shall participate with City Council or board colleagues in discussing and deciding policy matters for staff to carry out. 
Appointed board members shall work through the staff liaisons of their board. 
III. Procedures 
A. Where to Seek Advice 
Questions about this handbook, the City's Code of Ethics, a conflict-of-interest, compliance with open government laws, or other ethical issues should be presented to the City Attorney's Office. If time permits, requests should be in writing to the City Attorney directly. 
B. What to Do if You Are Uncertain 
The existence of an ethical issue often does not arise until a meeting is underway. Rather than risk an inadvertent violation of law, the safest course of action is simply to declare that a conflict may exists that prevents an elected official or advisory board member from participating. Indeed, if there is a consistent theme to this handbook, it would be: "If in doubt, don't." 
C. How to Declare a Possible Conflict 
If an official believes that a conflict-of-interest (or even a possible conflict) exists, then he or she should disclose the fact as soon as possible. For example, as soon as an elected official or advisory board member realizes that a conflict exists on a given matter, they must disclose the conflicting interest on the record for the minutes. From that point on, the official shall complete any required affidavit and not participate in any manner (by discussing, questioning or voting) in that matter. 
Declaring a conflict and not participating should be recognized as a necessary part of preserving public trust and should not be avoided simply because of delays or inconvenience. Indeed, officials should declare possible conflicts to avoid any appearance of impropriety. 
D. Where to Report Improper Behavior 
Elected officials and advisory board members have a duty to create the image and reality of a responsive, accessible and fair city government. Accordingly, City Council and advisory board members have a duty to report if another elected official or advisory board member is violating laws or ethics relating to city government, as set forth in the Code of Ethics and this handbook. Moreover, officials shall never attempt to use their authority or influence for the purpose of intimidating, threatening, coercing, commanding or influencing any person with the intent of interfering with that person's duty to disclose such improper activity. 
All complaints or allegations of a violation of the City's Code of Ethics against an elected official or advisory board member shall be made in writing on a form provided by the City, sworn to before a notary public, and filed of record with the City Secretary. A general complaint lacking in detail shall not be sufficient to merit investigation procedures outlined in the City's Code of Ethics Ordinance. 
IV. Penalties and Sanctions 
It is the intent of the City Council to educate, and, when necessary, discipline board or councilmembers who violate the City's Code of Ethics. Discipline shall be progressive, from the least punitive to the most punitive measures, unless the City Council believes progressive discipline does not provide the appropriate sanction because of the gravity of the offense, or because the City Council does not believe the sanction would deter future misconduct. In all instances, the totality of the circumstances shall be taken into consideration in resolving a matter, including the intent of the one accused of wrongdoing. This Code does not prevent informal resolution of minor infractions, such as by immediate corrective action of the possible misconduct. 
( Ord. No. 3479 , § 1, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 2-281. - Disclosure of substantial interest. 
Any officer who has a substantial interest in any matter pending before the body, board, commission, corporation or committee of which the officer is a member, before a vote or decision on such matter, shall file an affidavit stating the nature and extent of the substantial interest, and shall abstain from further participation in such matter. The affidavit shall be on a form provided by the city and must be filed with the city secretary. 
( Ord. No. 3479 , § 1, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 2-282. - Annual certification of compliance; sexual harassment training. 
(a)  Officers shall provide a written certification of compliance with this code of ethics, on a form provided by the city, upon taking office to the position appointed or elected, and on each anniversary date thereafter. 
(b)  Officers shall be required on annual basis to participate in sexual harassment training provided by the city. 
( Ord. No. 3479 , § 1, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 2-283. - Post service prohibitions. 
(a)  The city may not appoint any former mayor or member of the city council to any appointed position (compensated or not) with the city or to any city board, commission or committee established by ordinance, resolution, charter, state law or otherwise until at least six months has elapsed since the such person terminated the office previously held by such person. 
(b)  The city may not enter into any contract for the purchase or sale of real or personal property, labor or services with any former officer or business entity in which the former officer has a substantial interest until at least six months has elapsed since such person terminated the position or office previously held by such person. 
( Ord. No. 3479 , § 1, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 2-284. - Complaints against officers. 
(a)  All complaints or allegations of a violation of this code of ethics against an officer shall be made in writing sworn to before a notary public, and filed of record with the city secretary. The complainant may but is not required to use a form provided by the city. Such complaint shall describe in detail the act or acts complained of and the specific section(s) of this code of ethics alleged to have been violated. As determined by the city attorney a general complaint lacking in detail shall not be sufficient to invoke the investigation procedures contained herein; and anonymous complaints shall not be considered. Not later than the first business day after receipt the of the complaint by the city secretary, the city secretary shall provide a copy of the complaint to the affected officer, the city council, and the city attorney, who shall initially review the complaint to determine if the complaint contains sufficient detail and alleges a violation of the code of ethics. The affected officer may file a written response to the complaint with the city secretary within three business days after receipt of the complaint from the city secretary, who shall forward the response, if any, to the city attorney. 
(b)  Within three business days after notification by the city secretary, the mayor or mayor pro tem shall schedule a special called meeting of the city council to consider the complaint in executive session. At such meeting, the city attorney shall present a written report to the council describing in detail the nature of the complaint and the city attorney's findings and conclusions as to a possible violation of this Code. The non-implicated council members in attendance shall then review the complaint and either reject the complaint or invoke an investigation. In the event the city council decides to reject the complaint, the vote to reject the complaint shall be taken in open session without further investigation. In the event the city council decides to invoke an investigation, the city attorney shall select and appoint an independent private attorney to fully investigate the alleged improprieties. The investigating attorney shall report back to the council in writing within ten business days from such appointment, unless an extension is granted by a majority of the non-implicated council members. Such report shall be comprehensive and explain in detail all facts, findings, and conclusions in support of the attorney's opinion as to whether or not a violation of this code of conduct occurred. 
(c)  The city council shall consider the findings of the investigating attorney's report at the meeting in which it is presented, at which time the person(s) accused shall have the right to a full and complete hearing with the opportunity to call witnesses and present evidence on such person's behalf. The final action, decision, or vote of the council with regard to the complaint shall be taken or made only in a meeting that is open to the public. 
(d)  No action or decision with regard to the complaint shall be made except in a meeting which is open to the public. 
(e)  A complaint or allegation of a violation of this article may only be made against an officer while such person holds such position or office. A complaint made against an officer pursuant to this section shall be processed and resolved even if such person resigns from, or ceases to hold such position or office, prior to resolution of the complaint. 
( Ord. No. 3479 , § 1, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 2-285. - Violations. 
The city council may take any one or more of the following actions in an open meeting concerning a complaint: 
(1)  Issue a statement finding the complaint is totally without merit, brought for the purpose of harassment, or brought in bad faith. 
(2)  Issue a letter of notification when the violation is unintentional. A letter of notification shall advise the officer of any steps to be taken to avoid future violations. 
(3)  Issue a letter of admonition when the violation is minor or may have been unintentional, but calls for a more substantial response than a letter of notification. 
(4)  Issue a reprimand when a violation has been committed knowingly or intentionally. 
(5)  Remove from office an officer, other than a city council member, for a serious or repeated violation of this code of ethics. Removal shall be, to the extent by and allowed, in compliance with the charter and state law. 
(6)  Pass a resolution of censure or a recommendation of recall when the city council finds that a serious or repeated violation of this code of ethics has been committed intentionally by a member of the city council. 
(7)  Removal of the mayor or member of the city council in accordance with applicable state law and the charter. Section 2.02 of the City Charter provides that a member of the city council may be removed from office if they knowingly violate the city council code of ethics. 
( Ord. No. 3479 , § 1, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 2-286. - Interpretation of content. 
Any officer may request and the city attorney shall issue, a verbal or written opinion (as deemed appropriate) concerning the meaning or effect of any section, word, or requirement of this code of ethics as it affects such person. 
( Ord. No. 3479 , § 1, 1-23-2018)  
Secs. 2-287—2-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC RECORDS[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference— Public records act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-321—2-340. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ACCESS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3539 , § 1, adopted Oct. 16, 2018, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 2-341—2-350, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1969, § 2-7, Ord. No. 1619, §§ 1(A)—1(J), 2-3-1986; Ord. No. 2793, §§ 2—4, 9-20-2004. 
 
Sec. 2-341. - Designation of custodian of records; duties and responsibilities of the custodian. 
The city secretary or his designee shall be the custodian of records and shall be responsible for the preservation and care of the records of the city. The custodian of records shall process requests for inspection or copies of public information held or maintained by the city in compliance with the Texas Public Information Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code Chapter 552, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 3539 , § 1, 10-16-2018)  
Sec. 2-342. - Cost of copies and charges for access to records. 
All charges for the search for, retrieval, inspection, or provision of copies of public information maintained by the city shall be assessed in accordance with the Texas Public Information Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code chapter 552, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 3539 , § 1, 10-16-2018)  
Secs. 2-343—2-370. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference— Management of local government records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-371. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department head means the officer who by ordinance, order or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Municipal records means all documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business. Such records shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this division or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
Permanent records means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records liaison officers means the persons designated under section 2-379. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of record keeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules; the management of filing and information retrieval systems; the protection of essential and permanent records; the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records; control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports and correspondence; and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-375. 
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-374. 
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-376. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording or receipt of a record, or fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 1919, §§ 1, 2, 12-10-1990) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-372. - Municipal records declared public property. 
All municipal records are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipality official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 3, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-373. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the local government records act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq., and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 4, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-374. - Designation of records management officer. 
The office of the city secretary, and successive holders of such office, shall serve as the records management officer for the city. Such designation was adopted by the city council on June 4, 1990, pursuant to Resolution No. 90-093. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his name with the director and librarian of the state library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-375. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
A records management committee consisting of the assistant city manager, personnel director, community services director, finance director and chief of police shall be established to execute the following duties: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 6, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-376. - Plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city manager and city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of record keeping, adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and properly preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his duties prescribed by state law and this division effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored and microfilmed. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities or record keeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from application of this division and the records management plan adopted under it, and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 7, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-377. - Duties of records management officer. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this division, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal departments by preparation of manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city manager, city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this division; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of municipal records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city manager, who shall report to the city council, on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13) of this section; and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city manager noncompliance by department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the local government records act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. The city manager will keep the city council informed of any noncompliance with this program. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 8, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-378. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this division, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this division; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs and duties for which the department head and his staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 9, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-379. - Designation of records liaison officers. 
Each department head shall designate a member of his staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that, in the best interests of the records management program, more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his department. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 10, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-380. - Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this division, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 11, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-381. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis, listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the record keeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the members of the records management committee. 
(d)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 12, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-382. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-376 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 13, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-383. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule, and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 14, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-384. - Records center. 
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-376, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-376. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 15, 12-10-1990)  
Sec. 2-385. - Micrographics. 
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by an order of the city, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of municipal records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the state library and archives commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency and compliance with commission rules. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 16, 12-10-1990)  
Secs. 2-386—2-415. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[17] 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Charter reference— Budget, art. IV; bonds and other evidences of indebtedness, art. V; exemptions from garnishment, execution, etc., § 9.06; annual audit, § 2.18. 
State Law reference— Assessment and collection of taxes, art. VI; financial matters, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-416—2-435. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES 
 
Sec. 2-436. - Returned checks; processing fees. 
(a)  The city council hereby establishes, pursuant to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9022, a processing fee in an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code which shall be charged to the drawer or endorser of a returned check which is presented to the city. 
(b)  On any occasion in which the city is presented with a returned check, the amount due along with the processing fee described in subsection (a) of this section must be paid in either cash, certified check, money order or credit card. 
(c)  In those situations where the city has received on two or more separate occasions a returned check, within a 12-month calendar period, subsequent payments shall be paid in cash or via certified check, money order or credit card for a 12-month calendar period subsequent to the date of the most recent returned check. 
(Ord. No. 1683, §§ 1—3, 3-9-1987)  
Sec. 2-437. - Investigative fee for background checks for handgun applicants; authorized; collection. 
(a)  A nonrefundable investigative fee is hereby authorized to be charged for each application received by the chief of police for background checks conducted under the federal Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act. 
(b)  The amount of this nonrefundable investigative fee shall be an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. This amount is found to not exceed the actual expenses incurred by the city in relation to the conduct of these investigations. 
(c)  The chief of police shall collect this fee and issue a receipt upon payment. This investigative fee shall be paid by the licensed firearm dealer who presents the application to the chief of police. The chief of police shall not accept an application presented until the investigative fee is paid. 
(Ord. No. 2220, §§ 1—3, 9-25-1995)  
Sec. 2-438. - Dr. Pepper StarCenter View Point rental fee. 
The rental fee for use of the View Point meeting space at the Dr. Pepper StarCenter shall be as follows: 
(1)  A minimum of $750.00 for use for a period of up to eight hours; 
(2)  $100.00 for each hour in excess of eight hours of continuous use, which amount shall not be prorated for partial hours. 
(Ord. No. 3103, § 1, 9-21-2010)  
Secs. 2-439—2-520. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL FUND DIVIDEND PLAN 
 
Sec. 2-521. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dividend means a sum determined by the city council from the surplus to be distributed to taxpayers. 
Dividend declaration date means the effective date of a city ordinance declaring a dividend for a particular year. 
Fiscal year means the year that commences on October 1 of the tax year and ends on September 31 of the next year. 
GAAP means generally accepted accounting principles. 
Surplus means, based on a certified audit of the immediately preceding fiscal year's general fund, a sum that reflects an addition to the unreserved and undesignated fund balance (GAAP basis) of the general fund for the fiscal year being considered declared by the city council, solely at its discretion, to be available to be returned to the taxpayers as a dividend. 
Tax year means the year in which the tax roll is certified and the tax rate is established to fund the subsequent fiscal year. The tax year runs from January 1 to December 31. 
(Ord. No. 2296, § 2, 11-17-1997) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-522. - Review of general fund. 
(a)  Commencing in the 1995 tax year and for the 1995—96 fiscal year, and each and every year thereafter, while this division is in force and effect, the city council upon receipt of a certified audit from the city's independent auditor shall review the condition of the general fund for the specific fiscal year addressed in the subject audit and determine the following: 
(1)  That the audit details unreserved and undesignated general fund balance and details the addition to the general fund balance from prior fiscal years. 
(2)  That the city council finds that the 90-day (one quarter of a year's general fund expenditures and operating transfers) fund balance reserve requirement has been established. 
(3)  That the city council finds that all multi-year financial objectives have been provided for and met. 
(4)  That the city council finds that funding for current year capital projects have been provided for. 
(5)  That the city council finds that all known and quantifiable outstanding liabilities have been reviewed and planned for. 
(6)  That any other needs, requirements or opportunities determined by the city council are established. 
(b)  The city council, after determination that all of the requirements in subsections (a)(1) through (6) of this section have been ascertained and satisfactorily met, may, solely at its discretion, determine that a surplus in the general fund exists and that such surplus shall be considered for distribution as a dividend back to the taxpayers as reflected on the certified tax roll for the tax year immediately preceding the fiscal year that resulted in the surplus. 
(Ord. No. 2596, § 3, 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 2-523. - Surplus; dividend. 
The city council in the event it determines that a surplus exists may solely, at its discretion, declare a dividend and to what amount. 
(Ord. No. 2296, § 4, 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 2-524. - Public hearing; budget amendment. 
In the event the city council declares a dividend, a public hearing shall be called pursuant to the city Charter for the purpose of amending the budget ordinance for the fiscal year being considered. No dividend shall be finally authorized and distributed until the budget ordinance is amended to reflect the dividend. 
(Ord. No. 2296, § 5, 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 2-525. - Dividend; distribution. 
The approved dividend shall be distributed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  All taxpayers that are listed on the subject years certified tax rolls shall be paid the dividend from the general fund based on the amount each taxpayer was billed after all exemptions, abatements and adjustments have been factored out, in proportion to what all of the other taxpayers have been billed. For example, if taxpayer Jones was billed $500.00 in taxes and all of the taxpayers were billed $100,000.00, taxpayer Jones would receive a dividend of 0.005 percent of the total dividend to be distributed. 
(2)  Taxes being protested in a lawsuit or bankruptcy will receive the payment of the dividend at such time as a final billing for the subject year has been determined. A claim for the dividend must be made to the city within 60 days of final billing determination if the determination is not made within two years of the dividend declaration date. 
(3)  No interest shall be paid on any dividend payments irrespective as to when the payment is made or the cause of the delay. 
(4)  Taxpayers with delinquent taxes for the subject tax year, or any other delinquent bill or charge owed the city, shall have their dividend payment credited against any delinquency. 
(5)  No surplus payment will be paid for less than $1.00. 
(6)  In the case of a dispute between taxpayers as to who is entitled to the dividend, the city will deposit the sum in the registry of the district clerk's office of the county and the taxpayers can then pursue the amount of the dividend in a court of law. 
(7)  Dividend payments not claimed for two years after the declaration shall expire. 
(8)  Dividend payments made with proportion errors will not require reapportioning of all dividend payments unless the error is significant and justifies a reapportioning as determined solely by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2296, § 6, 11-17-1997)  
Secs. 2-526—2-550. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PERSONNEL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-551. - Criminal history check of city volunteers. 
(a)  All individuals desiring to provide volunteer services to any city department or for any event sponsored or co-sponsored by the city shall consent to a criminal history check if required by the city manager. 
(b)  Failure to consent to a criminal history check as required by this section shall be grounds for disqualification for consideration for volunteer services. 
(c)  When required by the city manager, the city shall cause a criminal background check to be conducted on each prospective individual desiring to provide volunteer services to any city department or for any event sponsored or co-sponsored by the city. If upon review of a criminal history check an individual is determined to have been convicted of any of the following offenses, that individual will not be considered for volunteer services: 
(1)  A felony or a misdemeanor classified as an offense against a person; 
(2)  A felony or misdemeanor classified as an offense against public administration or official misconduct; 
(3)  A felony or misdemeanor classified as an offense against public order or decency; 
(4)  A felony or misdemeanor violation of any law intended to control the possession or distribution of any controlled substance; 
(5)  A felony or misdemeanor violation involving indecency with a child, or 
(6)  Any offense involving moral turpitude. 
(d)  The provisions of this section are administrative in nature and not subject to criminal penalties. 
(Ord. No. 3113, § 3, 11-16-2010)  
Secs. 2-552—2-580. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-581. - Additional rights, credits and benefits for the retirement systems. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 62.105, 64.202(f), 64.204, 64.406 and 64.410, which subtitle shall in this article be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the city adopts the provisions in this section affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (which retirement system shall in this article be referred to as the "system"). 
(b)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity, if the member has at least 25 years of credited service in that system performed for one or more municipalities that have participation dates after September 1, 1987, or have adopted a like provision under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 844.202(f). 
(c)  If a vested member, as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 844.204(b), shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in the event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may, by written notice filed with the system, elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of section 64.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the member lived and retired at that date under a joint and survivor and annuity (option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse. 
(d)  At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom subsection (c) of this section applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise payable under this section. If such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse. 
(e)  Any employee of the city who is a member of the system and who performed service for this city prior to September 1, 1987, (for which service that employee did not receive credit with the system because the employee was not at that time a member of the system due to his age at the date of his employment) is hereby granted service credit with the system for all of such service (performed after the date of his latest employment by the city) that is prior to September 1, 1987, for which the employee has not previously received credit with the system, pursuant to section 62.105 of the TMRS Act. 
(f)  The rights, credits and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this division pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(g)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a standard occupational disability annuity under section 64.408 of the TMRS Act or an optional occupational disability retirement annuity under section 64.410 of the TMRS Act upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of the system, provided that the system's medical board has certified to the board of trustees that: 
(1)  The member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's employment; 
(2)  The disability is likely to be permanent; and 
(3)  The member should be retired. 
Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of section 64.409 of the TMRS Act. 
(h)  The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (f) of this section are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under sections 64.301 to 64.308 of the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 11-16-1987)  
Secs. 2-582—2-610. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-611. - Authorization of updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401 through 853.404 as amended (hereafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on January 1 of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed updated service credit (as that term is defined V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d)). 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1 of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this division. 
(c)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100 percent of the base updated service credit of the member (calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c)). 
(d)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after January 1, 1996, on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2239, § 1, 12-4-1995)  
Sec. 2-612. - Increase in retirement annuities. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases stated in subsection (b) of this section monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increase under this section replaces any annuity or increase previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before January 1, 1996. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 2239, § 2, 12-4-1995)  
Sec. 2-613. - Dates of allowances and increases. 
(a)  The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement annuities under this division shall be effective on January 1, 1996, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made on January 1 of each subsequent year until this division ceases to be in effect under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.404(e), provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.404(d). 
(Ord. No. 2239, § 3, 12-4-1995)  
Sec. 2-614. - Active military service credit. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 853.502, Subchapter F of Chapter 853, Title 8, Government Code as amended, the City of Farmers Branch hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in Sections 853.502(b) and 853.503 of said Subchapter F, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in Section 853.505. 
(b)  In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the employees saving fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15.00. The city agrees that its account in the municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit. 
(Ord. No. 2634, §§ 1, 2, 10-1-2001)  
Sec. 2-615. - City liable for combined normal contribution rate and prior service contribution rate. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 855.501(j) of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended (which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act"), the city agrees to be liable for the combined normal contribution rate and prior service contribution rate for the city's participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the "system"), as those rates are approved by the system's board of trustees from time to time under the provisions of the TMRS Act, provided that the combined rate does not exceed 15.50 percent. 
(Ord. No. 2729, § 1, 8-4-2003)  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE LIABILITY PLAN 
 
Sec. 2-616. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Actual damages means compensatory damages only and interest, if any, which has accrued thereon but does not include punitive or exemplary damages, fines or penalties. 
City means the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
City attorney means the city attorney of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas or his or her appointed counsel. 
City vehicle means a vehicle or mobile equipment either leased or owned by the city or the personal vehicle of a plan member when used in the scope and course of the plan member's duties for the city. 
Plan shall mean the City of Farmers Branch Officer and Employee Liability Plan as established by this article. 
Plan member means: 
(1)  Any employee, or elected or appointed officer of the city, any former employee or elected or appointed officer of the city, or the estate of an employee, officer or former employee, or officer; 
(2)  Any member or former member of a city board, commission, or committee created by charter, ordinance or resolution of the city, or the estate of said member; and 
(3)  Any member of the board of directors of a nonprofit corporation created by the charter, ordinance or resolution of the city as an instrumentality of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3137, § 1, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 2-617. - Coverage. 
(a)  The city shall pay the actual damages, as provided in this article herein, arising from any claim, lawsuit or judgment against a plan member, whether or not the city is a party defendant, provided said damages result from an act or omission of the plan member while in the scope of such person's employment or office with the city; and 
(b)  This section shall apply only to acts or omissions occurring or alleged to have occurred after the effective date of this article and to acts or omissions occurring or alleged to have occurred prior to the effective date of this article which are not barred by any statute of limitations. 
(Ord. No. 3137, § 1, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 2-618. - Defense. 
(a)  The city will defend any suit against a plan member who is covered under this Plan, even if the suit is groundless or fraudulent. 
(b)  The city may investigate, negotiate, and settle any claim or suit covered under this article as it determines necessary. 
(Ord. No. 3137, § 1, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 2-619. - Limits of coverage. 
(a)  The city will pay actual damages covered by this plan which a plan member is legally obligated to pay, except that in cases arising from incidents or occurrences where the city's liability exists by virtue of the Texas Torts Claims Act, Chapter 101, Texas Civil Practices and Remedies Code, as amended, whether or not the city is a party defendant, the city will pay those actual damages covered by this plan which a plan member is legally obligated to pay up to, but not exceeding, the limits of liability provided by that Texas Torts Claims Act, Chapter 101, Texas Civil Practices and Remedies Code, as amended, for local governmental units. 
(b)  In addition to the coverage provided in subsection (a) of this section, the city will pay: 
(1)  The city's expenses in investigating and defending the claim or lawsuit; 
(2)  Costs taxed against a plan member in a suit covered by this plan and interest that accrues after entry of judgment before the city has paid any such judgment or has deposited payment with the court on that part of the judgment which does not exceed the limits of coverage; 
(3)  Reasonable expenses incurred by the plan member; and 
(4)  Attorney's fees ordered by the court to be paid by the plan member. 
(Ord. No. 3137, § 1, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 2-620. - Cooperation of plan member required. 
To be entitled to coverage under the plan, a plan member must: 
(1)  Unless the city has actual notice or knowledge, notify the city manager or city attorney in person or in writing as soon as practicable upon receipt of written notice of a claim or lawsuit, but no later than ten working days after receipt; 
(2)  Cooperate with the city attorney and, upon request of the city attorney, assist in making settlements, in the conduct of suits and in enforcing any right of contribution or indemnity against a person or organization who may be liable to the city because of injury or damage covered under the plan; 
(3)  Assist in the conduct of any hearing or trial, attend hearings and trials, assist in securing and giving evidence, and assist in obtaining the attendance of witnesses; 
(4)  Not, except upon advice of the city attorney or when questioned by a police officer at the scene of an accident, give any oral or written statement or enter into any stipulation or agreement concerning a claim or lawsuit; and 
(5)  Not, except at the plan member's own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation or incur any expense with respect to a claim or lawsuit without the consent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3137, § 1, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 2-621. - Exclusions. 
(a)  Coverage under the plan does not apply to claims or lawsuits: 
(1)  Brought by the city against a plan member; 
(2)  For damages arising out of the intentional or knowing violation of a penal statute or ordinance committed by or with the knowledge or consent of the plan member; 
(3)  For damages arising out of acts of fraud committed by or at the direction of the plan member with intent to deceive or defraud; 
(4)  For damages arising from official misconduct; 
(5)  For any act or omission committed while the plan member is operating a city vehicle without authority, or while the plan member is operating a city vehicle in the course of personal or private business; 
(6)  For liability assumed by the plan member under a contract, unless the contract is entered into with appropriate legal authority at the direction of the city; 
(7)  For any claim or cause of action if the plan member joins or attempts to join with the suit against the plan member a claim against the city for benefits under this plan; 
(8)  For any claim or cause of action if the plan member fails to comply with section 2-620 of this plan; 
(9)  For punitive damages under circumstances where such damages are not recoverable by law against the city; 
(10)  For damages awarded against a plan member to the extent the damages are recoverable under an insurance contract or a self-insurance plan authorized by statute while in the course and scope of employment, up to the limits of said insurance or plan; or 
(11)  For any obligation for which the city may be liable under the Texas Workers' Compensation Act, Unemployment Compensation laws, or any similar law. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city, in its discretion, on a case by case basis, from providing legal representation and paying actual damages, court costs and attorney's fees required to be paid by a plan member in any claim or lawsuit, to the extent allowed by law. 
(c)  Any coverage under this plan shall be excess over any other insurance prior or subsequent hereto, and by whomsoever affected, directly or indirectly, covering loss or damages. This plan shall be liable only for excess of any loss or damages to the extent caused by the plan member beyond the amount due from other insurance, if applicable, whether collectible or not. 
(Ord. No. 3137, § 1, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 2-622. - Subrogation. 
The city shall be subrogated to the plan member's rights of recovery against any person, firm, corporation, or organization; and the plan member shall execute and deliver to the city attorney whatever documents are necessary to secure those rights and shall do nothing to prejudice those rights. 
(Ord. No. 3137, § 1, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 2-623. - Legal representation. 
(a)  The city will provide legal representation for a plan member in a claim or suit in which the plan member is covered under this plan. 
(b)  If the city attorney determines that there exists a conflict of interest for the city attorney to represent a plan member, and the plan member is otherwise entitled to coverage under this plan, the city will pay the reasonable fee of obtaining legal counsel to represent the plan member. The city attorney may select outside legal counsel to represent such plan member. 
(Ord. No. 3137, § 1, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 2-624. - No creation of cause of action. 
Nothing contained in this plan shall be construed as creating a right or cause of action against a plan member nor giving a right to a third party to institute or maintain a suit which would not otherwise exist under law as a legal claim against a plan member. 
(Ord. No. 3137, § 1, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 2-625. - No defenses waived. 
The plan does not affect any defense, immunity or jurisdictional bar available to the city or a plan member. 
(Ord. No. 3137, § 1, 5-3-2011)  
Secs. 2-626—2-699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - USE OF CITY FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 2-700. - Issuance of permit. 
The city manager, or designee, is authorized to issue permits, licenses or other agreements with respect to the reservation and use of city parks and recreation facilities, meeting rooms in city buildings and other city facilities for events and meetings including the service of alcoholic beverages in such facilities. 
( Ord. No. 3505, § 2, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 2-701. - Designation of facilities. 
The city manager shall from time to time designate the city parks and recreation facilities and other city facilities that are available for use by the public for events and meetings. 
( Ord. No. 3505, § 2, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 2-702. - Policy regarding use of city facilities. 
The city manager is authorized to establish a policy for the use of city facilities as provided in this article. The use of city facilities as provided in this article shall be subject to the "Policy for use of City Facilities" established by the city manager, from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 3505, § 2, 6-5-2018 )  
Sec. 2-703. - Fees. 
The city manager is authorized to establish fees and deposits for the use of city facilities as provided in this article, unless such fee or deposit has been established by city ordinance or by resolution of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 3505, § 2, 6-5-2018 )  
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainment, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 26; signs, ch. 62. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Posting handbills or advertising in public places. 
No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise fix, or cause such action to be done, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public, to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, or flagstone; or any lamppost, electric light, telegraph or telephone pole, or hydrant; any tree or tree box; or upon any part of any public bridge or viaduct; or other public structure or building; or upon any pole, box or fixture at any public street or way, except as such may be authorized or required by the laws of the United States, the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 3-1)  
Sec. 6-2. - Posting advertising on private premises without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, stick or place any advertisement, handbill or placard, or any printed, pictured or written matter, or anything for advertisement purposes upon any private property, or to knowingly permit such advertisement to be done for such person's benefit, without first securing the permission of the owner or person in charge thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 3-2)  
Secs. 6-3—6-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-36. - Purpose of article. 
To protect the people of the city against the nuisance of and incident to the promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial handbills, with the resulting detriment and danger to public health and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity requires the regulation of such printed matter, and to that end the purposes of this article are specifically declared to be as follows: 
(1)  Protect the people of the city against the unlawful activities or operations of dissolute persons of criminal habits or tendencies, representing themselves as solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors, by requiring the registration of all such solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors, together with the names of their employers. 
(2)  Protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited by such persons, or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter. 
(3)  Protect the people against the health and safety menace and expenses incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial handbills. 
(4)  Preserve to the people their constitutional right to receive and disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency and good morals and public order, by distinguishing between the nuisance created by the promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial circulars, and the right to deliver noncommercial handbills to all who are willing to receive the handbills. 
(Code 1969, § 3-14)  
Sec. 6-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter; any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or other printed matter or otherwise reproduced original; and copies of any matter or literature which: 
(1)  Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; 
(2)  Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting interest thereof by sales; or 
(3)  While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed, or circulated, for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Handbill distributor means any person engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbills. 
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered in the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed in accordance with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, means any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold in public. 
Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter; any sample or device; any dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original; and copies of any matter or literature not included in the definitions of the terms "commercial handbill" and "newspaper." 
Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, wall, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place means any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings. 
(Code 1969, § 3-15) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-38. - Application of article. 
This article shall not apply to any person advertising his business or activity upon his own premises, if such business or activity is regularly established at a definite location in the city, nor shall the terms of this article apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers. 
(Code 1969, § 3-16)  
Secs. 6-39—6-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DISTRIBUTION 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Compliance with article required for those in business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a handbill distributor for hire, or for any person to distribute commercial or noncommercial handbills, without first complying with the terms of this article and all other relevant laws and regulations. 
(Code 1969, § 3-22)  
Sec. 6-72. - Registration requirements—Generally. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage, as principal, either in the business of a billposter for hire, or in the business of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills for hire, or who shall desire to distribute commercial or noncommercial handbills, shall register with the chief of police of the city. 
(b)  Such registrant shall furnish such information as may be required by the chief of police including, but not limited to, the name, the business address, a brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted by the applicant, the probable number of agents and employees, and such other information as may be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1969, § 3-23)  
Sec. 6-73. - Same—Distributor required to register daily. 
Every handbill distributor covered by this article shall, on each and every day that such distributor is to distribute handbills within the city, register with the chief of police. 
(Code 1969, § 3-24)  
Sec. 6-74. - In public place. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial handbill in or upon any public place within this city. It shall be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill at any public place. However, it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver of such noncommercial handbill, any noncommercial handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept such noncommercial handbill. 
(Code 1969, § 3-25)  
Sec. 6-75. - Upon or in vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handling, transmitting or distributing of any noncommercial handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle, who is willing to accept the noncommercial handbill. 
(Code 1969, § 3-26)  
Sec. 6-76. - On private premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position in the interest thereof, a sign bearing the words "no trespassing," "no peddlers or agents," "no advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested, nor to have their privacy disturbed, nor to have any such handbill left upon such premises. 
(Code 1969, § 3-27)  
Sec. 6-77. - In vacant private premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbills in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 1969, § 3-28)  
Chapter 10 - AIRCRAFT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AVIATION 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aircraft means any person-carrying structure for navigation of the air, designed to be supported either by the buoyancy of the structure or by the dynamic action of the air against its surfaces, including but not limited to airplanes, propeller-driven and jets, helicopters or lighter-than-air craft, such as balloons, dirigibles, and ultralights. 
Heliport means an area of land or water or a structural surface which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended for use, for heliport buildings and other heliport facilities. 
Helistop means the same as a heliport, except that no refueling, maintenance, repairs or storage of helicopters is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 1, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 1, 5-21-1984) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-32. - Minimum altitude of operation of aircraft other than helicopters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an aircraft, other than a helicopter, under 1,000 feet in the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 2, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 2, 5-21-1984)  
Sec. 10-33. - Release of advertising pamphlets, etc.; general prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to release or throw any object, advertising pamphlet or any solid or liquid material from any flying aircraft in such a manner that such material will fall within the city except when such actions are necessary in emergencies as provided in section 10-34. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 3, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 3, 5-21-1984)  
Sec. 10-34. - Exceptions to prohibitions; emergency matters; council approval. 
The city council may grant a special permit to a party to release solid or liquid materials from a helicopter or other aircraft, and permit the aircraft to be operated at a height level below the minimum requirements of this article when an emergency situation presents itself which calls for immediate action to preserve the health, safety, and general welfare and morals of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 4, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 4, 5-21-1984)  
Sec. 10-35. - Use of loudspeaker for advertising. 
It shall be unlawful to use a loudspeaker or other sound or noisemaking device in an aircraft of any type, flying over the city for advertising. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 5, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 5, 5-21-1984)  
Sec. 10-36. - Minimum altitude of operation of helicopters; exception. 
Except when necessary for takeoffs or landings, no person shall operate a helicopter below 1,000 feet above ground level. This section shall not apply to flights for law enforcement, emergency fire and medical purposes and other similar uses or to flights over well-traveled corridors as long as a sufficient height is maintained that in the event of a power failure, the pilot has sufficient room to make a safe and autorotational landing. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 6, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 6, 5-21-1984)  
Sec. 10-37. - Takeoffs and landings—Restriction generally as to helicopters; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to takeoff or land any helicopter at other than an approved heliport or helistop approved by the city council in compliance with the city zoning ordinance, building code, and regulations of the United States Federal Aviation Administration except under the conditions and terms set out in section 10-38. This section does not apply to landings or takeoffs for purposes of law enforcement, emergency fire and medical purposes and other similar uses, including governmental. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to land any aircraft on publicly owned or held property without permission from the requisite public entity except for governmental purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 7, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 7, 5-21-1984)  
Sec. 10-38. - Same—Authorization for limited purposes; time. 
On special and limited occasions and where there is a need, the city manager, or his authorized representative, may issue a permit to operate, land and takeoff a helicopter at a location that is not an approved heliport or helistop provided that the applicant complies with the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Sign application giving the following information: 
a.  Location. 
b.  Furnish plot plan showing the following: 
1.  General area. 
2.  Specific place where the helicopter is proposed to be utilized. 
3.  Show and indicate all safety measures to be used. 
c.  Type of helicopter. 
d.  Date and time. 
e.  Purpose of request. 
f.  Name of pilot. 
(2)  Certify that the pilot is a licensed pilot operating under a license issued by the Federal Aviation Administration of the United States. 
(3)  Certify that the helicopter has been rated or licensed by the Federal Aviation Administration of the United States. 
(4)  Furnish a certificate, affidavit or letter from the United States Federal Aviation Administration stating that the proposed site and plan meet all of the requirements of the administration. 
(5)  Furnish a certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00/$3,000,000.00 to cover all risks anticipated in the proposed operations, specifically covering the city as an entity and the general public. 
(6)  The applicant for the permit shall sign a hold harmless agreement indemnifying and releasing the city from any damages, injuries or causes of action that could arise from the operation of the helicopter that would constitute a taking or damaging under the state or federal constitution, a nuisance, either public or private, a trespass or as a result of an act of negligence or from any other cause of action. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 8, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 8, 5-21-1984)  
Sec. 10-39. - Rating aircraft. 
No helicopter which has not been rated or licensed by the Federal Aviation Administration of the United States or its successors shall be flown from, taken-off from, or landed at or upon any heliport or helistop in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 9, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 9, 5-21-1984)  
Sec. 10-40. - Conformity with federal air regulations. 
No person shall navigate any helicopter over, land upon or fly such helicopter from, or service, maintain or repair any helicopter or conduct any helicopter operations on or from a heliport or helistop within the city limits, otherwise than in conformity with the requirements of the federal air regulations as established by the Federal Aviation Administration, or its successors. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 10, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 10, 5-21-1984)  
Sec. 10-41. - Condition of aircraft; operation by unskilled or intoxicated persons. 
No person shall knowingly operate any aircraft above the city or give any exhibition of flying while such aircraft is in a defective condition which is likely to cause any accident or injury to person or property, nor shall any person operate an aircraft over the city at any time unless such person is fully capable of handling and controlling the aircraft so operated, nor shall any person operate any aircraft while under the influence of any drug or intoxicant of any nature so as to incapacitate such person from operating any such aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 11, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 11, 5-21-1984)  
Sec. 10-42. - Location of ground vehicles on heliport premises. 
Ground vehicles, other than those regularly employed in the service of helicopters at a heliport, shall stay within the limits of parking spaces and drives and shall not enter the landing area. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 12, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 12, 5-21-1984)  
Sec. 10-43. - Compliance with other regulations; additional requirements. 
(a)  No heliport or helistop shall be constructed, operated or maintained unless such heliport or helistop has been approved by the city council pursuant to the zoning ordinance and building code, and conducted, operated and maintained in accordance with all requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, or its successors. 
(b)  All persons desiring to operate and maintain a heliport or helistop within the city limits must furnish certificates, affidavits or letters from regulatory federal agencies, namely the Federal Aviation Administration and its successors, that the proposed airport, heliport or helistop meets all of the requirements of these agencies. 
(c)  All heliports or helistops must be properly marked with United States Federal Aviation Administration's heliport day marker. 
(d)  Suitable ground cover must be provided over any dirt or exposed area outside of the landing pad of a heliport or helistop in order to reduce dust. 
(e)  All elevated heliports or helistops shall provide clearly visible signs showing the maximum helicopter gross weight for which it is stressed. 
(f)  The operator or owner of any heliport or helistop shall furnish the city with certificates of insurance that fully protect the general public and the city from any damages that might be caused or arise from the operation and maintenance of the heliport or helistop. 
(g)  The owner or operator of any heliport or helistop shall sign a hold harmless agreement indemnifying and releasing the city from any damages, injuries or causes of action that could arise from the operation of any heliport or helistop that would constitute a taking or damaging under the state or federal constitution, a nuisance, either public or private, a trespass or as the result of an act of negligence or from any other cause of action. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any heliport or helistop to operate such areas in a manner that would create a public or private nuisance due to the noise, odor, soot, dirt, engineer road, dust, gas fumes or vibration as the result of the construction, operation and maintenance of a heliport or helistop. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 13, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 13, 5-21-1984)  
Sec. 10-44. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-14. Any person who shall aid, abet or assist in the violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In a prosecution for violation of this article, it shall not be necessary for the complaint to allege, or for proof to be made, that the act was knowingly done; nor shall it be necessary for the complaint to negate any exception contained in this article concerning any prohibited act. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 15, 6-6-1983; Ord. No. 1501, § 15, 5-21-1984)  
Chapter 14 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate places of public amusements, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.074. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BILLIARD HALLS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; miscellaneous offenses, ch. 46. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billiard hall means any building, room, place or establishment of any kind or nature whatsoever, and by whatever name called, where billiard tables are operated for profit, whether such hall is operated in connection with any other lawful business or not, save and except religious, charitable or educational organizations authorized under the laws of the state. 
Billiard hall operator means every person, firm, association of persons, corporations and every other organization, save and except religious, charitable or educational organizations authorized under the laws of the state, owning, leasing, managing or in any manner controlling the operation of a billiard hall. 
Billiard table means any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion with or without pockets upon which balls are impelled by a stick or cue, and where the player thereon does not, or is not, required to make a coin deposit causing an electrical connection of any nature or kind before such game may be actually commenced. 
License means a license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1969, § 5-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-32. - Scope of article. 
The licensing and regulatory provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Billiard tables kept in private residences or apartments which are used without charge by members of the family or bona fide guests. 
(2)  Billiard tables provided on the premises of religious, charitable, educational or fraternal organizations for the use of members or their guests, and not for private profit, although a charge is made for playing thereon. 
(3)  Billiard tables, for which a charge is made for playing, although such tables are located on the premises of bona fide clubs or social organizations not operated for private profit, which provide other membership privileges and activities usual in bona fide private clubs organized for the promotion of some common objective, and whose members must be passed on and elected as individuals, by a committee or board made up of members of the club. To fall within this provision, the affairs and management of such a club shall be conducted by a board of directors, an executive committee, or such similar body chosen by club members at their annual meeting. 
(Code 1969, § 5-12)  
Sec. 14-33. - Police officers authorized to enter. 
Officers of the police department on official duty are hereby authorized and empowered to enter at any time, for the purposes of inspection, and for the preservation and enforcement of law and order, any billiard hall within the city. 
(Code 1969, § 5-13)  
Sec. 14-34. - Notices to be posted in hall. 
Every billiard hall operator shall have printed and posted in prominent places in the billiard hall copies of sections 14-33 and 14-38. 
(Code 1969, § 5-14)  
Sec. 14-35. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard hall between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 9:00 a.m. on all days of the week except Sundays, when it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard hall between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(Code 1969, §§ 5-11, 5-15)  
Sec. 14-36. - Gambling, betting and alcoholic beverages. 
No person while in a billiard hall shall gamble, make any bet or drink or have in his possession any alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1969, § 5-16)  
Sec. 14-37. - Minors unaccompanied by parent or guardian prohibited from entering. 
No person under the age of 17 years shall be permitted to attend any billiard hall unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Code 1969, § 5-17)  
Sec. 14-38. - Misrepresentation to gain admittance for a minor. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to represent himself to be either a parent or guardian of any minor under the age of 17 years for the purpose of gaining admittance into a billiard hall. 
(Code 1969, § 5-18)  
Sec. 14-39. - Operator to prohibit violation of article. 
The operators of any billiard hall shall not permit the violation of any of the terms of this article, and any operator who knows or should have known of a violation of the provisions of this article in the operation of a billiard hall shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Code 1969, § 5-20)  
Sec. 14-40. - Remedies to be cumulative. 
Any remedy prescribed by this article for the enforcement of this article shall be cumulative, and shall not preclude resort to any other remedy provided by law. 
(Code 1969, § 5-21)  
Secs. 14-41—14-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Required for operation; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any billiard hall in the city, unless and until such billiard hall has been licensed for such purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 5-28)  
Sec. 14-62. - Application; contents. 
Any person desiring a license to operate a billiard hall which is required to be licensed by this article shall file with the chief of police a written sworn application for such license. Such application shall state the following: 
(1)  The location, by street and number, of the place, or building, and the name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  If the applicant is an individual that has not been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; that such applicant has not been convicted of a felony, or, if he has, the nature of the offense; and the length of his residence in the city. 
(3)  If a firm, association or partnership, all the information required by subsection (2) of this section shall be stated as to each individual composing the firm, association or partnership. 
(4)  If a corporation, that such applicant is organized and chartered under the corporation laws of this state applicable to such corporation, or, if a foreign corporation, that such corporation has complied with the laws of this state applicable to such foreign corporations. Information with reference to the operator or person in charge of the operation of the proposed billiard hall which is to be licensed shall be enumerated as such information is prescribed in subsection (2) of this section. In addition thereto, a statement shall be appended to such application listing the names of the incorporators or stockholders, and the amount of interest owned by each of them. 
(5)  The previous occupation or employment of such applicant for a period of five years next preceding the filing of such application. 
(6)  Such other and additional information as the council may from time to time deem proper and necessary. 
(Code 1969, § 5-29)  
Sec. 14-63. - Falsification of application information. 
The information given in an application for any billiard hall license prescribed by this article is for the purpose of determining whether or not the applicant therefor is a fit and proper person to operate a billiard hall. It shall be unlawful to misrepresent the kind and character of the billiard hall to be operated, or any other fact or statement made in such application, and any misrepresentation of any person, club or organization for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this article shall, in addition to the other penalties prescribed by law, be cause for the revocation of any license issued under the terms of this article in the mode and manner set forth in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 5-30)  
Sec. 14-64. - Misrepresentation; grounds for revocation. 
It shall be unlawful to misrepresent the kind and character of a billiard hall to be operated, or any other fact or statement made in such application, and any misrepresentation of any person, club or organization for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this article, in addition to the other penalties prescribed by law, is cause for revocation of any license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1969, § 5-31)  
Sec. 14-65. - Investigation of premises. 
No license shall be granted under this article unless it shall, upon an investigation by the chief of police, the director of public health, the chief of the fire department, and the building inspector, be determined that the premises desired to be used for the purpose of a billiard hall complies with the laws of this state and the ordinances of the city. Such officers shall, in their respective capacities, note their approval or disapproval upon the application. 
(Code 1969, § 5-32)  
Sec. 14-66. - Premises to be in proper zone. 
No license to operate a billiard hall shall be granted unless the premises sought to be used for such purposes are in an area where such use is permitted under the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 5-33)  
Sec. 14-67. - Fees to be paid; no refunds. 
(a)  The fees to be charged for each license, issued under the terms of this division, shall be in amounts established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  No refund of any license fee paid in accordance with this section shall be made by the city for any cause whatsoever. 
(Code 1969, § 5-34)  
Sec. 14-68. - Information to appear on face. 
Every billiard hall license provided for in this division shall state on its face to whom it is issued, the date it will expire, the address and location of the billiard hall, and whether such licensee is authorized to operate and conduct a billiard hall. Such license shall be signed and sealed by the assessor and collector of taxes. 
(Code 1969, § 5-35)  
Sec. 14-69. - Issuance creates no vested rights. 
No billiard hall license granted under the terms of this article shall be deemed the granting of a vested right, but such license shall remain subject to the terms and provisions of this article, and subject to future regulations as shall be promulgated by the city council by ordinance. 
(Code 1969, § 5-36)  
Sec. 14-70. - Posting in conspicuous place. 
Every billiard hall license issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of such hall, and in such a place and position that it may be easily read at any time, day or night. 
(Code 1969, § 5-37)  
Sec. 14-71. - Expiration; renewal. 
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall terminate one year from the date of such issuance. However, annual continuous licenses for billiard halls may be secured upon the payment of annual fees in amounts established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 5-38)  
Sec. 14-72. - Appeal from refusal to issue. 
(a)  If the chief of police shall refuse to grant a general license to any applicant under this article, the action of the chief of police shall be final unless the applicant shall, within ten days after the refusal to grant such license, file a written appeal with the city secretary, addressed to the city council requesting a hearing by such council upon the question as to whether or not his application shall be granted. 
(b)  If an appeal is filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the chief of police shall provide the city council with a record of all proceedings theretofore had with reference to the application, including the written application, together with the action of the chief of police and the reasons for such action. 
(c)  The city council shall, within 30 days, grant a hearing thereon to determine the correctness of the action of the chief of police. At such hearing, the city council may make such investigation as it may see fit to ascertain whether all the pertinent facts appear in the application. It shall be discretionary with the city council as to whether or not a license shall be granted, and such action as the city council may take thereon shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1969, § 5-39)  
Sec. 14-73. - Transfer. 
Billiard hall licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be deemed personal to such licensee and shall not be assignable. However, licenses issued under this article may be transferred from one location or place of business to another location after the chief of police has been given five days' notice of such proposed transfer, has investigated such new location or place of business and has given his consent to such transfer. 
(Code 1969, § 5-40)  
Sec. 14-74. - Corporate reorganization; effect. 
If any corporation having a billiard hall license issued under this article is reorganized or has a change of management, such license shall not continue in force until the chief of police has been given five days' notice of such reorganization or change of management, and until the chief has made an investigation of such reorganization and change of management, and has given his consent for the continuation of such license, after a determination that the personnel of the new management is fit and proper to operate a billiard hall within the terms of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 5-41)  
Sec. 14-75. - Revocation. 
(a)  If a billiard hall licensed under this article is not being conducted in accordance with this chapter, the laws of the state, or is being conducted in violation of the laws of this state, the chief of police may at any time give notice in writing to the operator, licensee, manager or other person in control of the operation and maintenance of such billiard hall that the permit or license issued for the operation and maintenance of such billiard hall has been revoked and canceled. 
(b)  The notice of revocation and cancellation set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall become a final revocation and cancellation after the expiration of ten days from the date of the service of such notice upon the operator, licensee, manager or other person in charge of the billiard hall, unless on or before the expiration of such ten-day period, the licensee, operator, manager or other person in charge of the billiard hall shall file with the city secretary a written appeal addressed to the city council. Such appeal shall request that the council grant such appellant a hearing upon the question of whether or not the permit or license issued by the city shall be canceled and revoked. 
(c)  If made and filed as prescribed in subsection (b) of this section, an appeal shall operate as a stay or postponement of the revocation and cancellation of such license, until such time as the city council shall grant a hearing and make a final adjudication upon the question of whether or not such license should be canceled. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date of the filing of such appeal, and such action and judgment of the city council, after hearing all the evidence and facts, shall be final and conclusive as to all parties. 
(Code 1969, § 5-42)  
Secs. 14-76—14-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Regulation of coin-operated amusement devices, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Coin-operated machine means every machine or device of any kind or character which is operated by or with coins, or metal slugs, tokens or checks. The terms "music coin-operated machines" and "skill or pleasure coin-operated machines" as those terms are defined in this section shall be included in such term. 
Music coin-operated machine means every coin-operated machine of any kind or character, which dispenses or vends or which is used or operated for dispensing or vending music and which is operated by or with coins or metal slugs, tokens or checks. The following are expressly included within such term: phonographs, pianos, graphophones and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or vend music. 
Noncoin-operated amusement device means any device operating in the manner of a coin-operated amusement device, but without a slot for the insertion of coins or tokens or similar objects to operate such devices; provided, however, that this does not include noncoin-operated amusement devices in private residences. 
Operator means any person, firm, company, association or corporation who exhibits, displays or permits to be exhibited or displayed, in a place of business other than his own, any coin-operated machine in this state. 
Owner means any person, individual, firm, company, association or corporation owning any coin-operated machine in this state. 
Proprietor means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club who, as the owner, lessee or proprietor, has under his control any establishment, place or premises in or at which such device is placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play. 
Service coin-operated machines means every pay toilet, pay telephone and all other machines or devices which dispense service only and not merchandise, music, skill or pleasure. 
Skill or pleasure coin-operated machines means every coin-operated machine of any kind or character whatsoever, when such machines dispense or are used or are capable of being used or operated for amusement or pleasure, or when such machines are operated for the purpose of dispensing or affording skill or pleasure, or for any other purpose other than the dispensing or vending of merchandise or music or service exclusively. The following are expressly included within such term: marble machines, marble table machines, marble shooting machines, miniature race-track machines, miniature football machines, miniature golf machines, miniature bowling machines, and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or afford skill or pleasure; provided, however, that every machine or device of any kind or character which dispenses or vends merchandise, commodities or confections or plays music in connection with or in addition to such games or dispensing of skill or pleasure shall be considered as skill or pleasure machines and taxed at the higher rate fixed for such machines. 
(Code 1969, § 5-54) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.002.  
Sec. 14-107. - Occupation tax. 
The occupation tax for each proprietor shall be one-fourth the tax levied by the state per amusement device used or played or exhibited for use or play. All proprietors' license taxes shall be payable annually at the first of each year or at the time an amusement device is placed in the proprietors' establishment. In no case shall any portion of the tax be repaid or refunded to the licensee. 
(Code 1969, § 5-56; Ord. No. 1288, § 1, 12-17-1979; Ord. No. 1992, § 2, 7-20-1992) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.451.  
Sec. 14-108. - Accessory and primary uses. 
When the primary use of a building or premises is retail, and when not prohibited by state law or other city ordinances, up to a maximum of five coin-operated machines may be placed in the premises of the retail store and shall be considered as an accessory use to the primary retail use. When more than five coin-operated machines are placed in a premises, it shall be considered a primary use and all regulations of the city will apply including a specific use permit, when applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1992, § 3, 7-20-1992)  
Sec. 14-109. - Application; issuance of decal. 
(a)  An application shall be filed in writing with the building official on a form to be provided by the city, and shall specify the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers and their addresses. 
(2)  The address of the premises where the coin-operated machines are to be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such place. 
(3)  The trade name and general description of the coin-operated machines, the name of the manufacturer and the serial number, and, if the applicant is a proprietor, the number of machines. 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the coin-operated machines, if other than the proprietor. 
(b)  The tax shall accompany such application. The application shall be first referred to the building official or his agent who shall make or cause to be made such investigation as they deem necessary. If the application is approved by the building official or his agent, the public works director shall remit the tax to the city treasurer. If the application is denied, the tax shall be returned to the applicant. All applications under this article shall expire on December 31. The tax decal shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the machine. Such decal shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, and in the case of a proprietor, the decal shall apply only to the machine for which such decal is issued. 
(Code 1969, § 5-57)  
Sec. 14-110. - Change in number of machines. 
In case a proprietor under the provisions of this article desires, after the expiration of any portion of any year, to increase the number of machines to be used or played, or exhibited for use or play in his establishment, he shall make application to the building official who shall approve the number of machines requested. 
(Code 1969, § 5-58)  
Sec. 14-111. - Sealing of machines by city; breaking seal a misdemeanor. 
The city levying an occupation tax on coin-operated machines is hereby authorized to seal any such machine on which the tax has not been paid. The city is hereby authorized to charge a fee in an amount as established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code for the release of any machine sealed for nonpayment of tax. Whoever shall break the seal affixed in the name of any city or exhibit, display or remove from its location any machine on which the seal has been broken shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.453.  
Sec. 14-112. - Regulations and prohibited acts while operating establishment. 
(a)  Keeping machines in plain view; gambling. All such machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of any person who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize or permit any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(b)  Regulations governing licensed establishments. Every business or place under this article shall at all times conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  The premises shall be kept and maintained in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition in accordance with all applicable statutes and ordinances, and all rooms or halls connected thereto shall be well-lighted and kept open and free from blinds, screens and obstructions. 
(2)  No loud, boisterous, indecent or suggestive conduct shall be allowed on the premises. 
(3)  No alcoholic beverages shall be served or consumed on the premises nor within the same building nor at any other place within 300 feet of the premises which is reasonably under the control of the owner, occupant, operator or custodian of the premises. 
(4)  No gambling of any kind shall be allowed on the premises. 
(5)  No loitering shall be allowed on the premises either within or without a building. 
(6)  Truants, as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Education Code § 25.088 et seq., shall not be allowed on the premises during regular public school hours. 
Any member of the police department having determined that such act or condition proscribed in this section is being committed or exists on the premises of a place or business licensed under this article, and the person creating such condition or committing such act are owners or employees of such premises or place of business, shall be authorized to immediately cause the premises to be closed and vacated until the hour of 8:00 a.m. on the next day immediately following such determination. 
(c)  Knowledge of this section's contents imputed to all permittees in hearing. Knowledge of the proscribed conditions and activities by the permittee's agent, officer, representative, employee, or servant shall be imputed to the permittee in any administrative hearing under this article. 
(d)  Penalty for violation of section. Any permittee, his officer, agent, employee or servant who permits on the premises any act or condition proscribed by this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Punishment shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 1-14. This subsection shall not be construed as a limitation to prosecute for any other offense or any permit revocation. 
(Code 1969, § 5-62; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 6-28-1982)  
Sec. 14-113. - City manager to enforce article's provisions. 
The city manager shall enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 5-60)  
Sec. 14-114. - Violations of article deemed public nuisances; disposal of machines. 
Any proprietor on violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be maintaining a public nuisance, and any police officer or the city manager or his agent who observes such violation shall seize all such machines in the establishment and, upon conviction of such person, the city shall proceed to dispose of the machines in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1969, § 5-61)  
Secs. 14-115—14-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BINGO[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Bingo, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 179d. 
 
Sec. 14-146. - State law provisions adopted; enforcement and interpretation. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 179d is incorporated in this article, as if set out word for word. This article shall be enforced and interpreted in accordance with Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 179d, as now set out and may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1661, § 2, 11-3-1986)  
Sec. 14-147. - Percentages of prizes awarded to city or county. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, the city is entitled to 50 percent of the fee collected under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 179d, § 19b on a prize awarded at a bingo game conducted in the city. 
(b)  If the county is entitled to a share of the fee imposed by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 179d, § 19b: 
(1)  The county is entitled to 25 percent of the fee collected under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 179d, § 19b on a prize awarded at a bingo game conducted in the county; and 
(2)  The city is entitled to 25 percent of the fee collected under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 179d, § 19b on a prize awarded at a bingo game conducted in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1661, § 1, 11-3-1986) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 179d, § 19c.  
Chapter 18 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3518, § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 2018, amended Ch. 18 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-305, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1969, §§ 6-1—6-9, 6-10, 6-20—6-27, 6-30, 6-31; Ord. No. 1266, §§ 1—5, 10-1-1979; Ord. No. 1394, §§ 1, 2, 4(a)—(d), 8-30-1982; Ord. No. 1547, §§ 1(6-7), 2(6-30), 1-21-1985; Ord. No. 1554, § 1(6-7), 2-18-1985; Ord. No. 1939, § 1(6-8), 5-20-1991; Ord. No. 2032, § 1(6-A), 4-19-1993; Ord. No. 2759, §§ 1—7, 3-1-2004; Ord. No. 2904, § 2, 4-15-2008; Ord. No. 2912, § 2, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 2966, §§ 2, 3, 4-15-2008; Ord. No. 3019, §§ 1, 4—6, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 3109, §§ 1(A)—1(J), 11-16-2010; Ord. No. 3164, §§ 1(A)—1(C), 11-1-2011; Ord. No. 3212, § B, 12-4-2012; Ord. No. 3285, §§ 1(a)—(d), 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 3486, §§ 1—3, 1-23-2018. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal services facility means an establishment operated by the city for the temporary confinement, safekeeping, and control of animals which come into the custody of the city. 
Animal services officer means a person certified as an animal control officer by the Texas Department of State Health Services and designated by the city to represent and act for the city in the impounding of animals, controlling of animals running at large, and enforcing the provisions of this chapter and all regulations relating to animals as authorized by state or federal law. 
At large and running at large means: 
(1)  On the premises of owner, any animal not confined to the premises of the owner by some physical means of sufficient height, strength, length, and/or manner of construction to preclude the animal from leaving the premises of the owner. 
(2)  Off the premises of owner, any animal which is not physically and continually restrained by some person by means of a leash or chain of proper strength and length that precludes the animal from making an unsolicited contact with any person, his/her clothing, his/her property, and/or his/her premises; provided, however, that any animal confined within an automobile or other vehicle of its owner shall not be deemed at large. 
(3)  Feral cats that have been sterilized, vaccinated for rabies, ear notched or otherwise permanently marked, and returned to locations within the city by the city in order to reduce the population of feral cats through sterilization shall not be considered to be at large or running at large. 
Backyard chicken means a female chicken (hen) which is possessed or harbored for providing organic egg production in compliance with this chapter. 
Cat means a member of the domestic feline species. 
Chicken coop means an enclosed structure which meets the construction standards set forth in section 18-302. A chicken coop is not an accessory structure for purposes of Chapter 94, Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Farmers Branch. 
Control means owning, possessing, keeping, maintaining or harboring an animal. 
Dangerous animal means: 
(1)  An animal that makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own; 
(2)  An animal that commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to that person; 
(3)  An animal that commits an unprovoked attack on a human being that causes serious bodily injury or death and occurs in an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own unless the person who was attacked was trespassing or otherwise violating the law by being within the enclosure; or 
(4)  An animal that is at large and commits an unprovoked attack on a domestic animal that causes serious bodily injury or death to the attacked animal death of the attacked animal. 
(5)  The term dangerous animal does not include an animal that commits an unprovoked attack on a human being in an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure where the person who was attacked was trespassing or otherwise violating the law by entering the enclosure. 
Dog means a member of the domestic canine species. 
Exercise yard means the enclosure attached to the chicken coop that provides exercise for the backyard chickens and prohibits the backyard chickens from escaping such enclosure. 
Feral cat means any cat without a permanent, indoor home, stray, abandoned or truly feral that does not have a microchip implanted or a collar with a current rabies tag displayed. 
Impound means to take into custody or to place in the animal shelter of the city or other authorized confinement area. 
Leash means a strong cord or chain attached to a strong collar fully capable of restraining the animal on which it is used and which is being held by the owner or other person. 
Local rabies control authority (LRCA) means animal services manager or his designee. 
Local rabies control incident (LRCI) means any bite, scratch, or other injury to a person caused by a warm-blooded animal that breaks the victim's skin and/or causes him or her to bleed and potentially come into contact with the injuring animal's saliva and could therefore allow the rabies virus to be transmitted from the animal to the person. 
Owner means any person, group, firm, homeowners association, or corporation that owns, harbors, keeps, possesses or controls or causes to permit to be harbored, fowl or animals on or about his/her premises. 
Primary enclosure means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, run, cage, compartment, or hutch. 
Prohibited animal means an animal not normally considered domesticated including, but not limited to, venomous lizards, venomous snakes, venomous spiders, venomous insects, venomous frogs, boas, pythons, crocodiles, alligators, owls, hawks, falcons, eagles, vultures, ocelots, tigers, leopards, cougars, panthers, lions, lynx, bobcats, wolves, coyotes, weasels, mink, raccoons, skunks, foxes, bears, elephants, kangaroos, opossum, bats, armadillos, monkeys, chimpanzees, antelopes, deer, goats, sheep, pigs, horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, oxen, llamas, buffalo, or any other wild animal capable of, or inclined to do serious bodily harm to humans or other animals defined as a "dangerous wild animal" in Texas Health and Safety Code, § 822.101, as amended. 
Prohibited fowl means roosters, chickens, turkeys, pheasants, quail, guineas, geese, ducks, pigeons, peacocks, emu, ostriches and other similar feathered animals regardless of age or sex which are kept on property within the city but which shall not include backyard chickens kept in accordance with article VI of this chapter. 
Rabbit means Oryctolagus cuniculus, which is a long-eared mammal, related to hares. 
Registered/registration means the process the owner of existing, legal fowl or animals must complete in order to keep legal fowl or animals. This process requires the owner legal fowl or animals to contact the city; identify the property where the fowl or animals are being kept; identify the legal owner of the fowl or animals; and permit an animal services officer to inspect the property to verify compliance with city laws. 
Secure enclosure or enclosure means an animal housing enclosure that meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; 
(2)  Is capable of preventing the escape or release of an animal in the enclosure; 
(3)  Is clearly marked as containing a dangerous animal; 
(4)  Has an attached, secure roof; 
(5)  Has a concrete floor, or sides buried not less than two feet into the ground and constructed to prevent the animal from digging under the secure enclosure and escaping; 
(6)  Is no closer than four feet to any property line; 
(7)  Is locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the enclosure; and 
(8)  Complies with all additional requirements as established and provided in writing to the owner by the animal services manager, his designee, or this chapter. 
(9)  A secure enclosure or enclosure does not mean a residential home or commercial building unless specifically allowed by the animal services manager. 
Serious bodily injury means an injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping or tearing of flesh that would cause either a) a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment, or b) a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a veterinarian professional for an injured animal and would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment for said animal. 
Sterilization means the surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a dog or cat by a veterinarian to render the animal unable to reproduce. 
Unprovoked means an action by an animal that is not: 
(1)  In response to being tormented, abused, or assaulted by any person; 
(2)  In response to pain or injury; 
(3)  In protection of itself or its food, kennel, immediate territory, or nursing offspring; or 
(4)  In response to an assault or attempted assault on a person. 
Veterinarian means a person licensed to practice veterinary medicine by the state board of veterinary medical examiners. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-2. - Keeping of prohibited animals or fowl unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, stable, board, possess, harbor or house any prohibited animal or prohibited fowl on premises under the person's control within the city limits, expect as provided by article VI of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-3. - Existing, legal fowl. 
(a)  Properties where existing, legal fowl were kept prior to December 31, 2004, may keep a maximum number of six fowl. 
(b)  Existing, legal fowl shall be kept in a secure pen or enclosure that is at least 30 feet from any inhabited dwelling other than the residence of the person keeping the fowl. The pen or enclosure shall also be at least five feet from any adjoining property line. 
(c)  Manure, droppings and waste material shall be removed from pens, enclosures, shelters, yards or areas, at least once each day and be disposed of in such a manner as to prevent the congregation of flies and the cause of a nuisance such as odor and unsightly matter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than six existing, legal fowl or a crowing rooster at any location within the city unless the enclosure or pen for the fowl is located at least 200 feet from any inhabited dwelling other than the residence of the person keeping the existing, legal fowl. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-4. - Keeping of prohibited animals unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any prohibited animal or fowl as defined in section 18-1 within the city limits except in a medical research project under institutional supervision, veterinarian clinic, circus, amusement parks or zoo. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-5. - Regulations pertaining to rabbits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person residing within the city limits to keep more than two adult rabbits (any rabbit over the age of four months) unless the enclosure or pen for the rabbits is located at least 200 feet from any inhabited dwelling other than the residence of the person keeping the rabbits. 
(b)  All rabbits shall be kept in a secure pen or enclosure that is at least 30 feet from any inhabited dwelling other than the residence of person keeping the rabbits. The pen or enclosure shall also be located at least five feet from any adjoining property line. 
(c)  Manure, droppings and waste material shall be removed from pens, enclosures, shelters, yards or areas, at least once each day and be disposed of in such a manner as to prevent the congregation of flies and the cause of a nuisance such as odor and unsightly matter. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-6. - Penalty. 
Any owner violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine, upon conviction in the municipal court, of at least $500.00 but not more than $2,000.00 for each and every day that the prohibited fowl or animal remains and each day shall constitute a separate offense. Such fines shall be in addition to and accumulative of the provisions for the abatement of a nuisance and obtaining of injunctive relief. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-7. - Fees. 
(a)  All fees for this chapter shall be reviewed, set and adopted by a resolution of the city council and published in Appendix A of this Code. The following is not intended to be an exhaustive listing of fees that shall be assessed: owner surrender fees, redemption fees, rabies vaccination fee, impoundment fee; microchip fee; adoption fee; sterilization fee; dangerous animal registration fee; shelter quarantine fee; and home quarantine fee. 
(b)  The animal services director or his designee shall have the authority to reduce, refund, or waive fees under this chapter and/or enter into a payment arrangement agreement with the person to allow payments. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-8. - Filing of false claims and reports. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly initiates, communicates or circulates a claim of ownership for an animal with the animal services manager that he knows is false or baseless. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly initiates, communicates or circulates a report of a violation of any provision of this chapter or state law with the animal services manager that he knows is false or baseless. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Secs. 18-9—18-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-41. - Animal services manager; enforcement officers; issuance of citations. 
(a)  The animal services manager shall be responsible for supervising all animal services officers in the city. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the animal services manager and officers to enforce this chapter. Any animal services officer shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this chapter. The animal services manager and officers shall be empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with its provisions; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall authorize any party enforcing the terms of this chapter to enter upon private property without a search or arrest warrant where the federal or state constitution or statutory laws require such a search or arrest warrant. The animal services manager and officers shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-42. - Interference with animal services manager or animal services officers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any animal services manager or officer in the performance of his duties. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-43. - Right of entry by animal services to determine violations; presentation of credentials. 
(a)  Animal services officers shall have the power to search, seize and impound an animal without a warrant or court order, with probable cause under the following conditions: 
(1)  On public property, in all cases; 
(2)  On private property, if: 
a.  The consent of the resident or property owner, or someone with apparent authority to consent, is obtained; or 
b.  Exigent circumstances exist, the animal services officer reasonably believes that there is imminent danger of serious bodily injury or death to a human being, another animal, or the animal in question, and there is insufficient time to obtain a warrant. 
(3)  Upon the request of a peace officer if the owner is not available and there is no one 17 years of age or older to accept responsibility for the animal. 
(b)  Animal services officers are authorized to seek a warrant or order from a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this chapter, pursuant to all applicable local, state, and federal laws. 
(c)  Animal services officers shall have the power to search, seize and impound an animal with a warrant or court order under one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  When the animal services officer has probable cause to believe that the animal creates a nuisance as described in article VIII of this chapter; 
(2)  When the animal services officer has probable cause to believe that the animal has been abandoned or is being treated inhumanely as described in this chapter; 
(3)  When the animal services officer has probable cause to believe that the animal has rabies or has been exposed to rabies; 
(4)  When the animal services officer has probable cause to believe that the animal is not being quarantined for rabies observation under appropriate conditions as defined in this chapter; 
(5)  When the animal services officer has probable cause to believe that the animal meets the definition of a dangerous animal as defined in this chapter; 
(6)  When animal services officer has probable cause to believe that the animal has been involved in a local rabies control incident; or 
(7)  When the animal services officer has probable cause to believe that the animal is being possessed or harbored in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  All animal services officers exercising the powers set forth in this section shall present proper credentials to the occupant of the premises and explain his reasons therefor. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-44. - Warrants to be issued upon refusal to admit officers. 
(a)  Required. Whenever any animal services manager or officer is denied admission to inspect any premises under this article and the animal services officer cannot determine whether violations exist on suspected premises from an adjoining premises, inspection of the suspected premises shall be made only under authority of a warrant issued by a magistrate authorizing the inspection. 
(b)  Affidavit of belief of violation; issuance of warrant by magistrate. In applying for such a warrant, the animal services manager or officer shall submit to the magistrate an affidavit setting forth his belief that a violation of this chapter or other animal services ordinances exist with respect to the place sought to be inspected and the reasons for such belief. Such affidavit shall designate the location of such place and the name of the person believed to be the occupant thereof. If the magistrate finds that probable cause exists for an inspection of the premises in question, he may issue a warrant authorizing the inspection. Such warrant shall describe the premises with sufficient certainty to identify the premises. Any warrants issued will constitute the authority for the animal services officer to enter upon and inspect the premises described therein. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-45. - Powers and duties of citizens. 
(a)  Any citizen of the city is hereby authorized to take control of and deliver to the office of the animal services manager any animal that may be found running at large within the territorial limits of the city, other than prohibited animals or animals suspected of being rabid, subject to the applicable provisions of law. The owner surrender fee also does not apply to citizens delivering animals found running at large within the territorial limits of the City of Farmers Branch to the animal services manager within 72 hours of taking control of said animal. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he takes control of an animal under this subsection (a) herein and fails to deliver it to the animal services manager within 72 hours of taking control of said animal. 
(c)  It is a defense prosecution under this section if the person has received written or emailed permission to keep said animal from an animal services officer and said person has provided the animal services officer the following: 
(1)  Person's name, phone number, and valid state identification number; 
(2)  Address of the location of where said animal will be kept; and 
(3)  A picture of the animal. 
(c)  Any citizen of the City of Farmers Branch who owns an animal residing within the territorial limits of the City of Farmers Branch may offer to surrender ownership of the animal to the animal services manager. The animal services manager may accept or refuse the animal in accordance with written procedures to be established and set forth by the animal services manager. For each owner surrendered animal accepted by and released to the animal services manager, the owner shall pay to the animal services manager at the time of release an owner surrender fee, which shall be set by resolution of city council. Furthermore, when an adult nursing female animal is surrendered and accompanied by a litter of unweaned animals, the owner surrender fee does not apply to the litter of unweaned animals. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Secs. 18-46—18-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 18-66. - Officers authorized to impound, euthanize or kill animals. 
The chief of police, any police officer, animal services manager, or any animal services officer or other persons designated by the chief of police, animal services manager or city manager shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Seize and impound any animal running at large in the city; 
(2)  Impound any animal which is diseased or endangers the health of a person or another animal; 
(3)  Kill an animal which poses an imminent danger of bodily harm to a person or property or a real or apparent immediate necessity exists for destruction of the animal; 
(4)  Impound and quarantine any animal that he has probable cause to believe was exposed to or infected with rabies. Any animal that exhibits symptoms of the rabies disease during quarantine shall be humanely euthanized; 
(5)  Kill any animal suspected of having rabies when such animal is found at large, after having made a reasonable, but unsuccessful effort to capture the animal; 
(6)  impound any animal at the request of a peace officer, member of the fire department, or owner of property where the animal is located when the owner of the animal has been arrested, hospitalized, is missing, has died, or when the owner is being lawfully evicted from his premises and there is no person 17 years of age or older present who will assume responsibility for the animal; 
(7)  Seize and impound any dangerous animal, as set forth in article V of this chapter regarding dangerous animals; 
(8)  Seize and impound an animal if probable cause exists to believe the animal has been inhumanely treated as defined by this chapter; or 
(9)  Euthanize an impounded animal at the designated animal shelter if the animal services manager, animal services officer, or a veterinarian determines that recovery of the animal from injury, disease, or sickness is unlikely. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-67. - Confinement of strays; notice to officers; duty of impoundment. 
If any animal is found upon the premises of a person not the owner of the animal, the owner or occupant of such premises shall have the right to confine such animal until he can notify the chief of police, the animal services manager, or their designees to come and impound such animal, provided that the impoundment is done in a reasonable time. When so notified, it shall be the duty of such police or animal services officers to at once cause such animal to be impounded in the city shelter. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-68. - Shelter to be established. 
The city council shall select and establish a place within the city for the impounding of animals found running at large. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-69. - Redemption period. 
(a)  Impounded animals shall be held at the shelter for not less than 72 hours, excluding Sunday, unless earlier reclaimed by the owner or the owner's agent, or euthanized as allowed by this chapter. 
(b)  An animal impounded at the request of a peace officer, member of the fire department, or property owner as set forth in section 18-66(f) herein shall be held at the shelter for not less than ten business days, unless earlier reclaimed by the owner or the owner's designee or euthanized as allowed by this chapter. 
(c)  An impoundment period is not applicable for the following animals or situations: 
(1)  Any animal whose owner has voluntarily released to the city in writing; 
(2)  Wild animals; 
(3)  Injured or diseased animals; 
(4)  Cats that are determined by the animal services manager or his designee to be feral cats. Said cats may be sterilized, vaccinated for rabies, have its ears surgically tipped to identify it as a sterilized and vaccinated cat, and returned to locations within the city after a 24-hour holding time at the animal shelter. 
(d)  Any impounded animal, with or without traceable identification, which appears to be suffering from serious bodily injury or disease and which is in severe pain or suffering and may not recover or which appears to have an infectious disease which is an immediate danger to humans or to other animals may be euthanized. 
(e)  Any animal that is not displaying any type of identification, and which due to its violent or feral nature poses a substantial risk of bodily injury to the safety of animal shelter staff may be euthanized. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-70. - Requirements for redemption of impounded animals; redemption fee. 
(a)  Conditions for redemption of animals. Any person who wishes to redeem an impounded animal shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Proof of rabies vaccination of the animal is required. 
a.  Sufficient proof of an animal's current rabies vaccination shall be a rabies vaccination certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian. 
b.  If the owner cannot prove that the animal has a current rabies vaccination, the owner shall pay a fee to have a rabies vaccination given prior to the release of the animal, if a veterinarian is on staff at that time. If a vaccination cannot be given at the time of release, a rabies vaccination voucher shall be provided upon receipt of payment of the rabies vaccination fee. 
c.  If a vaccination cannot be given at the time of the redemption, the owner shall have seven business days after the animal's release to provide written proof of obtaining a current rabies vaccination to the animal services officer. 
d.  If, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, the rabies vaccination should not be given within the seven business day period, the owner must provide a signed statement from the veterinarian stating why the vaccine should be temporarily delayed and when the vaccine may be given. The owner shall provide written proof of the administering of the vaccination to a animal services officer within 48 hours of the time stated for appropriate administration in the veterinarian's statement. 
(2)  A microchip implant in the animal is required. If the animal is not already identifiable by microchip, the owner shall pay a fee to have a microchip implanted into the animal prior to release. 
(3)  Sterilization of the animal is required. 
a.  The owner shall submit written proof of having the animal sterilized within 30 days of its release. The proof shall be a completed sterilization certification form provided by the animal services facility that is signed by the sterilizing veterinarian. 
b.  Subsection (3)(a) herein shall not apply if the owner provides proof at the time of redemption that the animal has a current rabies vaccination, the animal is identified by microchip and visible identification, and the owner can provide written verification (the sufficiency of which may be determined by the animal services manager or his designee) that one or more of the following conditions is met at the time of impoundment: 
1.  Either the animal is registered with a national registry; or the animal is a sporting dog, livestock dog, or working dog, and the owner was a member of a national breed club, local breed club, or sporting or hunting club; 
2.  The animal was a professionally trained assistance or police service animal; 
3.  The animal was at large due to forces of nature, fire, or the reported criminal act of a third party who was not residing at the animal owner's residence; or 
4.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as permitting sterilized dogs and cats to run at large. 
c.  A pet owner whose animal qualifies for exemption from the sterilization requirements pursuant to subsection (3)(b) herein shall pay an unsterilized animal redemption fee as established by the city council and set forth in Appendix A of this Code and impoundment fees to the city pursuant to section 18-160, prior to reclaiming the animal. 
(4)  Payment of fees. The owner must pay a redemption fee in an amount established by the city and listed in Appendix A of this Code, any other applicable fees, and any expense incurred by the city for the care of the animal (example, veterinarian costs) prior to release of the impounded animal. 
(b)  Wild animals. Impounded wild animals kept in violation of this chapter may not be redeemed and may be placed with a wildlife rehabilitator or wildlife educational center or euthanized at the animal services manager's discretion. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he fails to provide the proof of rabies vaccination required in subsection (a)(1)(c) or (d) herein. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if he fails to provide the proof of sterilization required in subsection (a)(3)(a) herein. 
(e)  This section shall not apply if the animal was impounded: 
(1)  For being inhumanely treated as defined in this chapter and a hearing is pending or shall be pending to determine the disposition of the animal; 
(2)  As a dangerous animal as defined in this chapter and a hearing is pending or shall be pending to determine the disposition of the animal; 
(3)  For investigation of rabies and the quarantine period has not expired. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-71. - City ownership of impounded animals not timely redeemed or voluntarily released. 
In the event that a person has not redeemed an animal as required by the expiration of any required impoundment period or immediately after being voluntarily released by its owner, the animal shall become the property of the city, all ownership rights for the animal shall transfer to the city, and the animal services manager may dispose of the animal by any of the following methods: Adoption, humane euthanasia, or transfer to another agency, taking into consideration factors that may include, but not be limited to, the animal's behavior, aggressive tendencies, feral characteristics, health, and housing space availability, within the sole discretion of the animal services manager. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-72. - Impoundment records. 
The animal services manager shall keep records giving descriptions of all animals impounded by him, the date of impounding, the date of sale, the amount realized for such animal and the name and address of the purchaser. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-73. - Contracts and agreements. 
The city manager is authorized to enter into contracts with approved animal shelters or organizations for the humane treatment of animals to provide for direct transfer of animals impounded by the city to such shelter or organization. The city manager is further authorized to enter into agreements with individuals who will provide for the transport of impounded animals to shelters or organizations approved by the animal services manager. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Secs. 18-74—18-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-106. - Microchipping of dogs and cats. 
(a)  An owner of a dog or cat commits an offense if the dog or cat does not have a microchip. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that: 
(1)  The dog or cat was under four months of age; 
(2)  The dog or cat was being held for sale by a retail pet store or for adoption by animal services or an animal welfare organization; 
(3)  The owner of the dog or cat has resided in the city for fewer than 30 days; 
(4)  The dog or cat qualifies for a medical exception from a licensed veterinarian; 
(5)  The dog or cat owner is a not a resident of the city and is staying in the city for fewer than 60 days; or 
(6)  The person charged produces to the court proof of a registered microchip showing the dog or cat was implanted with a microchip at the time the citation was issued or not later than 20 days after the citation was issued. 
(c)  The owner of a dog or cat shall maintain his or her current contact information with a microchip registration company. 
(1)  If the owner's contact information changes, the owner shall update the microchip registration company not later than 30 days after the change in the contact information. 
(2)  If the ownership of a dog or cat changes, the new owner shall provide the microchip registration company with his or her contact information not later than 30 days after the change in ownership. 
(3)  It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the person charged produces to the court proof that the contact information was current and the correct owner was listed at the time the citation was issued or the contact information was corrected and made current not later than 20 days after the citation was issued. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Secs. 18-107—18-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DOGS AND CATS 
 
Sec. 18-126. - Requirements for harboring. 
No owner shall keep or harbor any dog or cat four months of age or over within the city limits unless such dog or cat is vaccinated against rabies as provided in section 18-127, and the owner has a rabies vaccination certificate and a tag for the dog or cat. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-127. - Rabies vaccination required. 
Any owner of any dog or cat four months of age or over and which shall at any time be kept within the limits of the city shall have such dog or cat immunized with an anti-rabies vaccine by a duly licensed and practicing veterinarian. All dogs or cats initially vaccinated at four months of age or older shall be revaccinated not later than one year after the initial vaccination and thereafter either annually with one-year anti-rabies vaccine or every three years with three-year anti-rabies vaccine. Such owner shall procure from such veterinarian a certificate stating the date of the vaccination, date the next rabies vaccination is due, name and address of the owner and the approximate age, name, sex and breed of the dog or cat. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-128. - Collar and rabies tag required; exception. 
Every owner shall be required to provide each dog or cat with a collar or harness which such dog or cat must wear at all times and to which shall be securely attached the tag issued for such dog or cat by a veterinarian, licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, showing that the dog or cat has been, within the last 12 months, vaccinated against rabies. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs or cats less than four months of age. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-129. - Prima facie evidence of non-vaccination. 
All cats four months old or older, within the limits of the city, which do not have affixed thereto a tag as required by section 18-128, shall be and hereby are presumed not to have been vaccinated for rabies, which presumption may be rebutted by the owner or person having control of the dog or cat by the presentation of a certificate of a duly licensed and practicing veterinarian showing that such dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies on a date not more than 12 months before the date such dog or cat was impounded by the chief of police, animal services manager, or any other person designated by the chief of police, animal services manager, or city council. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-130. - Number allowed. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor more than four dogs four months of age or older and more than four cats four months of age or older on any premises used or zoned for residential purposes. However, bona fide raisers and breeders of dogs or cats strictly for a hobby may make application with animal services manager or his duly delegated employee for permission to keep or harbor more than four dogs of four months of age or older and more than four cats of four months of age or older. Upon payment of a breeder fee, the animal services manager, or his duly designated employee, shall issue a permit for one year to the applicant upon the following information being furnished and the listed conditions being satisfied: 
(1)  The maximum number of dogs and cats to be kept or housed. 
(2)  The purpose for the keeping or harboring of the dogs and cats. 
(3)  The dogs and cats are to be housed in cages or pens inside a residence or completely enclosed structure. 
(4)  The dogs and cats are kept or harbored so as not to be a nuisance or detriment to any adjoining or adjacent neighbors. 
(5)  The owner or custodian of a dog shall not permit such dog to bark or howl or create noises that cause the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the adjacent premises to be disturbed. 
(6)  The cages or pens are to be maintained in a sanitary condition so as not to create any hazards to the general health and welfare of the community. 
(b)  The animal services manager, or his duly delegated employee, upon being satisfied that the information in subsection (a) of this section has been furnished and the conditions satisfied, shall issue a permit for one year to the applicant. This permit may be revoked at any time upon any of the conditions and requirements being violated. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-131. - Dogs and cats not to run at large. 
(a)  No owner of any dog or cat shall allow any dog or cat to run at large or be outside of or off the owner's premises, whether vaccinated or not. All dogs or cats on the owner's premises shall be securely kept behind an adequate fence or shall be kept on a chain adequate to restrain such dog or cat from leaving the owner's premises in violation of the terms of this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person causes a dog or cat not owned by him to be at large by intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly releasing a confined dog or cat. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on a human, domestic animal or domestic fowl while said dog is at large, and the attack causes bodily injury or death to the human, domestic animal or domestic fowl. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-132. - Barking dogs. 
(a)  No owner shall keep or possess in the city any barking or howling dog which disturbs the peace or comfort of other citizens within the city. 
(b)  Prior to issuing a citation or filing a complaint in the Farmers Branch Municipal Court, the animal services manager and animal services officers may require the receipt of a sworn, written complaint by any person over the age of 18 years charging that a particular dog in the city is barking or howling to a degree that it is disturbing the peace or comfort of other citizens within the city, prior to issuing a citation for violation under subsection (a) herein. 
(c)  To be considered valid, a sworn, written complaint shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of complainant(s) and other witnesses; 
(2)  A description of the dog and the address where it resides, and, if known, the name and telephone number of the owner of the dog; 
(3)  A statement describing the facts upon which the complaint is based including: a description of the incident or incidents and how the dog's barking or howling is disturbing the peace of comfort of other citizens within the city; specific dates and times when said dog has been barking or howling; and duration of barking or howling; 
(4)  The names and contact information for witnesses who were present for the incident, if any; 
(5)  Any other facts that the complainant believes to be important. 
(d)  The animal services manager or animal services officer may reject or return complaints that are incomplete or do not contain the information required in subsection (c) herein. The animal services manager shall cause to have investigated all complaints containing the information required in subsection (c) herein that are submitted to the city. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-133. - Entering places where food is sold or served. 
No owner or other person having control of a dog shall allow such dog to enter or be in any place of any kind or character where food is sold or served for human consumption. This section shall not apply to assistance dogs used by blind or disabled persons. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-134. - Waste. 
(a)  The owner of a dog or person having control of a dog shall be responsible for the removal of any feces deposited by such dog on public or private property not owned by the person having control of such dog. 
(b)  Feces deposited by a dog upon public property or upon the property of any person other than the dog's owner shall be collected and removed at once by the dog's owner or person having control of such dog. 
(c)  Feces collected and removed must be disposed of in a sanitary manner and placed in a solid waste receptacle. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-135. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any owner or other person violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-14. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Secs. 18-136—18-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STERILIZATION 
 
Sec. 18-151. - Purpose and scope of division. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to prevent the production of offspring by dogs and cats that are adopted from the animal shelter and to increase the number of animals in the city vaccinated for the rabies virus. 
(b)  Scope. The sterilization requirements of this division shall apply only to dogs and cats that are adopted from the animal shelter and shall not apply to dogs and cats already owned and kept on private properties within the city. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-152. - As requirement for adoption. 
Animal services may not offer a dog or cat for adoption from the animal shelter unless the animal has been sterilized and vaccinated for the rabies virus. Exceptions to the requirements of this division include: 
(1)  Dogs or cats under the age of six months shall have an agreement pursuant to section 18-153; 
(2)  An agency or humane organization, with required vaccination and sterilization policies for the adoption of animals approved by animal services, are exempt from the requirements and fees established by this division; 
(3)  A new pet owner shall agree to, in writing, provide written proof of sterilization of the animal signed by a veterinarian licensed in the State of Texas, within 30 days of redemption of the animal from the animal shelter. Failure to provide written proof of sterilization within 30 days of redemption shall constitute a violation of this division and the animal services manager may impose a fine of up to $2,000.00 and seek civil remedies in accordance with state law. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-153. - Agreement. 
(a)  The sterilization agreement used by animal services must contain the following: 
(1)  The date of the agreement; 
(2)  The name, current address, date of birth, current business and residential telephone numbers, state driver's license number or other government issued picture identification and signature of the new or existing owner; 
(3)  A description of the dog or cat adopted; and 
(4)  Signature of the animal services manager. 
(b)  The new owner, who signs an agreement under this section, shall have the dog or cat sterilized by a veterinarian before the sterilization completion date stated in the agreement. 
(c)  A new pet owner shall pay a sterilization agreement deposit in the amount established by the city and listed in Appendix A of this Code which payment shall be in the form of cash, credit card or debit card. 
(d)  If written proof of sterilization signed by a veterinarian licensed in the State of Texas has not been provided to the animal services manager within three days after the time frames set forth in the sterilization agreement, the deposit shall be forfeited and the animal services manager shall surrender it to the city treasurer. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person who adopts an animal hereunder to fail to comply with this section, and the forfeiture of the deposit shall not prevent a prosecution hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-154. - Confirmation. 
Except as provided in section 18-155, each new or existing owner who signs a sterilization agreement shall deliver to the animal services manager a receipt or statement signed by a veterinarian who performed the sterilization surgery as proof that the dog or cat has been sterilized. This proof must be delivered in person or by mail to the animal services manager no later than the date set forth in the agreement. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-155. - Loss of adopted dog or cat by new or existing owner. 
If an adopted dog or cat dies, is lost or is stolen before the sterilization completion date established in the agreement, the new or existing owner must deliver a written statement, no later than the seventh day after the disappearance or death of the dog or cat, to the animal services manager, describing the circumstances of the animal's disappearance or death. The written statement may be accepted by the animal services manager in lieu of the proof of sterilization required by section 18-154. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-156. - Failure of new or existing owner to deliver proof. 
It shall be the presumption that failure of the new owner to deliver to the animal services manager proof, as required under section 18-154 or a letter as required under section 18-155, is the result of the new or existing owner's refusal to have the adopted dog or cat sterilized. Such failure shall cause animal services to file a court complaint against the new or existing owner. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-157. - Reclamation. 
If the animal services manager does not receive a written statement as required under section 18-154 or 18-155, after the expiration of the seventh day after the sterilization completion date established in the agreement described in section 18-153, the animal services manager may reclaim the animal from the new owner. A person may not prevent, obstruct or interfere with a reclamation under this section. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-158. - Responsibility for enforcement of division. 
Animal services shall have the primary enforcement responsibility for this division and shall be empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with its provisions; provided, however, that nothing in this division shall authorize any party enforcing the terms of this division to enter upon private property without a search or arrest warrant where the federal or state constitution or statutory laws require such a search or arrest warrant. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-159. - Adoption and microchipping fees. 
(a)  A person shall pay the fee established by the city in the amount set forth in Appendix A of this Code for the following services: 
(1)  The adoption of animals from the animal adoption center shelter by residents or nonresidents; 
(2)  The microchipping of animals placed by the city, excluding animals owned by the city which are to be adopted, rescued, transferred, or fostered. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee are authorized to temporarily reduce the fee for adoption of animals in association with a special animal adoption event or upon the determination of the director of environmental health that such reduction is necessary to increase adoption rates in order to reduce overcrowding or capacity issues at the animal adoption center. 
(c)  The animal services manager or his designee is authorized to reduce or not charge the fee authorized by subsection (a) above, with respect to the adoption of an animal that has remained impounded for a period of more than 12 consecutive days upon a finding of animal services manager that such reduction is necessary to create an incentive to adopt said animal in order to reduce overcrowding or capacity issues at the animal adoption center. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-160. - Impoundment fees. 
(a)  A person shall pay the fee established by the city in the amount set forth in Appendix A of this Code for the following services: 
(1)  Redemption of an animal by the owner or person authorized to act on behalf of the owner of the animal from the animal adoption center; 
(2)  Housing an animal at the animal adoption center, which shall be a per day fee; and 
(3)  Surrender of ownership of an animal by its owner to the city through the animal adoption center. 
(b)  The fees under subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall be in addition to any expenses for animal maintenance incurred by the city during the period the animal is in possession of the city. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Secs. 18-161—18-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TREATMENT OF ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 18-221. - Inhumane treatment of animals prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, either through his action or omission, he: 
(1)  Docks the tail or removes the dew claws of an animal over five days of age, or crops the ears of an animal of any age, unless he is licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state; 
(2)  Transfers ownership or otherwise physically removes from its mother any dog, cat, ferret, or rabbit less than six weeks old, or any other animal that is not yet weaned, except as advised by a licensed veterinarian; 
(3)  Dyes or otherwise artificially colors any animal; 
(4)  Displays, transfers ownership, or offers to transfer ownership of any dyed or otherwise artificially colored animal; 
(5)  Abandons any animal that he or she has possession or ownership of at the animal services facility, at any other place of business, on public property, or with any person that has not consented or has revoked consent to be responsible for the care of the animal; 
(6)  Fails to reclaim any animal that he owns from the animal services facility or any person who had temporary possession of the animal; 
(7)  Fails to notify animal services within 24 hours after a motor vehicle being operated by him strikes an animal; 
(8)  Euthanizes, kills or attempts to euthanize or kill an animal in a manner other than one allowed in this chapter; 
(9)  Carries or transports an animal in any motor vehicle, conveyance, or trailer and fails to effectively restrain the animal so as to prevent the animal from leaving or being accidentally thrown from the vehicle, conveyance, or trailer; 
(10)  Places or confines an animal, or allows an animal to be placed or confined, in a motor vehicle, conveyance, or trailer without providing adequately for the necessities of life, including air, food, potable water, sanitary conditions, shelter, or protection from the heat, cold, or other environmental condition, or under other circumstances that may cause bodily injury, serious bodily injury, or death of the animal; 
(11)  Causes or allows an animal to remain in its own filth; 
(12)  Owns or has care, custody, or control of an animal having an infestation of ticks, fleas, or other parasites, without having the animal treated by a veterinarian or following a proper commercially available treatment regimen for the infestation; 
(13)  Owns or has care, custody, or control of an animal having an obvious or diagnosed illness, injury, or communicable illness transmittable to animal or human, without having the animal treated by a veterinarian or following a proper treatment regimen for the injury or illness; 
(14)  Fails to provide basic grooming for an animal; 
(15)  Causes, allows, or trains an animal to fight another animal or possesses animal fighting paraphernalia or training equipment; 
(16)  Transfers ownership or offers to transfer ownership of any chicken, duckling, or rabbit younger than 16 weeks of age in quantities of less than 12 to a single purchaser; 
(17)  Mutilates or allows to be mutilated any dead animal for reasons other than food preparation or taxidermy. Dissection in compliance with medical or veterinary research, medical or veterinary necropsy, and bona fide educational use of dead animals shall not be considered mutilation; 
(18)  Attaches or allows to be attached a collar or harness to an animal that is of an inadequate size so that it restricts the animal's growth or causes damage to the animal's skin; 
(19)  Attaches or allows to be attached a tether that is not appropriately sized for the animal or so heavy as to restrict or burden the animal's movements; or 
(20)  Teases, taunts, or provokes an aggressive reaction from an animal. 
(b)  Animals seized pursuant to this section may be impounded and the animal services officer may petition the municipal court for a hearing to determine whether the animal was inhumanely treated and to determine the disposition of the animal. The petition shall be filed within 48 hours of the seizure. If the court is not open during this 48-hour period, the petition shall be filed the next day the court is open for business. If a hearing is not requested, then the animal shall be returned to the owner upon request of the owner. 
(c)  This section shall not be interpreted to restrict the lawful activities and legitimate operations of rodeos, 4H clubs, or FFA clubs. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prevent a peace officer or animal services officer from removing an animal from a motor vehicle if the animal's safety appears to be in immediate danger from heat, cold, lack of adequate ventilation, lack of food or water, or other circumstances that could reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability, or death to the animal. 
(e)  A peace officer or animal services officer who removes an animal from a motor vehicle shall take it to the animal facility or other place of safekeeping or, if the officer deems necessary, to a veterinary hospital for treatment. 
(f)  A peace officer or animal services officer is authorized to take all steps that are reasonably necessary for the removal of an animal from a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, breaking into the motor vehicle, after a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person responsible. 
(g)  A peace officer or animal services officer who removes an animal from a motor vehicle shall, in a secure and conspicuous location on or within the motor vehicle, leave written notice bearing his or her name and office, and the address of the location where the animal can be claimed. The animal may be claimed by the owner only after payment of all charges that have accrued for the maintenance, care, medical treatment, or impoundment of the animal as set forth in this chapter herein. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-222. - Animal housing enclosure requirements. 
(a)  This section shall not apply to enclosures for rabbits kept pursuant to section 18-6 of this chapter or enclosures for backyard chickens kept pursuant to article VI of this chapter. 
(b)  All animal housing pens and enclosures must be securely built, adequately sized for the kind, size, and number of animals housed, maintained in a sanitary condition so that flies or mosquitoes are not allowed to breed and odors are not offensive to adjacent residences or businesses, in compliance with all other requirements of this chapter, city zoning laws, and the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Enclosures housing fewer than five animals must be at least 20 feet from any adjacent building, excluding any building owned by the owner of the animals; 
(2)  Enclosures housing five or more animals must be at least 50 feet from any adjacent building, excluding any building owned by the owner of the animals; 
(3)  Enclosures used as an area for a dog to regularly eat, sleep, drink, and/or eliminate must have at least 100 square feet of space for each dog six months of age or older that is housed there; and 
(4)  Enclosures shall be located so that the animals being housed are protected from inclement weather, harassment, stings and bites from insects, and attacks by other animals. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he fails to provide an enclosure or enclosures meeting the criteria set forth in this section. 
(d)  Dangerous animal enclosures shall also meet the requirements of a secure enclosure as set out in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Secs. 18-223—18-255. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 18-256. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to provide a greater degree of safety and protection for citizens by establishing rules and regulations regarding the keeping and harboring of dangerous or aggressive animals within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-257. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-258. - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to and cumulative of all other penalties, the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any and all violations of this article. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-259. - Enforcement of article. 
Animal services officers shall have the primary enforcement responsibility for this article and shall be empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with its provisions; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall authorize any party enforcing the terms of this section to enter upon private property without a search or arrest warrant where the federal or state constitution or statutory laws require such a search or arrest warrant. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-260. - Dangerous animals. 
(a)  Any dangerous animal found running at large may be destroyed by any animal services officer or peace officer in the interest of public safety. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, a person learns he/she is the owner of a dangerous animal when: 
(1)  The owner knows of an attack described in the definition of "dangerous animal"; or 
(2)  The owner is notified by the animal services manager that the animal is a dangerous animal. 
(c)  Complaint. 
(1)  The animal services manager may receive a sworn, written complaint by any person over the age of 18 years charging that a particular domestic animal in the city is a dangerous animal as defined in this article. To be considered valid, a sworn, written complaint shall contain at least the following information: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of complainant(s) and other witnesses; 
b.  A description of the animal and the address where it resides, and, if known, the name and telephone number of the owner of the animal; 
c.  A statement describing the facts upon which the complaint is based including: a description of the incident or incidents which cause the complainant to believe the animal is a dangerous animal; the date, time and location of the incident; a description of the injuries sustained and whether medical assistance was sought and the outcome of that treatment; 
d.  The names and contact information for witnesses who were present for the incident, if any; 
e.  Any other facts that the complainant believes to be important. 
(2)  The animal services manager may reject or return complaints that are incomplete or do not contain the information required in subsection (c)(1) herein. The animal services manager shall cause to have investigated all complaints containing the information required in subsection (c)(1) herein that are submitted to the city. 
(d)  Determination. 
(1)  Within ten days of receiving a valid complaint, the animal services manager shall determine if the animal described in the complaint is a dangerous animal. 
(2)  If the animal services manager determines that the subject animal of a valid complaint is not a dangerous animal, he/she shall provide written notice of said determination to the owner of the animal and the individual who submitted the complaint under subsection (c)(1) herein. 
(3)  If the animal services manager determines that the animal is a dangerous animal, he/she shall make a disposition determination based on the necessity to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. This determination shall be one of the following: 
a.  Removal of the dangerous animal from the city; 
b.  Humane destruction of the dangerous animal; or 
c.  Allow the dangerous animal to remain in the city, provided the owner is in compliance with the requirements set forth in subsection (i). 
(e)  Notification. 
(1)  The animal services manager shall provide notice of his/her determination regarding an animal that is subject to a complaint and the ordered disposition of an animal determined to be a dangerous animal to the owner of the animal, the individual who submitted the complaint, as well as any known victim of a dangerous animal. 
(2)  The notice shall be in writing and shall contain a statement that the owner has a right to appeal the determination that the animal is a dangerous animal to the Farmers Branch Municipal Court as set forth in subsection (v) herein. 
(3)  Notice shall be hand delivered or mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's last known mailing address. A notice that is mailed is deemed received three days after it is placed in a mail receptacle of the United States Postal Service. 
(f)  Impoundment pending disposition of a dangerous animal. 
(1)  Within 24 hours of receiving notice from the animal services manager that an animal is a dangerous animal, the owner of said dangerous animal shall cause said animal to be impounded and boarded at the owner's expense at the animal services facility pending the disposition of the animal in conformance with the animal service manager's notice or appeal. If the animal that is the subject of the hearing was already impounded for being an animal at large, was seized pursuant to this chapter, or was abandoned at the animal services facility, the animal shall remain impounded until the conclusion of the hearing. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if he interferes with the lawful seizure or impoundment of an animal by an animal services officer. 
(3)  A person commits an offense if he harbors, hides, transports, or secures the transport for any animal for the purpose of preventing its required impoundment under this section. 
(g)  Removal from city. 
(1)  In the event that the animal services manager determines that the dangerous animal must be removed from the city, the owner of said dangerous animal shall remove said dangerous animal from the city limits within 15 days of notification from the animal services manager. Animal services may humanely destroy the dangerous animal if the owner of the dangerous animal has not submitted an appeal of the determination in accordance with subsection (v) and does not remove such dangerous animal from the city within 15 days of notification by the animal services manager. 
a.  Prior to removal from the city, the owner of a dangerous animal must submit proof that the dangerous animal has been microchipped and registered with a national registry. 
b.  Prior to removal to another jurisdiction, the owner of a dangerous animal must submit proof that the receiving jurisdiction is aware that an animal, which has been declared dangerous by the City of Farmers Branch, will be residing within their jurisdiction and that the owner or person who will be harboring the animal has met all of the local requirements for harboring a dangerous animal within the receiving jurisdiction. 
c.  Prior to removal from the city, the owner of a dangerous animal must report the disposition and exact address for relocation of such animal to the animal services manager in writing. 
(h)  Humane destruction. 
(1)  In the event that the animal services manager determines that the dangerous animal must be humanely destroyed, animal services may humanely destroy the dangerous animal if the owner of the dangerous animal has not submitted an appeal of the determination in accordance with subsection (v). 
(i)  Requirements for owner of a dangerous dog. 
(1)  No later than 30 days after notification from the animal services manager that an animal has been determined to be a dangerous animal and is permitted to remain within the city, the owner of a dangerous animal shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Prior to reclaiming the animal from animal services, present proof that the owner has purchased a current liability insurance policy with coverage amounts of at least $300,000.00 per occurrence for personal injury, death and property damage to cover injury, death, or damage caused by a dangerous animal. The owner or keeper shall maintain such insurance as long as the dangerous animal is kept within the city; 
b.  Prior to reclaiming the animal from animal services, present proof of a current rabies vaccination of the dangerous animal if it is a dog or a cat. In the event that the animal is provided a rabies vaccination by animal services, the owner shall be responsible for said expense and shall reimburse the city for these costs prior to retaining custody of such animal; 
c.  Prior to reclaiming the animal from animal services, present proof satisfactory to the animal services manager that the enclosure in which the animal will be kept is a secure enclosure; 
d.  Prior to reclaiming the animal from the animal services division, present written permission from the property owner allowing the animal to return to the property if the owner of a dangerous animal rents or leases the property where the animal will be living; 
e.  Prior to reclaiming the animal from the animal services division, present proof that said animal has been implanted with a microchip and registered with a national registry maintained by a recognized organization, such as AVMA or UKC, on a national basis. In the event that the animal is microchipped by animal services, the owner shall be responsible for said expense and shall reimburse the city for these costs prior to retaining custody of such animal; 
f.  Prior to reclaiming the animal from the animal services division, pay an annual registration fee in the amount set forth in Appendix A of this Code; 
g.  Keep the dangerous animal in a secure enclosure as defined in section 18-1 at all times when its owner is not present; 
h.  Require that the dangerous animal, when exercised outdoors on property owned or leased by the animal's owner, be conducted in an enclosed area with a fence or wall not less than six feet in height and with the dangerous animal secured by a leash no longer than four feet in length held by a person of sufficient strength to restrain the animal; 
i.  Except as provided in subsection (i)(1)(h) above, require that a dangerous animal not be removed from a secured enclosure unless it is secured by a leash no longer than four feet in length held by a person of sufficient strength to restrain the animal, and muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the animal from biting a person or another animal; 
j.  Require that the city's animal services officer be admitted to the location and premises of all dangerous animals to periodically inspect for compliance with all sections of this article; and 
k.  Require the dangerous animal be sterilized. 
(2)  The animal services manager shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous animal a dangerous animal registration tag. Such tag shall be of a bright distinguishing color, shall contain the year of registration engraved on its tag face, and shall be larger than a normal license tag issued to dogs and cats. A dangerous animal registration shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(3)  The owner of a registered dangerous animal shall attach the tag to the animal's collar or similar device and shall place such collar or device on the animal. 
(4)  If the owner of a registered dangerous animal sells or gives away the animal or moves the animal to a new address, the owner, prior to the date of the sale, gift, or move, shall notify the animal services manager of the animal's new address and owner, and receive written permission by the animal services manager for the move. 
(5)  If a new owner keeps a dangerous animal within the city, the new owner shall register the dangerous animal with the animal services manager prior to receiving the animal. 
(6)  Not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the annual registration of a dangerous animal, the owner of the dangerous animal shall deliver to the animal services manager proof that the owner is continuing to maintain the required liability insurance, vaccination, and secure enclosure along with an annual re-registration fee of $100.00. 
(7)  The animal services manager may request proof of liability insurance and the maintenance of a secure enclosure as deemed necessary to assure compliance with this article. 
(j)  The owner of an animal that has been determined to be dangerous by another jurisdiction is prohibited from having such animal within the city limits. 
(k)  The owner of a dangerous animal shall immediately notify the animal services manager of all attacks made by the animal on humans or domestic animals, or if the animal is at large. For the purposes of this chapter, immediate shall mean within ten minutes of the owner becoming aware of the attacks or the animal being at large. Notification shall be made to the city's emergency dispatch system (911). 
(l)  The owner of a dangerous animal shall notify the animal services manager of the death of such animal by providing satisfactory proof to the local rabies control authority. 
(m)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous animal and the animal makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the animal's enclosure, and the attack causes bodily injury to the other person. 
(n)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous animal and the animal makes an unprovoked attack on a domestic animal or domestic fowl while such animal is at large, and the attack causes bodily injury or death to the domestic animal or domestic fowl. 
(o)  A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous animal commits an offense if the person fails to comply with requirements for owners of dangerous animals set forth in subsection (i) herein. 
(p)  A person commits an offense if he owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous animal without having such animal currently registered as a dangerous animal with the city animal services division. 
(q)  The owner of a dangerous animal commits an offense if he fails to comply with subsection (k) herein. 
(r)  The owner of a dangerous animal commits an offense if he sells or gives the animal to another person and fails to notify the other person at the time of the sale or gift that the animal is a registered dangerous animal. 
(s)  The owner of a registered dangerous animal commits an offense if he fails to display on such animal a current dangerous animal registration tag issued by the city's animal services division. 
(t)  If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court shall order the animal services manager to impound and humanely destroy the animal immediately. 
(u)  The animal services manager shall be authorized to obtain a search and seizure warrant if there is reason to believe any requirements of this section are being violated. 
(v)  Appeal. 
(1)  Orders of the animal services manager pertaining to a dangerous animal may be appealed to the city municipal court. Appeals to the court shall be made by the owner filing a written notice of appeal with the court not later than the 15th day after receiving notice that the animal has been determined to be dangerous. During the pendency of the appeal, the order of the animal services manager shall be suspended, and the animal shall remain impounded at the owner's expense at the animal services facility. The decision of the municipal court may be appealed as set forth in Texas Health and Safety Code section 822.0424, as amended. 
(2)  The appeal before the municipal court shall be a trial de novo. The standard procedures for trial settings in the municipal court shall be used for these appeals. The appeal is limited to a hearing under the substantial evidence rule and is a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the animal services manager's determination of dangerousness or affirming, reversing, or modifying the manager's decision regarding disposition of the dangerous animal. 
(3)  The owner filing the appeal shall file an appeal bond in the amount of $300.00 with the municipal court. The bond shall be used to cover the cost of daily care of the animal. Should the judge or jury determine the animal is not dangerous the appeal bond may be returned if the amount has not been assessed as costs of daily care. 
(4)  The owner shall be responsible for any costs beyond feeding, including, but not limited to: veterinary care, immunizations, medications, and care for other animals or employees injured by the animal. 
(5)  The judge or jury may render a verdict in the appeal regarding the disposition of the dangerous animal that conforms to the requirements set forth in subsections (g), (h), or (i), whichever is applicable. 
(6)  The owner shall pay all assessed costs before the animal is released to the owner. 
(w)  Noncompliance. 
(1)  Upon receipt of a sworn, written complaint by any person that the owner of a previously determined dangerous animal has failed to comply with subsection (i) herein or has failed to remove the dog from the city as required by order of the animal services manager or the municipal court, the municipal court shall conduct a hearing to determine whether the owner is in compliance with subsection (i) herein or with an order of removal, whichever applies. The hearing must be conducted within 30 days after receipt of the complaint, but, if the dog is already impounded, not later than ten days after the date on which the dog was seized or delivered. The municipal court shall provide, either in person or by mail, written notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing to the animal owner and to the complainant. Any interested person may present evidence at the hearing. 
(2)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the municipal court shall: 
a.  Find that the owner of a dangerous dog is in compliance with subsection (i) herein or with an order of removal, whichever applies, and, if the animal is impounded, order the animal services manager to waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the animal to its owner; or 
b.  Find that the owner of a dangerous dog is not in compliance with subsection (h) herein or with an order of removal, whichever applies, and order the animal services manager to seize and impound the dog (if the animal is not already impounded) and to: 
1.  Humanely destroy the animal if the animal services manager determines that the owner has not complied with subsection (i) of this section by the 11th day after the date the municipal court issues an order under this subsection or the animal is seized and impounded, whichever occurs later, or release the animal to the owner if the animal services manager determines that the owner has complied with subsection (i) before the 11th day; 
2.  Release the animal to the owner if the animal services manager determines that the owner will permanently remove the animal from the city before the 11th day after the date the municipal court issues an order under this subsection or the animal is seized and impounded, whichever occurs later, and re-seize, impound, and humanely destroy the animal if the owner has not permanently removed the dog from the city by the 11th day; or 
3.  Humanely destroy the animal if: 
i.  The animal services manager determines that the owner will not comply with subsection (i) of this section by the 11th day after the date the municipal court issues an order under this subsection or the animal is seized and impounded, whichever occurs later; 
ii.  The animal services manager determines that the owner will not permanently remove the animal from the city before the 11th day after the date the municipal court issues an order under this subsection or the animal is seized and impounded, whichever occurs later; or 
iii.  The owner of the animal cannot be located before the 15th day after the date the municipal court issues an order under this subsection or the animal is seized and impounded, whichever occurs later. 
(3)  The owner of the dangerous animal is responsible for all costs of seizure, acceptance, and impoundment, and all costs must be paid before the animal will be released to the owner. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-261. - Burden of proof regarding identification. 
It is a rebuttable presumption, rebuttable by a preponderance of the evidence, that a declaration by the city's animal services manager of an animal as a dangerous animal, and a party as an owner, pursuant to this article, establishes that fact as a matter of law. The burden to rebut that legal presumption lies with the owner of the animal. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-262. - Listing of registered dangerous animals. 
The animal services manager shall publish a list available to any citizen that states the identifying information of all animals deemed dangerous. The dangerous animal's address, description, and pictures shall be included as well as any other information deemed pertinent. The list shall be available at the animal services facility and on the city's webpage. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Secs. 18-263—18-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BACKYARD CHICKENS 
 
Sec. 18-300. - Backyard chickens allowed; permits. 
(a)  A person may harbor or possess not less than three and not more than six backyard chickens on residential property or on property owned or leased by the city, a school, or an educational facility within the city after first having obtained a permit from the city for such location and payment of a nonrefundable application fee set forth in Appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  Permit application. A person who desires to harbor or possess backyard chickens on residential property within the city on which the person identifies as the person's primary residence shall: 
(1)  Submits an application for a permit to animal services on a form provided by the city accompanied by a site plan showing the proposed location for the chicken coop on the property, and a floor plan and side elevations for the chicken coop to be located on the property; 
(2)  Pay a nonrefundable application fee in the amount set forth in Appendix A of this Code; 
(3)  If the applicant is a person other than the owner of the property on which the backyard chicken(s) will be kept, submit with the permit application written authorization from the property owner to keep three or more backyard chickens on the property identified in the permit application, which authorization must bear the property owner's signature; 
(4)  Successfully attend and complete an education program offered by the city for the keeping of back yard chickens and submit the certificate of completion of the program with the application for permit. 
(c)  Not more than one permit may be issued for an individual property, tract or residential lot. 
(d)  The permit is nontransferable and shall be valid and effective until the permit holder no longer resides at the property for which the permit was issued, in the event the person ceases to harbor or keep backyard chickens on the property, or the permit is otherwise revoked pursuant to this article. 
(e)  The permit shall not supersede, replace or control over any recorded deed restrictions, covenants or other restrictions applicable to such residential property. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-301. - Standards for keeping backyard chickens. 
A person keeping three or more backyard chickens on residential property or on property owned or leased by the city, a school, or an educational facility within the city shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Not less than three and not more than six backyard chickens may be kept on an individual property, tract or residential lot; 
(2)  Backyard chickens shall be kept within a secure chicken coop constructed with three or more sides with a roof or other cover capable of allowing the chickens within the coop to remain dry and protected from the elements and which provides for direct access by an enclosed passage between the roosting area and exercise yard. Backyard chickens shall be kept within the chicken coop and exercise yard except when being removed to be transported off the property, or returned from a location off the property; provided, however, backyard chickens under the direct supervision and control of, and in the presence of, an adult may be allowed to roam in the rear yard outside of the chicken coop and exercise yard if the entire rear yard is secured by an enclosed perimeter fence; 
(3)  No more than one chicken coop and one exercise yard shall be allowed on the property and must be located in the rear half of the lot not less than five feet from any property line; 
(4)  The height of the chicken coop shall not exceed the greater of six feet or the lowest height of the existing fence enclosing the rear yard where the chicken coop is located, but in no case greater than eight feet in height; 
(5)  The chicken coop shall provide at least five square feet of area per backyard chicken, but in no case, exceed a total of 80 square feet of area; 
(6)  The exercise yard shall be not less than 15 square feet in area per backyard chicken not exceed a total 120 square feet in area; 
(7)  The chicken coop and exercise yard must be maintained in a sanitary condition and the accumulation of backyard chicken waste on the property is prohibited; 
(8)  Nuisance odors or excessive noise shall not be allowed to travel beyond the property line and disturb neighbors of ordinary sensibilities; 
(9)  Adequate food, shelter, water, and care shall be provided in a humane manner to the backyard chicken(s); 
(10)  No backyard chicken or backyard chicken byproducts, including, but not limited to eggs, may be sold by, under the direction of, or with the consent of the permit holder; 
(11)  Medical treatment from a Texas-licensed veterinarian must be timely obtained by the permit holder and provided to any backyard chicken(s) showing symptoms of illness or injury; and 
(12)  Any processing of deceased backyard chickens shall not occur in any area visible from the public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-302. - Construction standards for chicken coops and exercise yards. 
(a)  Chicken coops. Chicken coops shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The chicken coop must be constructed in a workmanship like manner of naturally decay-resistant wood, or wood that has been pressure treated to resist decay or galvanized steel or aluminum; 
(2)  Exposed wood material of the chicken coop shall be stained, sealed or painted to provide additional weather protection to the material; 
(3)  The chicken coop may be located above the exercise yard; and 
(4)  The tallest part of the chicken coop shall not exceed the greater of six feet above grade or the lowest height above grade of the existing fence enclosing the rear yard where the chicken coop is located, but in no case greater than eight feet in height above grade, measured at the lowest elevation property line in the rear yard, even if located on top of the exercise yard. 
(b)  Exercise yard construction. Exercise yards shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The exercise yard shall be constructed in a workmanship like manner of a frame of naturally decay resistant wood, wood that has been pressure treated to resist decay, galvanized steel or aluminum; 
(2)  Any wood used on the exercise yard frame shall be stained, sealed or painted; 
(3)  The exercise yard frame shall be maintained in good and sound condition; and 
(4)  The exercise yard frame shall securely hold the wire enclosure on all edges of the enclosure. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-303. - Roosters not authorized. 
(a)  A permit issued pursuant to this article does not authorize the possession or keeping of a rooster on any property within the city. It is an offense for any person to keep, harbor or possess a rooster within the city. A person convicted of such offense shall be subject to a penalty of fine in the amount of not less than $1,000.00. 
(b)  It shall be a defense to a violation of this section if on the date of the offense the rooster was 60 days old or younger. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-304. - Keeping excess chickens. 
A person commits an offense if the person possesses or keeps more than six backyard chickens on any property within the city. Each day that a person keeps or possesses more than six backyard chickens on property within the city shall constitute a separate offense. A person convicted of an offense under this section shall be subject to a penalty or fine in the amount of not less than $100.00 for each backyard chicken in excess of six that the person has possessed or kept on property within the city. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-305. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit issued by the city pursuant to this article may be revoked upon a finding by the animal services manager after written notice to the permit holder that the permit holder has violated any provision of this article. The permit holder may appeal the revocation to the city manager, or designee whose decision shall be final. The permit holder shall have until 5:00 p.m. of the second business day following receipt of the notice of revocation to appeal the permit revocation to the city manager by submitting such appeal in writing to the city manager. The appeal shall be heard by the city manager within ten business days following receipt of a timely notice of appeal at a hearing at which the Animal Services and permit holder may submit oral and documentary evidence and testimony, and are provided an opportunity to ask questions of witnesses. No rules of evidence will apply to the conduct of such hearing. The city manager, or designee, shall make a final determination to either repeal or uphold the permit revocation, which decision shall be final. If the permit holder fails to timely file an appeal of the permit revocation, or if the city manager, or designee upholds the permit revocation following an appeal, the permit holder will have 72 hours to remove the backyard chickens from the city following the date the notice of revocation is delivered to the permit holder or the date the city manager, or designee denies the appeal of the permit revocation, whichever is later. 
(b)  A permit issued by the city pursuant to this article shall be revoked upon a finding by animal services that the permit holder has been convicted of three or more violations of the Code of Ordinances including this article. A permit revoked pursuant to this subsection (b) is not appealable and such person (and such premises while owned or occupied by such person) shall not be eligible for a permit for back yard chickens under this article. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Secs. 18-306—18-325. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RABIES AND ZOONOSIS CONTROL 
 
Sec. 18-326. - State regulations adopted. 
The city hereby adopts by reference the Texas Rabies Control Act of 1981, as amended, (Chapter 826 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended) and the standards established by the appropriate state agency or Texas Board of Health as minimum standards for rabies control and quarantine provisions within the city. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-327. - Local rabies control authority. 
(a)  Designation of local rabies control authority. The animal services manager and his designees are hereby designated as the local rabies control authority for purposes of enforcement Texas Health and Safety Code Chapter 826, as amended. 
(b)  Duties. Among other duties, as the local rabies control authority, the animal services manager, either directly or through the city's animal services officers, shall enforce: 
(1)  Chapter 826 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, and the rules adopted by the Texas Board of Health that comprise the minimum standards for rabies control and any other applicable state and federal laws related to zoonotic diseases; 
(2)  City ordinances governing the control of rabies within the city; and, 
(3)  The rules adopted by the Texas Board of Health under the area rabies quarantine provisions of Texas Health and Safety Code, section 826.045, as amended, and any other applicable state and federal laws related to zoonotic diseases. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-328. - Notification of local rabies control incidents or zoonotic disease. 
(a)  Any licensed veterinarian or technician working for a veterinarian who diagnoses, examines, or treats any animal diagnosed to have, or suspected to have, rabies, a non-natural infection of anthrax, avian influenza, brucellosis, campylobacteriosis, Escherichia coli 0157:H7, hantavirus, Lyme Disease, monkey pox, plague, Q-fever, rabies, Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, Salmonellosis, Tularemia, West Nile virus, or any other zoonotic encephalitis, or other zoonotic diseases transmissible to humans, shall immediately report their findings to the animal services manager. 
(b)  Any physician or other medical or veterinary practitioner having knowledge of a local rabies control incident shall notify the animal services manager of the names, addresses and phone numbers of persons or animals treated. 
(c)  Any person owning or possessing an animal which has been involved in a local rabies control incident, or any other person having knowledge of the local rabies control incident, shall notify the animal services manager within 24 hours of said incident. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if he has knowledge of a local rabies control incident and fails to notify the animal services manager within 24 hours of said incident. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if he has knowledge that an animal within the city carries any of the diseases listed in this section and fails to notify the animal services manager of said animal within 24 hours of first obtaining knowledge of said infection. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if he has knowledge of a local rabies control incident and fails to provide the following information to the animal services manager within 24 hours of said incident: 
(1)  The name and contact information (telephone number or address) of the victim of said local rabies control incident; or 
(2)  The name and contact information (telephone number or address) of the owner of the animal involved in a local rabies control incident, provided that the owner's name and contact information should be reasonably known to that person. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-329. - Quarantine. 
(a)  Any animal that an animal services officer has probable cause to believe was exposed to or is infected with rabies, or that the agent has probable cause to believe has been involved in a local rabies control incident, shall be placed under quarantine. Animals shall be quarantined according to state law and rules. Owners of animals being quarantined at the animal services facility shall pay an animal services quarantine fee. 
(b)  Any animal that is required to be quarantined under subsection (a) herein that is concurrently required to take medication for any medical condition shall be quarantined at a licensed veterinarian facility or in a home quarantine in accordance with subsection (c) herein. 
(c)  Upon request by the owner, a home quarantine may be allowed if the animal services officer determines all state requirements for a home quarantine are met and the owner complies with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Isolates the animal from all people and pets other than those that lived with the biting animal at the quarantining residence prior to the local rabies control incident; 
(2)  Agrees to allow an animal services officer to inspect the animal and residence at any reasonable time during the quarantine period; 
(3)  Agrees to contact the animal services manager immediately if the animal escapes from the residence, dies, attacks any other person or animal, exhibits any change in behavior, or exhibits any sign of illness; 
(4)  Confines the animal inside a residence or dwelling at all times other than times for evacuation of waste material. During evacuation, the animal shall be kept on a tether not more than six feet in length and must remain under the direct physical control of an adult at all times; 
(5)  Agrees to keep the animal at the approved residence or dwelling throughout the quarantine period unless prior written approval to move the animal is obtained from the animal services officer; 
(6)  Agrees to keep the animal under quarantine until the animal is cleared by the animal services officer; 
(7)  Implants a microchip in the animal in compliance with this chapter; 
(8)  Agrees to immediately turn the animal over to a state-approved rabies quarantine facility for the duration of the quarantine period as ordered by the animal services manager if any section of this chapter is violated; and 
(9)  Pays the home quarantine fee as set by this chapter. 
(d)  Should a potential outbreak of rabies within the city be suspected and the danger to the public safety from rabid animals be reasonably imminent, the animal services manager is hereby authorized to issue a quarantine proclamation, ordering persons owning, keeping, or harboring dogs, cats or other warm-blooded animals to muzzle the same or confine them for the time as may be specified in the quarantine proclamation. Upon the publication of the proclamation by local newspapers, persons owning or harboring animals addressed by the proclamation shall confine them to premises unless they are effectively muzzled and under the control of an adult person by a tether not more than six feet in length. After publication of the proclamation, an animal found to be in violation of the order or at large may be impounded or destroyed by an animal services agent if such agent is unable, with reasonable effort, to apprehend the animal for impoundment. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if the person fails or refuses to immediately comply with the animal services manager's order to quarantine an animal in response to a potential outbreak of rabies. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Secs. 18-330—18-335. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 18-336. - Nuisances. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person is an owner of an animal and the person permits, or by insufficient control allows, any of the following to occur: 
(1)  Creation of any condition on the owner's property, or that carries over to an adjacent property, that renders the ground, the water, the air or the food hazardous or injurious to animal life or health or that is offensive to the senses or that is detrimental to the public health; 
(2)  Allowing any female animal in estrus to be on any public property, or any private property not owned by the animal's owner, except to transport said animal to a veterinarian for treatment or to a planned breeding in compliance with all other provisions of this chapter; or 
(3)  Feeding of a cat(s) (feral or not) or wildlife not belonging to the person by setting food in the open outside of a building, whether said food is left attended or unattended. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of an animal and the person fails to immediately remove and dispose of any excreta the animal produces. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (b) of this section if the owner proves by preponderance of the evidence that: 
(1)  The property where the animal defecated was owned, leased, or controlled by the owner of the animal at the time it defecated; 
(2)  The animal was an assistance animal, and at the time it defecated, the animal was in the presence of its disabled person or was present on the property of its disabled person; 
(3)  The owner of the property or person in control of the property had given prior written consent for the animal to defecate on the property; 
(4)  The animal is a police service animal being used in official law enforcement activities; or 
(5)  The animal is under the direction and control of a non-profit search and rescue organization participating in an authorized search and rescue activity. 
(d)  After the third offense resulting in conviction, as defined in this chapter, of any person with care, custody, or control of an animal, for violating any provision of this article VIII, section 18-336 or 18-337 in any 12 consecutive month period, the animal services manager or officer may petition the city's municipal court for a hearing to determine if such animal is a continuing public nuisance. Within 24 hours of receiving notice from the animal services manager that an animal a petition has been filed under this subsection, the owner of said animal shall cause said animal to be impounded and boarded at the owner's expense at the animal services facility pending the disposition of the animal in conformance with the municipal judge's order. The subject animal may be seized and impounded by an animal services officer if the owner does not comply with the impoundment requirements herein. After the hearing, which shall be held within 20 days of the court's receipt of a petition, a city municipal court judge may order the subject animal be: 
(1)  Humanely euthanized; 
(2)  Excluded from the city limits of Farmers Branch of the animal; 
(3)  Released to the ownership of the animal services facility; or 
(4)  Returned to the owner. 
(e)  After an order in subsection (d) herein is issued by the municipal court, the owner shall comply with the order or within the time specified in the court order, or if no time for compliance is specified in the order, within 48 hours after the order is signed by the judge. 
(f)  If a judge orders that the animal is to be removed from the city limits, the owner shall provide the address of the location of the animal to the animal services manager in writing within 72 hours of the signing of the order. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Sec. 18-337. - Running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person raising or keeping any animal to fail to prevent any such animal from running at large within the city, or to fail to prevent any such animal from going upon the premises of another. 
( Ord. No. 3518, § 1, 8-21-2018 )  
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Dangerous structures, § 9.09; building permits, § 9.10. 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, § 30-71 et seq.; erosion and sedimentation control regulations, § 34-31 et seq.; noise regulations, § 34-246 et seq.; flood damage prevention, § 42-31 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 22-31—22-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3459 , § 1, adopted Aug. 15, 2017, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 22-51—22-54, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2273, §§ 1, 4—6, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 2522, §§ 5—8, 3-6-2000; Ord. No. 3061, § 2, 2-2-2010; Ord. No. 3264, § 1, 3-3-2014. 
 
Sec. 22-51. - Building permit fees. 
The fees to be charged to and paid by an applicant upon approval of an application for a permit issued pursuant to sections 109 and 110 of the Building Code as adopted by Article III of this chapter, and Sections R108 and R109 of the Residential Code as adopted by Article III.5 of this chapter, shall be in the amounts set forth in Appendix A of this Code identified by this section. 
( Ord. No. 3459 , § 1, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 22-52. - Plumbing, mechanical, electrical, and irrigation permit fees. 
The fees to be charged to and paid by an applicant upon approval of an application for each permit for plumbing, mechanical, electrical, irrigation issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be in the amounts set forth in Appendix A of this Code identified by this section. 
( Ord. No. 3459 , § 1, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 22-53. - Registration of contractors. 
All plumbing contractors, mechanical contractors, irrigation contractors, fire sprinkler contractors, electrical contractors, sign companies, and master, plant and journeyman electricians performing work within the city must be registered with the city's building inspection department prior to commencing performance of any work within the city. 
( Ord. No. 3459 , § 1, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 22-54. - Final calculation and payment of required construction cost fees. 
(a)  Except for permits fees assessed in association with construction of a residential dwelling, the construction values used for calculating permit fees for all projects, shall be not less than the most set forth in the building valuation data (BVD) table published by International Code Council (ICC) in August of the calendar year immediately prior to the date of submission of the application to the building inspections department. Every permit application shall set forth: 
(1)  The applicant's estimated total value of the construction that is the subject of the application including, but not limited to, the estimated value of all materials, equipment, labor, overhead and profit; 
(2)  The square footage area of the structure(s) to be constructed; 
(3)  The type of construction and occupancy class of the structure to be constructed as determined by the applicable construction code(s) adopted pursuant to articles III through VII.7 of this chapter; 
(4)  The signed statement of the applicant stating that the statements and information set forth in the application is to true and correction. 
(b)  Calculating permit fees for all projects associated with residential dwellings will be performed using the rate per square foot or the flat rate that corresponds with the appropriate the scope of work. Every permit application shall set forth: 
(1)  The scope of work of the project; 
(2)  The square footage area of the structure(s) to be constructed, remodeled, renovated or otherwise effected; 
(3)  The type of construction and occupancy class of the structure to be constructed as determined by the applicable construction code(s) adopted pursuant to articles III through VII.7 of this chapter; and 
(4)  The signed statement of the applicant stating that the statements and information set forth in the application is to true and correction. 
(c)  If upon completion of construction of the building that is the subject of a permit for which the permit fee was calculated in accordance with subsection (a) of this section the actual cost of construction is determined to exceed by greater than five percent the value of construction set forth in the permit application, not later than ten days after receipt by the applicant of written demand from the city, the applicant shall amend the application and pay the difference between the permit fee(s) calculated based on the increased construction value and the amount of the permit fee(s) paid at the time of issuance of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 3459 , § 1, 8-15-2017; Ord. No. 3576 , § 1, 6-18-2019)  
Sec. 22-55. - Plan review deposit. 
A non-refundable plan review deposit of one-half of the permit fees, calculated in accordance with section 22-54, shall be paid at the time of submitting construction plans for review. If the calculated permit fees are $1,000.00 or less, the total permit fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans for review. 
( Ord. No. 3459 , § 1, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 22-56. - Permit revision fee. 
If construction plans are revised after issuance of a building permit to the extent the permit must be amended, and the plan revisions are not requested or required by the city, a permit revision fee of $150.00 per hour, with a one hour minimum, shall be paid, based on the number of hours spent by city staff reviewing and approving the revised construction plans and preparing the revised permit. The amount of the permit revision fees charged after the initial one-hour minimum shall be determined based on the nearest whole hour. The fee required by this section must be paid upon completion of the permit revision review and prior to issuance of the amended permit. 
( Ord. No. 3459 , § 1, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 22-57. - Permit expediting fee. 
(a)  A permit expediting fee in an amount equal to the permit fee calculated pursuant to section 22-54 may be paid in addition to the permit fee to reduce standard permit turnaround times. 
(b)  Permit expediting fees shall be paid in full at the time of submitting plans for plan review and are in addition to the plan review deposit required by section 22-55. 
(c)  The permit expediting fee is applicable only to permit applications that do not require additional review outside of the building department. 
(d)  Permit expediting fees are non-refundable; provided, however, if, after payment of the permit expediting fee, the building official determines the project that is the subject of the application is of sufficient size or complexity that the amount of time required to review and comment on the construction plans cannot reasonably be accomplished with the required time for expedited review set forth in subsection (e) of this section, the building official shall return or otherwise be authorized to refund the permit expediting fee to the party paying such fee. 
(e)  With respect to a permit application for which a permit expediting fee has been accepted, the building official or designee reviewing the plans in association with the application shall complete the review of the plans and reply with written comments to the applicant and/or issue the permit not later than seven business days after receipt of the permit application, the required number of sets of complete construction plans, and the building permit fee and permit expediting fee have been paid. If the plans are returned to the applicant with a request for changes and resubmission for review prior to issuance of the requested permit, the review and comment period by the city reviewer of the application shall not exceed seven business days after delivery to the building inspections department of the revised plans. 
( Ord. No. 3459 , § 1, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 22-58. - Technology fee. 
In addition to the other fees required by this division, a non-refundable technology fee will be paid at the time of issuance of a building permit in the amount set forth in Appendix "A" of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 3459 , § 1, 8-15-2017)  
Secs. 22-59—22-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Building regulation generally, § 9.10; condemnation of dangerous structures, § 9.09. 
Cross reference— Construction noises, limitation, § 34-248; accumulations of lumber, boxes, etc., prohibited, § 34-289. 
 
Sec. 22-86. - Adoption of International Building Code; purpose. 
There is hereby adopted by the City of Farmers Branch, Texas, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, quality of materials, erection, construction, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, conversion, addition to, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all building or structures, the 2018 International Building Code, published by the International Code Council, including Appendix E "Supplementary Accessibility Regulations", Appendix F "Rodent Proofing", Appendix G "Flood Restraint Construction" and Appendix J "Grading"; with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended by this article, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein, the same as if entirely set out at length herein, and from the date of which this article shall take effect, the provisions hereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. This code shall be known as the "building code" or the "Farmers Branch Building Code." 
(Code 1969, § 8-1; Ord. No. 1168, §§ 1—30, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1182, §§ 1—5, 3-20-1978; Ord. No. 1243, § 1, 4-16-1979; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 9-4-1979; Ord. No. 1272, § 1, 9-17-1979; Ord. No. 1278, § 1, 11-5-1979; Ord. No. 1370, §§ 1—3, 12-7-1981; Ord. No. 1442, §§ 1—34, 5-2-1983; Ord. No. 1525, § 1, 9-17-1984; Ord. No. 1631, § 1, 4-21-1986; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 2-16-1987; Ord. No. 1738, § 1, 12-7-1987; Ord. No. 2012, § 1, 1-4-1993; Ord. No. 2268, § 1, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 2529, § 1, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 2644, § 2, 4, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2835, § 2, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2967, § 2, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3265, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3405 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3606 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Sec. 22-87. - Local amendments to International Building Code. 
For purposes of enforcement of the provisions of the building code within the incorporated limits of the city, the following sections, paragraphs, and sentences of the 2015 Edition of the International Building Code are hereby amended as follows: 
Section 101.4 is amended to read as follows: 
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.8 and referenced elsewhere in this code, when specifically adopted, shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 101.4 is amended by adding a new Section 101.4.8 to read as follows: 
101.4.7 Electrical. The provisions of the Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
Sections 103 and 103.1 is amended by replacing the phrase "Department of Building Safety" with "Building Inspections Department-City of Farmers Branch" where it appears. 
Section 104.2.1 is deleted. 
Section 104.10.1 is deleted. 
Section 105.2 is amended to read as follows: 
105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
1.  Retaining Walls which are not over two feet (2') in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids. A building permit must be obtained for any wall two feet (2') in height or higher. In addition to the building permit application, the retaining wall contractor needs to submit two construction plans identifying the height and length of each portion of the retaining wall, as well as the material being used for the wall. If any portion of the retaining wall is four feet (4') in height or higher, the construction plans must be prepared by a certified professional engineer. The wall shall be measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall. It will be the responsibility of the retaining wall contractor to have his certified professional engineer inspect his walls following construction, if any portion is over four feet (4') in height. Walls under four feet (4') will be the sole responsibility of the retaining wall contractor. 
2.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1. 
3.  Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade and not over any basement or story below and which are not part of an accessible route. 
4.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
5.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
6.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems. 
7.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family dwellings. 
8.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R-3, as applicable in Section 101.2, and Group U occupancies. 
9.  Movable cases, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (5'9") (1,753 mm) in height. 
Section 105.5 is amended to read as follows: 
[A]105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after the issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. An application for a permit for a project for which a permit has expired pursuant to the previous sentence shall be treated as a new application and shall require the payment of a permit fee applicable to a new permit application. 
[A]105.5.1. Expiration of Active Permits. All permits that have not expired pursuant to Section 105.5 shall nevertheless expire 730 days after the date of issuance whether or not all work authorized by said permit is completed on or before said expiration date. 
[A]105.5.2. Extensions of Time. An extension of a permit set to expire pursuant to Section 105.5.1 may be requested in writing not later than 30 days prior to the date of expiration of a permit pursuant to Section 105.5.1, which request must demonstrate justifiable cause for the need for such extension. The building official may grant in writing one or more extensions of such permit provided the total period of all extensions shall not exceed one (1) year from the expiration date of the original permit. 
[A]105.5.3. Longer Extensions. The holder of a permit for which the maximum extension allowed pursuant to Section 105.5.2 may make application to the City Council for an additional extension of the permit by submitting such application in writing not later than 30 days prior to the then current expiration date of the permit, which request must demonstrate justifiable cause for the need for such extension. 
[A]105.5.4. Fee for Permit Extensions. Before any extension of a permit granted pursuant to Sections 105.5.2 and/or 105.5.3, the holder of the permit for which an extension is granted shall pay an additional permit fee in an amount equal to (i) the number of days for which the permit extension is granted (ii) divided by 730, then (iii) multiplied by the amount of the permit fee at the time of issuance of the original permit. 
Section 109 is amended by adding Sections 109.7, 109.8, 109.8.1, 109.8.2 and 109.9 to read as follows: 
109.7 Re-inspection Fee. A re-inspection fee as established by city council resolution may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives; 
2.  No building address or permit card is clearly posted; 
3.  City approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector; 
4.  The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called; 
5.  The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item; 
6.  The original red tag has been removed from the job site; and 
7.  Failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection. 
Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
109.8 Work without a permit. 
109.8.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
109.8.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code or the city fee schedule as applicable. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt the applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes nor from penalty prescribed by law. 
109.9 Unauthorized cover up fee. Any work concealed without first obtaining the required inspection in violation of Section 110 shall be assessed a fee as set forth in the city fee schedule. 
Section 110.3.5 is amended by deleting the "Exception". 
Section 202 is amended by amending the definitions of "Ambulatory Health Care Facility," "Atrium," "High-Rise Building," and "Special Inspector" to read as follows: 
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individuals who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group may include but not be limited to the following: 
- Dialysis centers 
- Sedation dentistry 
- Surgery centers 
- Colonic centers 
- Psychiatric centers 
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories... {Balance remains unchanged} 
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
SPECIAL INSPECTOR. A qualified person employed or retained by an approved agency who shall prove to the satisfaction of the registered design professional in responsible charge and the Building Official as having the competence necessary to inspect a particular type of construction requiring special inspection. 
Section 202 is amended by adding definitions for the phrases "Assisted Living Facilities," and "Repair Garage" to read as follows: 
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a 24-hour basis, who because of age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment which provides personal care services. The occupants are capable of responding to an emergency situation without physical assistance from staff. 
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs. 
Section 303.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
303.1.3 Associated with Group E occupancies. A room or space used for assembly purposes that is associated with a Group E occupancy is not considered a separate occupancy except when applying the assembly requirements of Chapters 10 and 11. 
Section 304.1 is amended to add the following to the list of occupancies: 
Fire stations 
Police stations with detention facilities for 5 or less 
Section 307.1 is amended by adding the following language to the end of Exception 4. Cleaning Establishments: 
See also IFC chapter 21, Dry Cleaning Plant provisions. 
Section 403.1 is amended by amending Paragraph 3 under "Exceptions" to read as follows: 
3.  Open air portions of buildings with a Group A-5 occupancy in accordance with Section 303.6. 
Section 403.3 is amended by deleting Paragraph 2 under "Exceptions." 
Section 403.3.2 is amended by amending the first paragraph to read as follows: 
403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (36.5 m) in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate. 
Section 404.5 is amended by deleting the paragraph titled "Exception." 
Section 406.3.3.1 is amended by adding the following sentence: 
A fire separation is not required between a Group R-2 and U carport provided that the carport is entirely open on all sides and that the distance between the two is at least 10 feet (3048 mm). 
Section 506.3.1 is amended to by adding the following sentence: 
In order to be considered as accessible, if not in direct contact with a street or fire lane, a minimum 10-foot wide pathway meeting fire department access from the street or approved fire lane shall be provided. 
Section 602.1.1 is amended by adding the following sentence: 
Where a building contains more than one distinct type of construction, the building shall comply with the most restrictive area, height, and stories, for the lesser type of construction or be separated by fire walls. 
Section 708.4.2 is amended by amending paragraph 1 under "Exceptions" to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  Buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, or in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 provided that sprinkler protection is provided in the space between the top of the fire partition and the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above as required for systems complying with Section 903.3.1.1. Portions of buildings containing concealed spaces filled with noncombustible insulation as permitted for sprinkler omission shall not apply to this exception for draftstopping. 
Section 718.3 is amended by adding a paragraph title "Exceptions" to read as follows: 
Exceptions: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. and provided that in combustible construction, sprinkler protection is provided in the floor space. 
Section 718.4 is amended by amending the paragraph titled "Exceptions" to read as follows: 
Exceptions: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and provided that in combustible construction, sprinkler protection is provided in the attic space. 
Section 901.6.1 is amended by adding a new Section 901.6.1.1 to read as follows: 
901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years: 
1.  The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be backflushed or inspected by approved camera when foreign material is present or when caps are missing, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems. 
2.  For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system. 
3.  Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised. 
4.  If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official. 
5.  Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as "Fifth Year" for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read "5 Year Standpipe Test" at a minimum. 
6.  The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed. 
7.  Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25. 
8.  Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions. 
9.  Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official. 
Section 901.6 is amended by adding Sections 901.6.4, 901.6.5, and 901.6.6 to read as follows: 
901.6.4 False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given, signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner. 
901.6.5 Systems in high-rise buildings. The owner of a high-rise building shall be responsible for assuring that the fire and life-safety systems required by the Building Code are maintained in an operable condition at all times. Unless otherwise required by the chief, quarterly tests of such systems shall be conducted by approved persons. A written record shall be maintained and shall be made available to the inspection authority. 
901.6.6 Smoke-control systems. Mechanical smoke-control systems, such as those in high-rise buildings, buildings containing atria, covered mall buildings and mechanical ventilation systems utilized in smokeproof enclosures and for smoke-removal systems utilized in high-piled combustible storage occupancies, shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times. Unless otherwise required by the chief, quarterly tests of such systems shall be conducted by approved persons. A written record shall be maintained and shall be made available to the inspection authority. 
Section 901.7 is amended to read as follows: 
901.7 Systems Out of Service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in the event of an excessive number of activations, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shut down until the fire protection system has been returned to service. ... {Remaining text unchanged} 
Section 903.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard, or as approved by the fire code official. 
Section 903.2 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12. Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED." 
Section 903.2.8.5, is amended by adding Section 903.2.8.5 to read as follows: 
903.2.8.5 Townhouses. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all Group R-3 Townhouse Occupancies. 
Section 903.2.9 is amended by adding Section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows: 
903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities. 
Section 903.2.11.3 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.11.3 Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings that have one or more stories other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1510 of the International Building Code located 35 feet (10 668 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage and has a minimum of two complete sides unobstructed for fire department access by roadway or fire lane. 
2.  All Group R-3 Single Family Home (detached) Occupancies. 
Amend Section 903.2.11 by adding Sections 903.2.11.7, 903.2.11.8, and 903.2.11.9 to read as follows: 
903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4572 mm), see Chapter 32 of the IFC to determine if those provisions apply. 
903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
903.2.11.9 Buildings Over 6,000 sq. ft. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all buildings with a building area over 6,000 sq. ft. or greater and in all existing buildings that are enlarged to be 6,000 sq. ft. or greater. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings. 
In all buildings and structures where Section 903.2 of the International Fire Code requires automatic sprinkler systems to be installed in buildings or structures of less than 6,000 square feet shall be enforced. 
Firewalls or fire barriers shall not be used to subdivide a building or structure into separate buildings to avoid the requirement to install a fire extinguishing system or automatic sprinkler system as required by this Section 903.2. 
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code. 
Section 903.3.1.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the building official and fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion and/or rate of rise heat detectors. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance rated construction or contains electrical equipment. 
1.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard as determined by the building official or fire code official. 
2.  Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the building official or fire code official. 
3.  Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
4.  Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. 
Section 903.3.1.2 is amended by adding Section 903.3.1.2.3 to read as follows: 
903.3.1.2.3 Attics, Open Breezeways, and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic spaces of such buildings two or more stories in height, open breezeways, and in the following attic spaces: 
1.  Attics that are used or intended for living purposes or storage shall be protected by an automatic sprinkler system. 
2.  Where fuel-fired equipment is installed in an unsprinklered attic, not fewer than one quick-response intermediate temperature sprinkler shall be installed above the equipment. 
3.  Attic spaces of buildings that are two or more stories in height above grade plane or above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
4.  Group R-4, Condition 2 occupancy attics not required by Item 1 or 3 to have sprinklers shall comply with one of the following: 
4.1.  Provide automatic sprinkler system protection. 
4.2.  Provide a heat detection system throughout the attic that is arranged to activate the building fire alarm system. 
4.3.  Construct the attic using noncombustible materials. 
4.4.  Construct the attic using fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section 2303.2 of the International Building Code. 
4.5.  Fill the attic with noncombustible insulation. 
Section 903.3.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law. 
Section 903.3.1 is amended by adding Section 903.3.1.4 to read as follows: 
903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section. 
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, preaction, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces. 
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces where: 
1.  The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the building, and 
2.  Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard, and 
3.  The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level. 
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved by the fire code official. 
Section 903.3.5 is amended to read as follows: 
903.3.5 Water supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements of this section and the International Plumbing Code. Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of the respective standards; however, every fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference Section 507.4 for additional design requirements. 
Section 903.4 is amended by adding the following paragraph after the Exceptions. 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Section 903.4.2 is amended to read as follows: 
903.4.2 Alarms. An approved audible device, located on the exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be connected to every automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. 
Section 903.4.3 is amended to read as follows: 
903.4.3 Floor control valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves and shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in all buildings. 
Section 905.2 is amended to read as follows: 
905.2 Installation standards. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14. Manual Dry Standpipes shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum 40-psig-air pressure with a high/low alarm. 
Section 905.3 is amended by adding Section 905.3.9 to read as follows: 
905.3.9 Buildings Exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 150 feet (45720 mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry, or manual dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14 when approved by Code Official. 
2.  R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors. 
Section 905.4 is amended to read as follows: 
905.4 Location of Class I standpipe hose connections. 
Class I standpipe hose connections shall be provided in all of the following locations: 
1.  In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
2.  On each side of the wall adjacent to the exit opening of a horizontal exit. 
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to a horizontal exit are reachable from an interior exit stairway hose connection by a 30-foot (9144 mm) hose stream from a nozzle attached to 100 feet (30480 mm) of hose, a hose connection shall not be required at the horizontal exit. 
3.  In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building. 
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an exit stairway hose connection by a 30- foot (9144 mm) hose stream from a nozzle attached to 100 feet (30480 mm) of hose, a hose connection shall not be required at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of the building. 
4.  In covered mall buildings, adjacent to each exterior public entrance from an exit passageway or exit corridor to the mall. In open mall buildings, adjacent to each public entrance to the mall at the perimeter line and adjacent to each entrance from an exit passageway or exit corridor to the mall. 
5.  Where the roof has a slope less than four unit's vertical in 12 unit's horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the roof or at the highest landing of an exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1011.12. 
6.  Where the most remote portion of a nonsprinklered floor or story is more than 150 feet (45720 mm) from a hose connection or the most remote portion of a sprinklered floor or story is more than 200 feet (60960 mm) from a hose connection, the fire code official is authorized to require that additional hose connections be provided in approved locations. 
7.  When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
Section 905.9 is amended by adding the following paragraph after the Exceptions: 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Paragraph 1 of Section 906.1 is amended to read in its entirety as follows, including the deletion of the Exception: 
1.  In new and existing Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-2, R-4 and S occupancies. 
Section 907.1 is amended by adding Section 907.1.4 to read as follows: 
907.1.4 Design Standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke detectors shall have analog initiating devices. 
Section 907.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. 
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall: 
1.  Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (1 llux) at the walking surface level, and 
2.  Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions. 
Section 907.2.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarms system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, where portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
Exceptions: 
1.  A manual fire alarm system is not required in Group E occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or less when provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
1.1.  Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use hard-wired or wireless interconnected single station detectors with battery backup in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2 ½ or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6). 
2.  Emergency voice/alarm communication systems meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall not be required in Group E occupancies with occupant loads of 100 or less, provided that activation of the manual fire alarm system initiates an approved occupant notification signal in accordance with Section 907.5. 
Section 907.2.4 is amended by deleting the paragraph titled "Exception." 
Section 907.2.7 is amended by deleting Exception 2: 
Section 907.2.8.1 is amended by deleting Exceptions 2, 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3. 
Section 907.2.9.1 is amended by deleting Exceptions 2 and 3. 
Exception 3 in Section 907.2.12 is amended to read as follows: 
3.  Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to skyboxes, restaurants and similarly enclosed areas. 
Section 907.2.12.1.1 is amended by amending numbered paragraph 1 and adding a new numbered paragraph 3 to read as follows: 
1.  In each mechanical equipment, electrical, transformer, telephone equipment or similar room, and Central Control Station. 
* * * 
3.  For Group R, Division 1 Occupancies, in all interior corridors serving as a means of egress for an occupant load of 10 or more. 
Section 907.4.2 is amended by adding Section 907.4.2.7 to read as follows: 
907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm actuating devices shall be an approved double action type. 
Section 907.6.1 is amended by adding Section 907.6.1.1 to read as follows: 
907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from an addressable input (monitor) module may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the addressable module to the initiating device is ten feet or less. 
Section 907.6.3 is amended by deleting all "Exceptions." 
Section 907.6.4.2 is amended to read as follows: 
907.6.4.2 High-rise buildings. In high-rise buildings, a separate zone by floor or an addressable fire alarm system shall be provided, based on the current fire alarm system installation for each of the following types of alarm-initiating devices where provided: 
1.  Smoke detectors. 
2.  Sprinkler waterflow devices. 
3.  Manual fire alarm boxes. 
4.  Other approved types of automatic fire detection devices or suppression systems. 
5.  In Group B office buildings, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire resistive construction within office spaces of a single tenant when the space is equipped with an automatic smoke-detection system within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate alarms audible in all areas served by the corridor. The smoke-detection system shall be connected to the building's fire alarm system where such a system is provided. 
Section 907.6.6 is amended by adding a sentence at the end of paragraph to read as follows: 
See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station. 
Section 907.6.6 is amended by adding Section 907.6.6.3 to read as follows: 
907.6.6.3 Communication requirements. All alarm systems, new or replacement, shall transmit alarm, supervisory and trouble signals descriptively to the approved central station, remote supervisory station or proprietary supervising station as defined in NFPA 72, with the correct device designation and location of addressable device identification. Alarms shall not be permitted to be transmitted as a general alarm or zone condition. 
Section 909.2 is amended by adding Section 909.2.1 to read as follows: 
909.2.1 Smoke-control System for High-Rises. A smoke control system meeting the requirements of Section 909 in the International Fire Code-2018 Edition and this code shall be provided for high-rise buildings. 
Section 909 is amended by adding Section 909.22 and related subsections to read as follows: 
909.2.2 Stairway or Ramp Pressurization Alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization alternative is chosen for compliance with Building Code requirements for a smoke proof enclosure, interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with Section 909, including the installation of a separate fire-fighter's smoke control panel as per Section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required from the fire department as per Section 105.7. 
909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved location at the entrance to the smoke proof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, the mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3. 
909.22.1.1 Ventilation Systems. Smoke proof enclosure ventilation systems shall be independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following: 
1.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building and directly connected to the smoke proof enclosure or connected to the smoke proof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
2.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the smoke proof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or through ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
3.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable system. 
2.  Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete. 
3.  Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit protective systems with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
909.22.1.2 Standby Power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 2702 of the Building Code. 
909.22.1.3 Acceptance and Testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the system shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is operating in compliance with these requirements. 
Section 910.2 is amended by the first sentence and Exceptions 2 and 3 to read as follows: 
910.2 Where Required. Smoke and heat vents or a mechanical smoke removal system shall be installed as required by Sections 910.2.1, 910.2.2, and 910.2.3. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Unchanged 
2.  Where areas of buildings are equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers, only manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas. Automatic smoke and heat vents are prohibited. 
3.  Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*s) 1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited. 
Section 910.2 is amended by adding Section 910.2.3 to read as follows: 
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as Section follows: 
1.  In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 5,000 square feet in single floor area. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
2.  In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
Section 910.3 is amended by adding Section 910.3.4 and related subsections to read as follows: 
910.3.4 Vent Operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3. 
910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically. The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered Buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above ambient. 
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents. 
910.3.4.3 Gravity-operated drop out vents. Automatic smoke and heat vents containing heat sensitive glazing designed to shrink and drop out of the vent opening when exposed to fire shall fully open within 5 minutes after the vent cavity is exposed to a simulated fire represented by a time-temperature gradient that reaches an air temperature of 500 degrees F (260 degrees C) within 5 minutes 
Section 910.4.3.1 is amended to read as follows: 
[F] 910.4.3.1 Makeup air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust. 
Section 910.4.4 is amended to read as follows: 
910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated automatically by the automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual controls shall also be provided. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
Section 912.2 is amended by adding Section 912.2.3 to read as follows: 
912.2.3 Hydrant Distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path. 
Section 913.2.1 is amended by adding the following second paragraph and exception to read as follows: 
When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as required by Section 506.1. 
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by Section 506.1. 
Section 1006.2.2 is amended by adding Section 1006.2.2.7 to read as follows: 
1006.2.2.7 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 1009.1 is amended by adding Exception 4 to read as follows: 
4.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1009. 
Section 1009.8 is amended by adding Paragraph 7 under "Exceptions" to read as follows: 
7.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1009 and Chapter. 
Section 1010.1.9.5 is amended by amending Exceptions 3 and 4 to read as follows: 
3.  Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M, or S occupancy, manually operated edge-or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf. The inactive leaf shall contain no doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware. 
4.  Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy, manually operated edge- or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf provided such inactive leaf is not needed to meet egress width requirements and the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The inactive leaf shall contain no doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware. 
Section 1015.8 is amended by amending paragraph 1 to read as follows: 
1.  Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 55-ft (16 764 mm) above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F 2006. 
Section 1020.1 is amended by adding Exception 6 to read as follows: 
6.  In Group B office buildings, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate self-annunciating alarms audible in all areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm system where such system is provided. 
Section 1029.1.1.1 is deleted. 
Section 1101.1 is amended by adding an "Exception" to read as follows: 
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be incompliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
Exception: Temporary buildings used for construction offices, sales offices leasing offices or other moved on to a project. Duration of the permit shall be determined by the building official or by the City Council as part of site plan approval. 
Section 2901.1 is amended to read as follows: 
2901.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter and the... {intervening text unchanged} ...conform to the International Private Sewage Disposal Code. The provisions of this Chapter are meant to work in coordination with the provisions of Chapter 4 of the International Plumbing Code. Should any conflicts arise between the two chapters, the Building Official shall determine which provision applies. 
Section 2902.1 is amended by adding the following sentence: 
In other than E Occupancies, the minimum number of fixtures in Table 2902.1 may be lowered, if requested in writing, by the applicant stating reasons for a reduced number and approved by the Building Official. 
Table 2902.1 is amended by adding footnote g to read as follows: 
g.  Drinking fountains are not required in M Occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or less, B Occupancies with an occupant load of 25 or less, and for dining and/or drinking establishments. 
Section 2902.1 is amended by adding a new Section 2902.1.4 to read as follows: 
2902.1.3 Additional fixtures for food preparation facilities. In addition to the fixtures required in this Chapter, all food service facilities shall be provided with additional fixtures set out in this section. 
2902.1.4.1 Hand washing lavatory. At least one hand washing lavatory shall be provided for use by employees that is accessible from food preparation, food dispensing and ware washing areas. Additional hand washing lavatories may be required based on convenience of use by employees. 
2902.1.4.2 Service sink. In new or remodeled food service establishments, at least one service sink or one floor sink shall be provided so that it is conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tool and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. The location of the service sink(s) and/or mop sink(s) shall be approved by the City's health department. 
Section 3001.2 Emergency Elevator Communication Systems for the deaf, hard of hearing and speech impaired is deleted. 
Section 3002.1 is amended by adding "Exceptions" to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  Elevators completely located within atriums shall not require hoistway enclosure protection. 
2.  Elevators in open or enclosed parking garages that serve only the parking garage, and complying with Sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively, shall not require hoistway enclosure protection. 
Section 3005.4 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
3005.4. Machine Rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces. Elevator machine rooms, control rooms, control spaces and machinery spaces shall be enclosed with fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. 
Section 3005 is amended by adding Section 3005.7 to read as follows. 
3005.7 Fire Protection in Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces. 
3005.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system. The building shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, except as otherwise permitted by Section 903.3.1.1.1 and as prohibited by Section 3005.7.2.1. 
3005.7.2.1 Prohibited locations. Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in machine rooms, elevator machinery spaces, control rooms, control spaces and elevator hoist-ways. 
3005.7.2.2 Sprinkler system monitoring. The sprinkler system shall have a sprinkler control valve supervisory switch and water-flow initiating device provided for each floor that is monitored by the building's fire alarm system. 
3005.7.3 Water protection. An approved method to prevent water from infiltrating into the hoistway enclosure from the operation of the automatic sprinkler system outside the elevator lobby shall be provided. 
3005.7.4 Shunt trip. Means for elevator shutdown in accordance with Section 3005.5 shall not be installed. 
Section 3005 is amended by adding Section 3005.8 to read as follows: 
3005.8 Storage. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room, control room, machinery spaces and or control spaces. Provide approved signage at each entry to the above listed locations stating: "No Storage Allowed. 
Section 3006.2 is amended by amending paragraph 5 to read as follows: 
5.  The building is a high rise and the elevator hoistway is more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) in height. The height of the hoistway shall be measured from the lowest floor at or above grade to the highest floors served by the hoistway. 
Section 3109.1 is amended to read as follows: 
3109.1 General. Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of sections 3109.2 through 3109.5 and other applicable sections of this code and other applicable state laws. 
(Code 1969, §§ 8-2—8-7; Ord. No. 1168, §§ 1—30, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1182, §§ 1—5, 3-20-1978; Ord. No. 1243, § 1, 4-16-1979; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 9-4-1979; Ord. No. 1272, § 1, 9-17-1979; Ord. No. 1278, § 1, 11-5-1979; Ord. No. 1370, §§ 1—3, 12-7-1981; Ord. No. 1442, §§ 1—34, 5-2-1983; Ord. No. 1525, § 1, 9-17-1984; Ord. No. 1631, § 1, 4-21-1986; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 2-16-1987; Ord. No. 1738, § 1, 12-7-1987; Ord. No. 2012, §§ 2—25, 1-4-1993; Ord. No. 2160, § 1, 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 2268, §§ 2—23, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 2317, §§ 1—6, 6-16-1997; Ord. No. 2396, § 1, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 2529, §§ 2—23, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 2644, § 3, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2689, § 3, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2967, §§ 3, 4, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3265, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3405 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3441, § 1, 4-18-2017 ; Ord. No. 3606 , § 1, 11-12-2019; Ord. No. 3632 , § 1, 3-17-2020)  
Secs. 22-88—22-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III.5. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
Sec. 22-100. - Adoption of International Residential Conservation Code; purpose. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Residential Code (inclusive of Appendix P "Sizing of Water Piping System" as published by the International Code Council and as amended pursuant to section 22-101, is hereby adopted. Copies of the Residential Code are on file in the office of the city secretary for permanent record and inspection and are incorporated into this section as if fully set forth herein. The chief building official, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the Residential Code. For purposes of this article, the phrase "Residential Code" means collectively (i) the 2018 Edition of the International Residential Code (inclusive of Appendix P "Sizing of Water Piping System" as set forth herein) and (ii) the local amendments adopted pursuant to section 22-101. 
(Ord. No. 2645, § 2, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2836, § 2, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2969, § 2, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3267, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3406 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3608 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Sec. 22-101. - Amendments to International Residential Code. 
For purposes of enforcement of the provisions of the Residential Code within the incorporated limits of the city, the following sections, paragraphs, and sentences of the 2018 Edition of the International Residential Code are hereby amended as follows: 
Section R102.4 is amended to read as follows: 
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections R102.4.1 and R102.4.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference made to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section R103.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Building Inspections Department - City of Farmers Branch is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. 
Section R104.10.1 Flood Hazard Areas is deleted. 
Section 105.1 is amended by adding Section R105.1.1 to read as follows: 
R105.1.1 Foundation repair. Any owner, authorized agent, company or person who intends to repair a foundation shall first obtain the required permit. 
Section R105.2 is amended to read as follows: 
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for the following. Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
1.  Sidewalks and driveways not more than 12 inches above adjacent grade and not over 100 square feet in area. 
2.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
3.  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep. 
4.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to a one-or two-family dwelling. 
5.  Existing fence repairs or replacement less than 20 feet in length provided neither the height nor location is altered. 
Section R105.3.1.1 is deleted. 
Section R105.3.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section R105.3.2 is amended to read as follows: 
R105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
Section R105.5 is amended to read as follows: 
R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after the issuance, or, if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended after commencement of work, more than 180 days pass between requests for inspections. An application for a permit for a project for which a permit has expired pursuant to the previous sentence shall be treated as a new application and shall require the payment of a permit fee applicable to a new permit application. 
R105.5.1. Expiration of Active Permits. All permits that have not expired pursuant to Section R105.5 shall nevertheless expire 365 days after the date of issuance whether or not all work authorized by said permit is completed on or before said expiration date. 
R105.5.2. Extensions of Time. An extension of a permit set to expire pursuant to Section R105.5.1 may be requested in writing not later than 30 days prior to the date of expiration of a permit pursuant to Section R105.5.1, which request must demonstrate justifiable cause for the need for such extension. The building official may grant in writing one or more extensions of such permit provided the total period of all extensions shall not exceed 180 days from the expiration date of the original permit. 
R105.5.3. Longer Extensions. The holder of a permit for which the maximum extension allowed pursuant to Section R105.5.2 may make application to the City Council for an additional extension of the permit by submitting such application in writing not later than 30 days prior to the then current expiration date of the permit, which request must demonstrate justifiable cause for the need for such extension. 
R105.5.4. Fee for Permit Extensions. Before any extension of a permit granted pursuant to Sections R105.5.2 and/or R105.5.3, the holder of the permit for which an extension is granted shall pay an additional permit fee in an amount equal to (i) the number of days for which the permit extension is granted (ii) divided by 365, then (iii) multiplied by the amount of the permit fee at the time of issuance of the original permit. 
R105.5.5 Fences and accessory buildings. Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code for the construction of fences and/or accessory buildings, including underground structures, shall expire and become null and void 90 days after the date of issuance. 
R105.5.5.1 Changes, alterations or adjustments in the permit after it has been issued shall not extend the original date established upon issuance for the permit. Work shall not continue on fences and/or accessory buildings for which the building permit has expired and has become null and void. A new permit may be requested from the building official by filing an application as required by this code. Prior to issuing a new permit, an investigation fee equal to the amount of the permit fee as established in the City's Fee Schedule shall be paid in addition to the building permit fee. 
R105.5.5.2 Every subsequent building permit issued after the original building permit has expired shall expire and become null and void after the number of days of issuance as follows: 
2nd permit 	45 days 
3rd and all following permits 	30 days 
 
R105.5.5.3 The building official may place any additional conditions as necessary upon the permit and authorized construction work to protect and help minimize the negative impact of long term construction activity on adjacent properties and on the City infrastructure. 
R105.5.5.4 Portions of fences and/or accessory buildings in residential areas not completed and for which a permit has expired shall be removed and the area immediately restored to its original condition. The site and structure must also be secured and material and trash removed. 
R105.5.6 Completion of exterior. All work relating to the exterior of a structure shall be completed within 180 days of the date the permit was issued for such work, including, but not limited to, all exterior facade material, painting, windows, final grading and landscaping. The building official may grant in writing one or more extensions of such permit provided the total period of all extensions shall not exceed 180 days from the expiration date of the original permit. 
Section R106.1.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R106.1.1.1 Foundation repair. Construction documents submitted for a foundation repair shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Texas who shall affix the appropriate seal on the drawings. 
1.  Inspection of a permitted foundation repair shall be made by the designing professional engineer and the designing professional engineer shall supply the City with a report that states that the inspections were performed and that the installation is in full compliance with the construction documents. 
2.  Upon completion of the foundation repair, a test on the plumbing system shall be performed. The water supply system shall be tested in accordance with Section P2503.6, and the DWV system shall be tested in accordance with Section P2503.5.1 with the provision that the water test need not exceed height of the finished floor elevation of the first floor. 
3.  A final inspection of a permitted foundation repair shall be performed to insure all required documentation was submitted, all inspections were performed, and that the disturbed areas were repaired. 
Section R106.1.4 is deleted. 
Section R202 is amended by amending the definition of "Townhouse" to read as follows: 
R202 TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units separated by property lines in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides. 
Table R301.2(1) is amended to read as follows: 
Table R301.2 (1); fill in as follows: 
Ground 
Snow 
Load 	Wind Design 	Seismic Design Category f 	Subject To 
Damage From 	Winter Design Temp e 	Ice Barrier Under-Layment h 	Flood Hazards g 	Air Freezing Index i 	Mean AnnualTemp j 
	Speed d 
(mph) 	Topographic 
Effects k 	Special Wind 
Region L 	Windborne Debris 
Zone m 	  
  
  
  
A 	Weathering 
a 	Frost Line 
Depth b 	Termite c 					
5 lb/ft 	115 (3 sec-gust)/ 
76 fastest mile 	No 	No 	No 		Moderate 	6" 	Very 
Heavy 	22°F 	No 	Local 
Code 	150 	64.9°F 
 
Section R302.1 is amended by adding a new paragraph 6 under "Exceptions" to read as follows: 
6.  Open non-combustible carport structures may be constructed when also approved within adopted ordinances. 
Section R302.3 is amended by adding a paragraph 3 under "Exceptions" to read as follows: 
3.  Two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a property line through the structure shall be separated as required for townhouses. 
Section R302.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 1? inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 1? inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors. 
Section R303.3 is amended by amending the paragraph titled "Exception" to read as follows: 
Exception: The glazed areas shall not be required where artificial light and a local exhaust system are provided. The minimum local exhaust rates shall be determined in accordance with Section M1505. Exhaust air from the space shall be exhausted directly to the outdoors. Spaces containing only a water closet, or water closet and a lavatory may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
Section R314.2 is amended by adding Section 314.2.3 to read as follows: 
R314.2.3 Certificate of Occupancy. Where a Certificate of Occupancy is issued for an existing dwelling unit, the individual dwelling unit shall be equipped with smoke alarms located as required for new dwellings. 
Section R314.6 is amended by amending Exception 2 to read as follows: 
2.  Smoke alarms installed in accordance with R314.2.3 shall be permitted to be battery powered where approved alarms are equipped with a 10 year minimum service life non-replaceable battery housed within a sealed compartment. 
Section R314.6.1 is added to read as follows: 
R314.6.1 Replacement of Smoke Alarms. Unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer, single and multiple station smoke alarms shall be replaced when they fail to respond to operability tests. Smoke alarms shall not be allowed to stay in service longer than 10 years from the date of manufacture. 
Section R315.2.2 is amended by amending paragraph 2 under "Exceptions" to read as follows: 
2.  Installation, alteration or repairs of electrical powered ... {remaining text unchanged} 
Section R315.2 is amended by adding Section 315.2.3 to read as follows: 
R315.2.3 Certificate of Occupancy. Where a Certificate of Occupancy is issued for an existing dwelling unit, the individual dwelling unit shall be equipped with carbon monoxide alarms located as required for new dwellings. 
Section R315.6 is amended by amending Exception 2 to read as follows: 
2.  Carbon monoxide alarms installed in accordance with section R315.2.3 shall be permitted to be battery powered where approved alarms are equipped with a 10 year minimum service life non-replaceable battery housed within a sealed compartment. 
Section R322 is deleted. 
Section R401.2, amended by adding the following sentence to the existing: 
... Every foundation and/or footing, or any size addition to an existing foundation, regulated by this code shall be designed and sealed by a Texas registered professional engineer. 
Section R401.4 is amended by adding the following sentence: 
A soils test shall be required prior to issuance of a construction permit for any new single family residence. 
Section 602.6.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. When piping or ductwork is placed in or partly in an exterior wall or interior load-bearing wall, necessitating cutting, drilling or notching of the top plate by more than 50 percent of its width, a galvanized metal tie not less than 0.054 inch thick (1.37 mm) (16 Ga) and 5 inches (127 mm) wide shall be fastened across and to the plate at each side of the opening with not less than eight 10d (0.148 inch diameter) having a minimum length of 1 ½ inches (38 mm) at each side or equivalent. Fasteners will be offset to prevent splitting of the top plate material. The metal tie must extend a minimum of 6 inches past the opening. See figure R602.6.1. 
Figure R602.6.1 is amended to appear and read as follows: 
 
Section R703.8.4.1 is amended by adding Section R703.8.4.1.2 to read as follows: 
R703.8.4.1.2 Veneer Ties for Wall Studs. In stud framed exterior walls, all ties may be anchored to studs as follows: 
1.  When studs are 16 in (407 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 24 in (737 mm) vertically starting approximately 12 in (381 mm) from the foundation; or 
2.  When studs are 24 in (610 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 16 in (483 mm) vertically starting approximately 8 in (254 mm) from the foundation. 
Section R902.1 is amended to read as follows and adding Paragraph 5 under "Exceptions" to read as follows: 
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. Class A, B, or C roofing shall be installed. Classes A, B, and C roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UIL 790 or ASTM E 108. 
Exceptions: 
5.  Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on one-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed (area defined by jurisdiction). 
Chapter 11 [RE] Energy Efficiency is deleted. 
Section M1305.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
M1305.1.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided ... {intervening text unchanged} ... sides of the appliance where access is required. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance can be serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is unobstructed ... {remaining text unchanged} 
Section M1411.3.1 is amended by amending Items 3 and 4 to read as follows: 
3.  An auxiliary drain pan ... {intervening text unchanged} ... with Item 1 of this section. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
4.  A water level detection device... {intervening text unchanged} ... overflow rim of such pan. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
Section M1411.3.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
M1411.3.1.1 Water-level monitoring devices. On down-flow units ... {intervening text unchanged} ... installed in the drain line. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
Section M2005.2 is amended to read as follows: 
M2005.2 Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a storage closet. Water heaters located in a bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion air will not be taken from the living space. Access to such enclosure may be from the bedroom or bathroom when through a solid door, weather-stripped in accordance with the exterior door air leakage requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code and equipped with an approved self-closing device. Installation of direct-vent water heaters within an enclosure is not required. 
Section G2408.3 (305.5) is deleted. 
Section G2415.2.1 (401.2.1) is amended by adding the following to the end of the section: 
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING: 1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure—Do Not Remove" 
Section G2415.12 (404.12) is amended to read as follows: 
G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade measured from the top of the pipe to finished grade. 
Section G2415.12.1 (406.12.1) is deleted. 
Section G2417.1 (406.1) is amended to read as follows: 
G2417.1 (406.1) General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in Sections 2417.1.1 through 2417.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the building official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. 
Section G2417.4 is amended to read as follows: 
G2417.4 (406.4) Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a manometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. 
Section G2417.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one half inches (3½"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3½"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. 
Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing 
Section G2417.4.2 is amended to read as follows: 
G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration. The test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. 
Section G2420.1 (406.1) is amended by adding Section G2420.1.4 to read as follows: 
G2420.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
Section G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) is amended to read as follows: 
G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) Located within the same room. The shutoff valve ... {intervening text unchanged} ... in accordance with the appliance manufacturer's instructions. A secondary shutoff valve must be installed within 3 feet (914 mm) of the firebox if appliance shutoff is located in the firebox. 
Section G2421.1 (410.1) is amended to read as follows: 
G2421.1 (410.1) Pressure regulators. A line pressure regulator shall be ... {intervening text unchanged} ... approved for outdoor installation. Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in Section M1305. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
Section G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3) is amended by deleting paragraphs 1 and 4 under "Exceptions." 
Section G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) is amended to read as follows: 
G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with this code. 
Section P2603 is amending by adding Section P2603.3 to read as follows: 
P2603.3 Protection against corrosion. Metallic piping, except for cast iron, ductile iron and galvanized steel, shall not be placed in direct contact with steel framing members, concrete or cinder walls and floors or other masonry. Metallic piping shall not be placed in direct contact with corrosive soil. Where sheathing is used to prevent direct contact, the sheathing shall have a thickness of not less than 0.008 inch (8 mil) (0.203 mm) and the sheathing shall be made of approved material. Where sheathing protects piping that penetrates concrete or masonry walls or floors, the sheathing shall be installed in a manner that allows movement of the piping within the sheathing. 
Section P2603.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
P2603.5.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 12 inches (mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade. 
Section P2801.6 is amended to read as follows: 
P2801.6 Required pan. 
Where a storage tank-type water heater or a hot water storage tank is installed in a location where water leakage from the tank will cause damage, the tank shall be installed in a pan constructed of one of the following: 
1.  Galvanized steel or aluminum of not less than 0.0236 inch (0.6010 mm) in thickness. 
2.  Plastic not less than 0.036 inch (0.9 mm) in thickness. 
3.  Other approved materials. 
Section P2801.6.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section P2801.6.1 Pan size and drain. The pan shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in depth and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in Table 605.4. Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
Section P2804.6.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section P2804.6.1 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge through an air gap. 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
5.  Discharge, to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors. 
[remaining text is unchanged] 
Section P2902.5.3 is amended to read as follows: 
P2902.5.3 Lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
Section P3003.9.2 is amended by deleting the Exceptions. 
Section P3111, including all subsections, is deleted in its entirety. 
Section P3112.2 is amended in its entirety to read as follows: 
P3112.2 Installation. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed in above the floor and may be vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not less than the drain board height and then returning it downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided with a foot vent taken off the vertical fixture vent by means of a wye-branch immediately below the floor and extending to the nearest partition and then through the roof to the open air or may be connected to other vents at a point not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings shall be used on all parts of the vent below the floor level and a minimum slope of one-quarter (¼) inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) back to the drain shall be maintained. The return bend used under the drain board shall be a one (1) piece fitting or an assembly of a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius), a ninety (90) degree (1.6 radius) and a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius) elbow in the order named. Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this Code. The island sink drain, upstream of the return vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of the foot vent. 
(Ord. No. 2645, § 3, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2836, § 3, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2916, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 2969, § 2, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3147, § 2, 6-21-2011; Ord. No. 3222, § 1, 3-19-2013 ; Ord. No. 3267, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3406 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3608 , § 1, 11-12-2019; Ord. No. 3633 , § 1(A)—(D), 3-17-2020)  
Secs. 22-102—22-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL STANDARDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
 
Sec. 22-121. - Adoption of National Electrical Code; purpose. 
The 2017 Edition of the National Electrical Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association and as amended pursuant to section 22-122, is hereby adopted. Copies of the Electrical Code are on file in the office of the city secretary for permanent record and inspection and are incorporated into this section as if fully set forth herein. The chief building official, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the Electrical Code. For purposes of this article, the phrase "Electrical Code" means collectively (i) the 2017 Edition of the National Electrical Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association and (ii) the local amendments adopted pursuant to section 22-122. 
(Code 1969, § 11-2; Ord. No. 1191, § 1, 6-19-1978; Ord. No. 1348, § 1, 6-15-1981; Ord. No. 1703, § 2, 12-7-1987; Ord. No. 2023, § 2, 6-7-1993; Ord. No. 2272, § 1, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 2650, § 2, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 3411 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3489, § 2, 3-20-2018 )  
Sec. 22-122. - Local amendments adopted. 
For purposes of enforcement of the provisions of the Electrical Code within the incorporated limits of the city, the following sections, paragraphs, and sentences of the Electrical Code are hereby amended as follows: 
Amend Article 90 by adding Article 90.10 titled "Administration" to read as follows: 
ARTICLE 90.10 - ADMINISTRATION 
90.10.1 Conflicting Provisions. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this Code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
90.10.2 Application to Existing Electrical Systems and Equipment. 
(A)  Additions, Alterations or Repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs may be made to any electrical system and equipment without requiring the existing electrical system and equipment to comply with all the requirements of this Code, provided that addition, alteration or repair conforms to that required for a new electrical system and equipment and provided further that no hazard to life, health or safety will be created by such additions, alterations or repairs. 
(B)  Existing Installations. Electrical systems and equipment lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this Code may have their use, maintenance or repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and no hazard to life, health or property has been created by such electrical system and equipment. 
(C)  Changes in Building Occupancy. Electrical systems and equipment which are a part of any building or structure undergoing a change in use or occupancy, as defined in the Building Code, shall comply with the requirements of this Code which are applicable to the new use or occupancy. 
(D)  Maintenance. All electrical systems and equipment, both existing and new, and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a proper operating condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe and hazard free condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this Code shall be maintained in conformance with this Code. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the electrical system. To determine compliance with this subsection, the Building Official may cause any electrical system to be reinspected. 
(E)  Moved Building. Electrical systems and equipment which are a part of buildings or structures moved into or within the City shall comply with the provisions of this Code for new installations. 
90.10.3 Unsafe Electrical Systems or Equipment. 
(A)  Unsafe Use. All electrical systems or equipment regulated by this Code which are unsafe, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, for the purpose of this Code, shall be considered unsafe. Any use of electrical systems or equipment regulated by this Code constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is, for the purpose of this section, an unsafe use. 
(B)  Unsafe Systems and Equipment as Public Nuisance. All such unsafe electrical systems or equipment are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Minimum Housing Code and the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Farmers Branch or such alternate procedure as may be adopted by this jurisdiction. As an alternative, the Building Official or other employee or official of the City as designated by the City Manager may institute any other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. 
90.10.4 Violations and Penalties. 
(A)  Violations. It shall be unlawful tor a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use or maintain mechanical systems or equipment or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code. 
(B)  Penalties. Any person, firm, organization or corporation violating any of the provisions of this code or any amendment thereto shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in Municipal Court shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000) for each offense, and each and every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
90.10.5 Organization and Enforcement. 
(A)  Powers and Duties of Building Official. The Building Official is hereby authorized to enforce all the provisions of this code. He shall cause a record to be kept of all permits issued and inspections made. 
(B)  Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the appointing authority, the Building Official may appoint a chief electrical inspector and other related technical officers and inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the electrical inspector or any of his assistants in the discharge of their duties. 
It shall be unlawful for the chief electrical inspector or any electrical inspector to engage in the business of selling, installing, or maintenance of electrical fixtures, devices, equipment or materials, and they shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business at any time while employed by the enforcement agency of the City. 
(C)  Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the Building Official or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Building Official by such Codes, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry be refused, the Building Official or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
When the Building Official or his authorized representative shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Building Official or his authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
(D)  Notice. When any order or notice is issued pursuant to the provisions of this Code to any person who cannot be found after a reasonable search, such order or notice may be served by posting it in a conspicuous place upon the premises occupied by him or upon the premises where the defects are alleged to exist. Such posting of the notice shall be considered equivalent to personal service of such order or notice. An order sent by mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid and directed to the address of the electrical contractor, owner, leaseholder, or occupant of the premises shall be equivalent to personal service of such order. 
Electrical inspectors are hereby empowered to attach to the nearest electrical cabinet or equipment feeding defective or hazardous wiring, any official notice or seal to prevent use of electricity in that area, and it shall be unlawful for any other person to place or attach such seal, or to break, change, destroy, tear, mutilate, cover or otherwise deface or injure any such official notice or seal posted by an electrical inspector. 
(E)  Stop Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code, the Building Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building Official to proceed with the work. 
(F)  Authority to Disconnect Utilities in Emergencies. The Building Official or his authorized representative shall have the authority to disconnect any electrical power or energy service supplied to the building, structure or building service equipment therein regulated by this Code in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The Building Official shall, whenever possible, notify the serving utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or building service equipment, in writing, of such disconnection immediately thereafter. 
(G)  Authority to Condemn Electrical System and Equipment. Whenever the Building Official ascertains that any electrical system or equipment regulated in this Code has become hazardous to life, health or property, he may order in writing that such electrical system or equipment either be removed or restored to a safe condition, whichever is appropriate. The written notice itself shall fix a time limit for compliance with such order. No person shall use or maintain a defective electrical system or equipment after receiving such notice. 
When such equipment or installation is to be disconnected, a written notice of such disconnection and causes therefore shall be given within 24 hours of the order to disconnect to the serving utility, the owner and occupant of such building, structure or premises. 
When an electrical system or equipment is maintained in violation of this Code and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the Building Official shall institute any appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. 
(H)  Connection after Order to Disconnect. No person shall make connections from any energy or power supply nor supply power to any electrical system or equipment which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the Building Official or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the Building Official until the Building Official authorizes the reconnection and use of such electrical system or equipment. 
(I)  Liability. The Building Official, or his authorized representative charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties. 
This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any property within the City for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the Code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by the Code or approvals issued under this Code. 
(J)  Cooperation of Other Officials and Officers. The Building Official may request, and shall receive so far as is required in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction. 
90.10.6 Board of Appeals. 
(A)  General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application, and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals consisting of members who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Building Official shall be an ex-officio member of and shall act as secretary to said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official. 
(B)  Limitations of Authority. The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of this code. 
(C)  Appointment. The members of the City of Farmers Branch Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be the City of Farmers Branch Board of Appeals. 
90.10.7 Permits. 
(A)  Permits Required. Except as specified in Subsection (c) of this article, no electrical system regulated by this Code shall be installed, altered, repaired, replaced or remodeled unless a separate electrical permit for each building or structure has first been obtained from the Building Official. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who is not licensed by the State as an electrical contractor to secure permits. 
(B)  Transfer of Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to lend, rent, or transfer an electrical permit or permit a person without proper license or registration to do work, or for any person to make use of any such permit or affidavit which is not actually his own, and any such permit obtained or affidavit submitted under these conditions shall be null and void. 
(C)  Exempt Work. An electrical permit shall not be required for the following: 
1.  Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an approved receptacle when that cord or cable is permitted by this Code. 
2.  Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers or fixed approved appliances of the same type and rating in the same location. 
3.  Temporary decorative lighting. 
4.  Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch, contactor or control device. 
5.  Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets therefore. 
6.  Repair or replacement of any overcurrent device of the required capacity in the same location. 
7.  Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems. 
8.  Taping joints. 
9.  Removal of electrical wiring. 
10.  Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental laboratories. 
11.  The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television stage sets. 
12.  Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy. 
13.  Low-energy power, control and signal circuits of Classes II and III as defined in this Code. 
14.  A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of electrical wiring apparatus or equipment or the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy or in the operation of signals or the transmission of the intelligence by a public or private utility in the exercise of its function as a serving utility. Exemption from the permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances. 
(D)  Application for Permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the Code enforcement agency for that purpose. Every such application shall: 
1.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
2.  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
3.  Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations and specifications and other data as required in subsection (e) of this article. 
4.  Be signed by permittee, or his authorized agent. 
5.  Give such other data and information as may be required by the Building Official. 
(E)  Plans and Specifications. Plans, engineering calculations, diagrams and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The Building Official may require plans, computations and specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer or architect licensed by the state to practice as such. If the Building Official finds that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of plans is not necessary to obtain compliance with this Code, then the Building Official may waive the submission of plans, engineering calculations, diagrams and data, or portions thereof. 
(F)  Information on Plans and Specifications. Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
Plans for buildings more than two stories in height of other than Groups R, Division 3 and U Occupancies shall indicate how required structural and fire-resistive integrity will be maintained where a penetration will be made for electrical and communication conduits, pipes and similar systems. 
(G)  Permits Issuance. The applications, plans and specifications, and other data, filed by an applicant for permit may be reviewed by other departments of the City to determine compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If the work described in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith conforms to the requirements of this Code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and the fees specified have been paid, the Building Official shall issue a permit therefore to the applicant. 
When the Building Official issues the permit where plans are required, he shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications "APPROVED". Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorizations from the Building Official, and all work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. 
The Building Official may issue a permit for the construction of part of an electrical system before the entire plans and specifications for the whole system have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of this Code. The holder of such permit shall proceed at his own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire building, structure or building service will be granted. 
(H)  Retention of Plans. One set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant and shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the Building Official until final approval of the work. 
(I)  Validity of Permit. The issuance of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Code, or of any other ordinance of the City, nor shall the issuance of a permit or approval of plans be construed as representing or warranting the safety or lack of defects of any electrical work described therein. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of these Codes shall be valid. 
The issuance of a permit based upon plans, specifications and other data shall not prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans, specifications and other data, or from preventing building operations being carried on there under when in violation of these Codes or of any other ordinances of the City. 
(J)  Expiration. Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days or more. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained and the fee therefore shall be one-half the amount required for the original permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after one year, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which he may commence work under that permit when he is unable to commence work within the time required by this article for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
(K)  Suspension or Revocation. The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this Code whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of the City. 
(I)  Permit Fees. The fee for each electrical permit shall be as set forth in the Fee Schedules of the City of Farmers Branch. A fee equal to twice the normal fee may be assessed on all work commenced prior to obtaining a required permit. 
90.10.8 Inspections. 
(A)  General. All electrical systems and equipment for which a permit is required by this Code shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official. No portion of any electrical system intended to be concealed shall be concealed until inspected and approved. Neither the Building Official nor the City shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material necessary to allow inspection. When the installation of an electrical system and equipment is complete, an additional and final inspection shall be made. Electrical systems and equipment regulated by this Code shall not be connected to the energy source until authorized by the Building Official. 
(B)  Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a permit to notify the Building Official that such work is ready for inspection. The Building Official may require that every request for inspection be filed at least one working day before such inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by telephone at the option of the Building Official. 
It shall be the duty of the person requesting inspections required by this Code to provide access to and means for proper inspection of such work. 
(C)  Operation of Electrical Equipment. The requirements of this article shall not be construed to prohibit the operation of any electrical system or equipment installed to replace existing equipment. The request for inspection of such equipment must have been filed with the Building Official not more than 48 hours after such replacement work is completed and before any portion of such electrical system is concealed by any permanent portion of the building. 
(D)  Other Inspections. In addition to the inspections required by this Code, the Building Official may make or require other inspections of any work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this Code and other laws which are enforced by the Code enforcement agency. 
(E)  Reinspection. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is requested is not complete or when required corrections are not made. 
This provision is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection or when required corrections are not made. 
Reinspection fees may be assessed when the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. 
To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall pay the reinspection fee in accordance with The Fee Schedules of the City of Farmers Branch. 
In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
90.10.9 Connection Approval. 
(A)  Energy Connections. An electrical system or equipment regulated by this Code for which a permit is required shall not be connected to a source of energy or power until approved by the Building Official. 
(B)  Temporary Connections. The Building Official may authorize the temporary connection of the electrical system or equipment to the source of energy or power for the purpose of testing the equipment, or for the use under a temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
All temporary electrical services must be granted for a specified time limit only, and upon expiration of the original time limit, may be renewed when, in the opinion of the Building Official, it is justifiable. Temporary electrical service permits shall in no case exceed 30 days per permit. 
The Building Official shall have the right to specify any conditions which must be met prior to releasing temporary electrical service. 
Temporary electrical services released for buildings where work is in progress and has not been approved on final inspection shall require the owner or owner's agent for such building to file application for temporary electrical service with the Building Official. Such application shall contain a "hold harmless agreement", as well as any other information which may be required by the Building Official. 
90.10.10 Method of Registration of Electrical Contractor. 
(A)  Electrical License Required. All applications for electrical permits must be made by a properly licensed person or business holding the appropriate license as required by the Texas Occupations Code Chapter 1305 administered by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation unless exempted by section 1305.003. 
(B)  Supervision. Any electrical work or any electrical sign work requiring a permit by Section 90.10.7 shall be directly supervised by a licensed individual other than an electrical apprentice. Continuous supervision by an on-site licensee shall be required at all times while electrical work is being performed. 
Article 100, Part I is amended by adding the definition of "Engineering Supervision" to read as follows: 
Engineering Supervision. Supervision by a Qualified State of Texas Licensed Professional Engineer engaged primarily in the design or maintenance of electrical installations. 
Article 110.2 is amended to read as follows: 
110.2 Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by this Code shall be acceptable only if approved. Approval of equipment may be evident by listing and labeling of equipment by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab (NRTL) with a certification mark of that laboratory or a qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ. 
Exception: Unlisted equipment that is relocated to another location within a jurisdiction or is field modified is subject to the approval by the AHJ. This approval may be by a field evaluation by a NRTL or qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ. 
Informational Note No. l: See 90.7, Examination of Equipment for Safety, and 110.3, Examination, Identification, Installation, and Use of Equipment. See definitions of Approved, Identified, Labeled, and Listed. 
Informational Note No. 2: Manufacturer's self-certification of equipment may not necessarily comply with US product safety standards as certified by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab. 
Informational Note No. 3: NFPA 790 and 791 provide an example of an approved method for qualifying a third party inspection agency. 
Article 210.52 (G)(1) is amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Garages. In each attached garage and in each detached garage with electric power, at least one receptacle outlet shall be installed for each car space. 
Article 500.8(A)(3) is amended to read as follows: 
(3)  Evidence acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction such as a manufacturer's self-evaluation or an engineering judgment signed and sealed by a qualified licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas. 
Article 505.7(A) is amended to read as follows: 
(A)  Implementation of Zone Classification System. Classification of areas, engineering and design, selection of equipment and wiring methods, installation, and inspection shall be performed by a qualified Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas. 
Article 600.6(A)(1) is amended to read as follows: 
(1)  At Point of Entry to Sign. The disconnect shall be located at the point the feeder circuit or branch circuit(s) supplying a sign or outline lighting system enters a sign enclosure, a sign body, or a pole in accordance with 600.5(C)(3). The disconnect shall open all ungrounded conductors where it enters the enclosure of the pole sign. 
Exception No. 1: A disconnect shall not be required for branch circuits(s) or feeder conductor(s) passing through the sign where enclosed in a Chapter 3 listed raceway or metal-jacketed cable identified for the location. The conductor(s) shall not serve the sign body or sign enclosure where passing through. 
Exception No. 2: A disconnect shall not be required at the point of entry to a sign body, sign enclosure, or pole for branch circuit conductor(s). The conductors shall be enclosed in a Chapter 3 listed raceway or metal-jacketed cable identified for the location. The conductor(s) shall be routed to a device box which contains the disconnect. A field-applied permanent warning label that is visible during servicing shall be applied to the raceway at or near the point of entry into the sign enclosure or sign body. The warning label shall comply with 110.21(B) and state the following: "Danger. This raceway contains energized conductors." The marking shall include the location of the disconnecting means for the energized conductor(s). The disconnecting means shall be capable of being locked in the open position in accordance with 110.25. 
Exception No. 3: A disconnect shall not be required at the point of entry to a sign enclosure or sign body for branch circuit(s) or feeder conductor(s) that supply an internal panelboard(s) in a sign enclosure or sign body. The conductors shall be enclosed in a Chapter 3 listed raceway or metal-jacketed cable identified for the location. A field-applied permanent warning label that is visible during servicing shall be applied to the raceway at or near the point of entry into the sign enclosure or sign body. The warning label shall comply with 110.21(B) and state the following: "Danger. This raceway contains energized conductors." The marking shall include the location of the disconnecting means for the energized conductor(s). The disconnecting means shall be capable of being locked in the open position in accordance with 110.25. 
Informational Note: The location of the disconnect is intended to allow service or maintenance personnel complete and local control of the disconnecting means. 
(Code 1969, §§ 11-3—11-101; Ord. No. 1191, § 1, 6-19-1978; Ord. No. 1348, § 1, 6-15-1981; Ord. No. 1703, § 3, 12-7-1987; Ord. No. 2023, §§ 3—18, 6-7-1993; Ord. No. 2272, §§ 2—4, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 2650, § 3, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 3411 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3435, § 1(A)—(C), 4-18-2017 ; Ord. No. 3489, § 2, 3-20-2018 )  
Secs. 22-123—22-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SWIMMING POOLS 
 
Sec. 22-156. - Adoption of International Swimming Pool and Spa Code; purpose. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as published by the International Code Council and as amended pursuant to section 22-157 is hereby adopted. Copies of the Pool Code are on file in the office of the city secretary for permanent record and inspection and are incorporated into this section as if fully set forth herein. The chief building official, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the Pool Code. For purposes of this article, the phrase "Pool Code" means collectively (i) the 2018 Edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as published by the International Code Council and (ii) the local amendments adopted pursuant to section 22-157. 
(Code 1969, §§ 8-22—8-24; Ord. No. 1246, §§ 1—14, 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 1698, § 1, 12-7-1987; Ord. No. 3613 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Sec. 22-157. - Amendments to International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
For purposes of enforcement of the provisions of the Pool Code within the incorporated limits of the city, the following sections, paragraphs, and sentences of the 2018 Edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code are hereby amended as follows: 
Section 102.9 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 102.9 Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law, to include but not limited to: 
1.  Texas Department of State Health Services (TDSHS); Standards for Public Pools and Spas; § 285.181 through § 285.208, (TDSHS rules do not apply to pools serving one- and two family dwellings or townhouses). 
2.  Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR); 2012 Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS), TAS provide the scoping and technical requirements for accessibility for Swimming Pool, wading pools and spas and shall comply with 2012 TAS, Section 242. (TAS rules do not apply to pools serving one- and two family dwellings or townhouses). 
Exception: Elements regulated under Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) and built in accordance with TDLR approved plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the TDLR, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Department of Building Inspections - City of Farmers Branch is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. The Department of - Sustainability and Public Health - City of Farmers Branch is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official for operation and maintenance of any public swimming pool in accordance this code, local and state law. 
Section 107.4 is deleted. 
Section 107.5 is amended to read as follows: 
107.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official, work on any system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this code. 
Section 202 is amended by adding a definition for the phrase "Sustainability and Public Health Department" to read as follows: 
Sustainability and Public Health Department: Sustainability and Public Health Department - City of Farmers Branch regulates the operation of public pools. Routine inspections on pools and spas open to the public are conducted to document compliance with the standards set forth in State law. 
Section 305.1 is amended to read as follows: 
305.1 General. 
The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of barriers for restricting entry into areas having pools and spas. In one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses, where spas or hot tubs are equipped with a lockable safety cover complying with ASTM F1346 and swimming pools are equipped with a powered safety cover that complies with ASTM F1346, the areas where those spas, hot tubs or pools are located shall not be required to comply with Sections 305.2 through 305.7. 
Section 305.2 is amended to read as follows: 
305.2 Outdoor swimming pools and spas. 
Outdoor pools and spas and indoor swimming pools shall be surrounded by a barrier that complies with Sections 305.2.1 through 305.7 and in accordance with the Texas Administrative Code, Texas Health and Safety Code 757 for public pools. 
Section 305.2.7 is amended by adding Section 305.2.7.1 to read as follows: 
305.2.7.1 Chain link fencing prohibited. Chain link fencing is not permitted as a barrier in public pools built after January 1, 1994. 
Section 305.4 is amended to read as follows: 
305.4 Structure wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a one and two family dwelling or townhouse or its accessory structure serves as part of a barrier and where doors or windows provide direct access to the pool or spa through that wall, one of the following shall be required: 
1.  Unchanged 
2.  Unchanged 
3.  Unchanged 
The wall of a building with windows in accordance with 2018 International Building Code, Section 1030 in Group R2 occupancies shall not be used as part of pool enclosure. Other windows that are part of a pool yard enclosure shall be permanently closed and unable to be opened for public pools. 
Section 305.6 is amended to read as follows: 
305.6 Natural barriers used in a one and two family dwelling or townhouse. In the case where the pool or spa area abuts the edge of a lake or other natural body of water, public access is not permitted or allowed along the shoreline, and required barriers extend to and beyond the water's edge a minimum of eighteen (18) inches, a barrier is not required between the natural body of water shoreline and the pool or spa. 
Section 307.1.4 is amended by adding a paragraph titled "Exception" to read as follows: 
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
Section 310.1 is amended to read as follows: 
310.1 General. Suction entrapment avoidance for pools and spas shall be provided in accordance with APSP 7 or for public swimming pools in accordance with State of Texas Rules for Public Swimming Pools and Spas, Title 25 TAC Chapter 265 Subchapter L, Rule § 265.190. {remaining language, including "Exceptions" unchanged.} 
Section 313.7 is amended to read as follows: 
313.7 Emergency shutoff switch for spas and hot tubs. A clearly labeled emergency shutoff or control switch for the purpose of stopping the motor(s) that provide power to the recirculation system and jet system shall be installed at a point readily accessible to the users and not less than 1.5 m (5 ft.) away, adjacent to, and within sight of the spa or hot tub. This requirement shall not apply to one and two family dwellings and townhouses. 
Section 402.13 is amended to read as follows: 
402.12 Water envelopes. The minimum diving water envelopes shall be in accordance with Texas Department of State Health Services, 25 TAC § 265.186(e) and Figure: 25 TAC § 256.186(e)(6). 
Maximum Diving Board Height Over Water 	¾ Meter 	1 Meter 	3 Meters 
Max. Diving Board Length 	12 ft. 	16 ft. 	16 ft. 
Minimum Diving Board Overhang 	2 ft. 6 in. 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 
D1 Minimum 	8 ft. 6 in. 	11 ft. 2 in. 	12 ft. 2 in. 
D2 Minimum 	9 ft. 	10 ft. 10 in. 	11 ft. 10 in. 
D3 Minimum 	4 ft. 	6 ft. 	6 ft. 
L1 Minimum 	4 ft. 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 
L2 Minimum 	12 ft. 	16 ft. 5 in. 	19 ft. 9 in. 
L3 Minimum 	14 ft. 10 in. 	13 ft. 2 in. 	13 ft. 11 in. 
L4 Minimum 	30 ft. 10 in. 	34 ft. 7 in. 	38 ft. 8 in. 
L5 Minimum 	8 ft. 	10 ft. 	13 ft. 
H Minimum 	16 ft. 	16 ft. 	16 ft. 
From Plummet to Pool Wall at Side 	9 ft. 	10 ft. 	11 ft. 6 in. 
From Plummet to Adjacent Plummet 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 
 
H (Overhead Obstruction or Ceiling) 
 
Section 402.13 is amended to read as follows: 
402.13 Ladders for diving equipment. Ladders shall be provided with two grab rails or two handrails. There shall be a uniform distance between ladder treads, with a 7 inch (178 mm minimum) distance and 12 inch (305 mm) maximum distance. Supports, platforms, steps, and ladders for diving equipment shall be designed to carry the anticipated loads. Steps and ladders shall be of corrosion-resistant material, easily cleanable and with slip-resistant tread; 
Sections 411.2.1 and 411.2.2 are amended to read as follows: 
411.2.1 Tread dimensions and area. Treads shall have a minimum unobstructed horizontal depth (i.e., horizontal run) of 12 inches and a minimum width of 20 inches. 
411.2.2 Risers. Risers for steps shall have a maximum uniform height of 10 inches, with the bottom riser height allowed to taper to zero. 
Sections 411.5.1 and 411.5.2 are amended to read as follows: 
411.5.1 Swimouts. Swimouts, located in either the deep or shallow area of a pool, shall comply with all of the following: 
1.  Unchanged 
2.  Unchanged 
3.  Unchanged 
4.  The leading edge shall be visibly set apart and provided with a horizontal solid or broken stripe at least 1 inch wide on the top surface along the front leading edge of each step. This stripe shall be plainly visible to persons on the pool deck. The stripe shall be a contrasting color to the background on which it is applied, and the color shall be permanent in nature and shall be a slip-resistant surface. 
411.5.2 Underwater seats and benches. Underwater seats and benches, whether used alone or in conjunction with pool stairs, shall comply with all of the following: 
1.  Unchanged 
2.  Unchanged 
3.  Unchanged 
4.  Unchanged 
5.  The leading edge shall be visually set apart and provided with a horizontal solid or broken stripe at least 1 inch wide on the top surface along the front leading edge of each step. This stripe shall be plainly visible to persons on the pool deck. The stripe shall be a contrasting color to the background on which it is applied, and the color shall be permanent in nature and shall be a slip-resistant surface. 
6.  Unchanged 
7.  Unchanged 
Section 603.2 is amended to read as follows: 
603.2 Class A and B pools: Class A and B pools over 5 feet deep: the transition point of the pool from the shallow area to the deep area of the pool shall be visually set apart with a 4-inch minimum width row of floor tile, a painted line, or similar means using a color contrasting with the bottom; and a rope and float line shall be provided between 1 foot and 2 feet on the shallow side of the 5-foot depth along and parallel to this depth from one side of the pool to the other side. The floats shall be spaced at not greater than 7-foot intervals; and the floats shall be secured so they will not slide or bunch up. The stretched float line shall be of sufficient size and strength to offer a good handhold and support loads normally imposed by users. If the owner or operator of the pool knows or should have known in the exercise of ordinary care that a rope or float is missing, broken, or defective, the problem shall be promptly remedied. 
Section 610.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
610.5.1 Uniform height of 10 inches. Except for the bottom riser, risers at the centerline shall have a maximum uniform height of 10 inches (254 mm). The bottom riser height shall be permitted to vary from the other risers. 
Section 804.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 804.1 General. The minimum diving water envelopes shall be in accordance with Table 804.1 and Figure 804.1, or the manufacturer's specifications, whichever is greater. Negative construction tolerances shall not be applied to the dimensions of the minimum diving water envelopes given in Table 804.1. 
(Code 1969, §§ 8-22—8-24; Ord. No. 1246, §§ 1—14, 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 1698, § 1, 12-7-1987; Ord. No. 3613 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Secs. 22-158—22-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 22-191. - Adoption of International Mechanical Code; purpose. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Mechanical Code, as published by the International Code Council and as amended pursuant to section 22-192, is hereby adopted. Copies of the Mechanical Code are on file in the office of the city secretary for permanent record and inspection and are incorporated into this section as if fully set forth herein. The chief building official, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the Mechanical Code. For purposes of this article, the phrase "Mechanical Code" means collectively (i) the 2018 Edition of the International Mechanical Code, as published by the International Code Council and (ii) the local amendments adopted pursuant to section 22-192. 
(Code 1969, § 4-1; Ord. No. 1169, §§ 1—10, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1451, §§ 1—6, 8-1-1983; Ord. No. 1699, §§ 1—6, 12-7-1987; Ord. No. 2271, § 1, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 2646, § 2, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2838, § 2, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2971, § 2, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3269, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3408 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3611 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Sec. 22-192. - Amendments to International Mechanical Code. 
For purposes of enforcement of the provisions of the Mechanical Code within the incorporated limits of the city, the following sections, paragraphs, and sentences of the 2018 Edition of the International Mechanical Code are hereby amended as follows: 
Section 102.8 is amended to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced herein shall be those that are listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 106.5.2 is amended to read as follows: 
106.5.2 Fee schedule. The fees to be paid for mechanical work shall be set forth in the Fee Schedules of the City of Farmers Branch. 
Sections 109.1 and 109.1.1 are amended to read as follows: 
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals established by ordinance. The board shall be governed by the enabling ordinance. 
109.1.1 Limitations of Authority. The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretations of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of this code. 
Section 109.2 is amended to read as follows: 
109.2 Appointment. The members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of Farmers Branch shall be appointed as the board of appeals. 
Sections 109.2.5 through 109.7 are deleted. 
Section 306.3 is amended to read as follows: 
306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided {intervening text unchanged} ... side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
4.  Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code official due to building conditions. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed ... {remainder of section unchanged} 
Section 306.5 is amended to read as follows: 
306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, and a permanent interior or exterior means of access shall be provided. Exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (2438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall {intervening language unchanged} on roofs having a slope greater than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope).... {remaining text unchanged}. 
Section 306.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
306.5.1 Sloped Roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are installed on a roof having a slope of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) or greater and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code ... {remainder of text unchanged}. 
Section 307.2.3 is amended by amending numbered paragraph 2 to read as follows: 
2.  A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan provided with the equipment. Such overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher level than the primary drain connection. However, the conspicuous point shall not create a hazard such as dripping over a walking surface or other areas so as to create a nuisance. 
Section 403.2.1 is amended by adding a paragraph 5 to read as follows: 
5.  Toilet rooms within private dwellings that contain only a water closet, lavatory or combination thereof may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
Section 501.3 is amended by adding a new paragraph 4 under "Exceptions" to read as follows: 
4.  Toilet room exhaust ducts may terminate in a warehouse or shop area when infiltration of outside air is present. 
Section 607.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
607.5.1 Fire Walls. Ducts and air transfer openings permitted in fire walls in accordance with Section 706.11 of the International Building Code shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing. For hazardous exhaust systems see Section 510.1-510.9 IMC. 
(Code 1969, §§ 4-2—4-85; Ord. No. 1169, §§ 1—10, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1451, §§ 1—6, 8-1-1983; Ord. No. 1699, §§ 1—6, 12-7-1987; Ord. No. 2271, § 10, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 2646, § 3, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2838, § 3, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2971, § 3, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3269, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3408 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3611 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Secs. 22-193—22-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PLUMBING STANDARDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Water system, § 86-31 et seq.; sanitary sewer system, § 86-76 et seq. 
State Law reference— Plumbing standards, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101, § 15. 
 
Sec. 22-226. - Adoption of International Plumbing Code; purpose. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Plumbing Code, as published by the International Code Council and as amended pursuant to section 22-227, is hereby adopted. Copies of the Plumbing Code are on file in the office of the city secretary for permanent record and inspection and are incorporated into this section as if fully set forth herein. The chief building official, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the Plumbing Code. For purposes of this Article, the phrase "Plumbing Code" means collectively (i) the 2018 Edition of the International Plumbing Code, as published by the International Code Council and (ii) the local amendments adopted pursuant to section 22-227. 
(Code 1969, § 20-2; Ord. No. 1171, §§ 1—27, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1450, §§ 1—21, 8-1-1983; Ord. No. 1698, §§ 1—13, 12-7-1987; Ord. No. 2270, § 1, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 2647, § 2, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2837, § 2, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2970, § 2, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3268, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3409 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3610 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Sec. 22-227. - Amendments to International Plumbing Code. 
For purposes of enforcement of the provisions of the Plumbing Code within the incorporated limits of the city, the following sections, paragraphs, and sentences of the 2018 Edition of the International Plumbing Code are hereby amended as follows: 
Table of Contents, Chapter 7, Section 713 is amended to read as follows: 
713 	Engineered 
Drainage 

Design 	69 
 
Section 102.8 is amended to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where the differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Sections 106.6.2 and 106.6.3 are amended to read as follows: 
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be adopted by resolution or ordinance of the City Council. 
106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refunding of fees. 
Sections 109.1 and 109.2 shall be amended to read as follows: 
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals established by ordinance. The board shall be governed by the enabling ordinance. 
109.1.1 Limitations of Authority. The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretations of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of this code. 
109.2 Appointment. The members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of Farmers Branch shall be appointed as the board of appeals. 
Sections 109.2.5 through 109.7 are deleted. 
Section 305.1 is amended to read as follows: 
305.1 Protection against contact. Metallic piping, except for cast iron, ductile iron and galvanized steel, shall not be placed in direct contact with steel framing members, concrete or cinder walls and floors or other masonry. Metallic piping shall not be placed in direct contact with corrosive soil. Where sheathing is used to prevent direct contact, the sheathing shall have a thickness of not less than 0.008 inch (8 mil) (0.203 mm) and the sheathing shall be made of approved material. Where sheathing protects piping that penetrates concrete or masonry walls or floors, the sheathing shall be installed in a manner that allows movement of the piping within the sheathing. 
Section 305.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade. 
Section 305.7 is amended to read as follows: 
305.7 Protection of components of plumbing system. Components of a plumbing system installed within 3 feet along alleyways, driveways, parking garages or other locations in a manner in which they could be exposed to damage shall be recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner. 
Section 314.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
314.2.1 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils and evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal.... {intervening text unchanged} ... Condensate shall not discharge into a street, alley, sidewalk, rooftop, or other areas so as to cause a nuisance. 
Section 409.2 is amended to read as follows: 
409.2 Water connection. The water supply to a commercial dishwashing machine shall be protected against backflow by an air gap or backflow preventer in accordance with Section 608. {remainder of section unchanged} 
Section 413.4 is amended to read as follows: 
413.4 Required location for floor drains. Floor drains shall be installed in the following areas. 
1.  In public coin-operated laundries and in the central washing facilities of multiple family dwellings, the rooms containing automatic clothes washers shall be provided with floor drains located to readily drain the entire floor area. Such drains shall have a minimum outlet of not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter. 
2.  Commercial kitchens. In lieu of floor drains in commercial kitchens, the code official may accept floor sinks. 
3.  Public restrooms. 
Section 502.3 is amended to read as follows: 
502.3 Water heaters installed in attics. Attics containing a water heater shall be provided {intervening language unchanged} side of the water heater. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions be not less than 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm) where such dimensions are large enough to allow removal of the water heater. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
4.  Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code official due to building conditions. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed ... {remainder of section unchanged} 
Section 502 is amended by adding Section 502.6 to read as follows: 
502.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm) above the ground or floor level which may be reached with a portable ladder. 
Section 504.6 is amended to read as follows: 
504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge through an air gap. 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
5.  Discharge to an approved location or to the outdoors. 
6.  Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage. 
7.  Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants. 
8.  Not be trapped. 
9.  Be installed so as to flow by gravity. 
10.  Terminate not more than 6 inches and not less than two times the discharge pipe diameter above the floor or flood level rim of the waste receptor. 
11.  Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping. 
12.  Not have valves or tee fittings. 
13.  Be constructed of those materials listed in Section 605.4 or materials tested, rated and approved for such use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1. 
14.  Be one nominal size larger than the size of the relief valve outlet, where the relief valve discharge piping is installed with insert fittings. The outlet end of such tubing shall be fastened in place. 
Section 504.7.1 is amended to read as follows: 
504.7.1 Pan size and drain: The pan shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in depth and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in Table 605.4. Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
Section 608.1 is amended to read as follows: 
608.1 General. A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner so as to prevent contamination from non-potable liquids, solids or gases being introduced into the potable water supply through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the system. Backflow preventer applications shall conform to applicable local regulations, Table 608.1, and as specifically stated in Sections 608.2 through 608.16.10. 
Section 608.17.5 is amended to read as follows: 
608.17.5 Connections to lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
Section 608.18 is amended to read as follows: 
608.18 Protection of individual water supplies. An individual water supply shall be located and constructed so as to be safeguarded against contamination in accordance with applicable local regulations. Installation shall be in accordance with Sections 608.18.1 through 608.18.8. 
Section 703.6 is deleted. 
Section 704 is amended by adding Section 704.5 to read as follows: 
704.5 Single stack fittings. Single stack fittings with internal baffle, PVC schedule 40 or cast iron single stack shall be designed by a registered engineer and comply to a national recognized standard. 
Section 712 is amended by adding Section 712.5 to read as follows: 
712.5 Dual Pump System. All sumps shall be automatically discharged and, when in any "public use" occupancy where the sump serves more than 10 fixture units, shall be provided with dual pumps or ejectors arranged to function independently in case of overload or mechanical failure. For storm drainage sumps and pumping systems, see Section 1113. 
Section 713 is amended by changing the title caption to read "ENGINEERED DRAINAGE DESIGN". 
Section 713.1 is amended to read as follows: 
713.1 Design of drainage system. The sizing, design and layout of the drainage system shall be designed by registered professional engineer using approved design methods. 
Section 803 is amended by adding Section 803.3 to read as follows: 
803.3 Special waste pipe, fittings, and components. Pipes, fittings, and components receiving or intended to receive the discharge of any fixture into which acid or corrosive chemicals are placed shall be constructed of CPVC, high silicone iron, PP, PVDF, chemical resistant glass, or glazed ceramic materials. 
Section 903.1 is amended to read as follows: 
903.1 Roof extension. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall terminate not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the roof. Where a roof is to be used for assembly or as a promenade, observation deck, sunbathing deck or similar purposes, open vent pipes shall terminate not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof. 
Section 918.8 is amended to read as follows: 
918.8 Where permitted. Individual, branch and circuit vents shall be permitted to terminate with a connection to an individual or branch-type air admittance valve in accordance with Section 918.3.1. Stack vents and vent stacks shall be permitted to terminate to stack-type air admittance valves in accordance with Section 918.3.2. Air admittance valves shall only be installed with the prior approval of the building official. 
Section 1106.1 is amended to read as follows: 
1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building storm sewers, and any horizontal branches of such drains or sewers shall be based on six (6) inches per hour rainfall rate. 
Section 1108.3 is amended to read as follows: 
1108.3 Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with Section 1106. Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for which the roof was designed as determined by Section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not have an opening dimension of less than 4 inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary system shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system. 
Section 1109 is deleted. 
Section 1202.1 is amended by deleting Paragraph 1 and 2 under "Exceptions". 
(Code 1969, § 20-3; Ord. No. 1171, §§ 1—27, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1450, §§ 1—21, 8-1-1983; Ord. No. 1698, §§ 1—13, 12-7-1987; Ord. No. 2270, §§ 2—13, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 2647, § 3, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2837, § 3, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2970, § 2, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3268, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3409 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3610 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Secs. 22-228, 22-229. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII.5. - FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 22-230. - Adoption of International Fuel Gas Code; purpose. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, as published by the International Code Council and as amended pursuant to section 22-231, is hereby adopted. Copies of the Fuel Gas Code are on file in the office of the city secretary for permanent record and inspection and are incorporated into this section as if fully set forth herein. The chief building official, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the Fuel Gas Code. For purposes of this article, the phrase "Fuel Gas Code" means collectively (i) the 2018 Edition of the International Fuel Code, as published by the International Code Council and (ii) the local amendments adopted pursuant to section 22-231. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 2, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2839, § 2, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2972, § 2, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3270, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3410 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3612 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Sec. 22-231. - Local amendments to International Fuel Gas Code. 
For purposes of enforcement of the provisions of the Fuel Gas Code within the incorporated limits of the city, the following sections, paragraphs, and sentences of the 2018 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code are hereby amended as follows: 
Section 102.2 is amended by adding a paragraph titled "Exception" to read as follows: 
Exception: Existing dwelling units shall comply with Section 621.2. 
Section 102.8 is amended to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where the differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 106.6.2 is amended to read as follows: 
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as adopted by ordinance and/or resolution of the City Council. 
Section 106.6.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refunding of fees. 
Section 109.1 is amended to read as follows: 
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals established by ordinance. The board shall be governed by the enabling ordinance. 
109.1.1 Limitations of Authority. The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretations of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of this code. 
Section 109.2 is amended to read as follows: 
109.2 Appointment. The members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of Farmers Branch shall be appointed as the board of appeals. 
Sections 109.2.5 through 109.7, inclusive, are deleted. 
Section 306.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
[M] 306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided ... {intervening language unchanged} ... side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
4.  Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code official due to building conditions. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is not less than ... (remainder of section unchanged}. 
Section 306.5 is amended to read as follows: 
[M] 306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, a permanent interior or exterior means of access shall be provided. Exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (2438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall . . . {intervening language unchanged} ... on roofs having a slope greater than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope).... {remainder of section unchanged}. 
Section 306.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
[M] 306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are installed on a roof having a slope 3 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25 percent slope) or greater and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code. 
Section 401.5 is amended by adding the following language at the end of the section: 
... Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING 
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure 
Do Not Remove" 
Section 404.12 is amended to read as follows: 
404.12 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum burial depth of 18 inches (458 mm) measured from the top of the pipe to surrounding finished grade. 
Section 404.12.1 is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 406.4 is amended to read as follows: 
406.4 Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a manometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. 
Section 406.4.1 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3 ½"), a set hand, 1/10-pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3 ½"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing. 
Section 409.1 is amended by adding Section 409.1.4 to read as follows: 
409.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
Section 410.1 is amended by adding the following sentence at the end of the section and a new paragraph titled "Exception" to read as follows: 
Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in Section 306. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
Section 621.2 is amended by adding a paragraph titled "Exception" to read as follows: 
Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Building Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in Section 108.7. 
(Ord. No. 2648, § 3, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2839, § 3, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2972, § 3, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3270, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3410 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3612 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Secs. 22-232—22-239. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII.7. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
 
Sec. 22-240. - Adoption of International Energy Conservation Code; purpose. 
The 2018 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, as published by the International Code Council and as amended pursuant to section 22-241, is hereby adopted. Copies of the Energy Conservation Code are on file in the office of the city secretary for permanent record and inspection and are incorporated into this section as if fully set forth herein. The chief building official, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the Energy Conservation Code. For purposes of this article, the phrase "Energy Conservation Code" means collectively (i) the 2018 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, as published by the International Code Council and (ii) the local amendments adopted pursuant to section 22-241. 
(Ord. No. 2649, § 2, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2840, § 2, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2973, § 2, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3271, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3407 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3609 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Sec. 22-241. - Local amendments to International Energy Code. 
For purposes of enforcement of the provisions of the Energy Conservation Code within the incorporated limits of the city, the following sections, paragraphs, and sentences of the 2018 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code are hereby amended as follows: 
Section C102/R102 is amended by adding Section C102.1.2 and Section R102.1.2 (N1101.4.1) to read as follows: 
C102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. 
R102.1.2 (N1101.4.1) Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. Regardless of the program or the path to compliance, each 1- and 2-family dwelling shall be tested for air and duct leakage as prescribed in Section R402.4 and R403.3.3 respectively. 
Section R202 (N1101.6) is amended by adding a definition for the phrases "Dynamic Glazing" and "Projection Factor" to read as follows: 
DYNAMIC GLAZING. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change it performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible transmittance (VT). 
PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device, divided by the distance measured vertically from the bottom of the fenestration glazing to the underside of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device. 
Table R402.1.2 INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT is amended by amending the Fenestration U-Factor for Climate Zone 3 to read "0.35". 
Table R402.1.4 EQUIVALENT U-FACTORS is amended by amending the Fenestration U-Factor for Climate Zone 3 to read "0.35". 
Section R402.3.2 is amended by adding a paragraph and table following the "Exception" to read as follows: 
Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhang, eave, or permanently attached shading device, the SHGC required in Table R402.1.2 shall be reduced by using the multipliers in Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections. 
Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections a 
Projection Factor 	SHGC Multiplier (all Other Orientation) 	SHGC Multiplier (North Oriented) 
0 - 0.10 	1.00 	1.00 
>0.10 - 0.20 	0.91 	0.95 
>0.20 - 0.30 	0.82 	0.91 
>0.30 - 0.40 	0.74 	0.87 
>0.40 - 0.50 	0.67 	0.84 
>0.50 - 0.60 	0.61 	0.81 
>0.60 - 0.70 	0.56 	0.78 
>0.70 - 0.80 	0.51 	0.76 
>0.80 - 0.90 	0.47 	0.75 
>0.90 - 1.00 	0.44 	0.73 
 
a North oriented means within 45 degrees of true north. 
Section R402.4.1.2 (N1102.4.1.2) is amended by adding the following at the end of the section: 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity and may not be employed or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
Section R402.4.1 is amended by adding Section R402.4.1.3 (N1102.4) and Table R402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3) to read as follows: 
R402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3) Testing option - ACH tradeoff. As an option to the air leakage rate set out in Section R402.4.1.2 (N1102.4.1.2), 1- and 2-family homes meeting all of the listed criteria below and the thermal envelope requirements in Table R402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3) will be considered compliant when tested and verified as having an air leakage rate to not less than or equal to four air changes per hour when tested and reported in accordance with the testing standards and reporting criteria listed in Section R402.4.1.2 (N1102.4.1.2). 
The compliance equivalency is limited as follows: 
1.  Limited to a conditioned floor area between 1,000 and 6,000 square feet, 
2.  Limited to between 2 to 6 bedrooms, 
3.  Assumes all ductwork and mechanical equipment is located in the unconditioned attic, 
4.  Assumes typical wood framing in the walls and roof, and 
5.  Assumes one of the following heating/cooling systems: 
a.  All electric system with a heat pump for heating, or 
b.  A system with electric cooling and natural gas heating. 
Dwellings using electric resistance strip heating do not qualify for this tradeoff. 
TABLE R402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3) a 
Envelope Component 	Option #1 	Option #2 
R402.4 Air Leakage 	=4 ACH50 	=4 ACH50 
Wall Insulation R-value 	R13 + R3 b 	R13 + R3 b 
Fenestration U-factor 	= 	=0.32 
Fenestration SHGC 	= 	=0.25 
Ceiling R-value 	= 	=R49 
Duct Insulation R-value 	R8 	R6 
Radiant Barrier Required 	No 	Yes 
 
a Except for the values listed in the table, all other mandatory code provisions are applicable. 
b The first value listed is the R-value of cavity insulation, the second value is the R-value of the continuous insulation or insulated siding. 
Section R402.4.1 is amended by adding Sections R402.4.1.4 and R402.4.1.5 to read as follows: 
R402.4.1.4 Testing options for R2 multifamily dwelling units. As an option to the air leakage rate set out in Section R402.4.1.2, multifamily dwelling units will be considered compliant when tested and verified as having an air leakage rate to the air leakage rate set out in either Section R402.4.1.4.1 or Section R402.4.1.4.2 when tested and reported in accordance with the testing standards and reporting criteria listed in Section R402.4.1.2 
R402.4.1.4.1 Total air leakage rate for interior multifamily dwelling units. Interior multifamily dwelling units with a measured, "unguarded" total air leakage result of 5.3 ACH50 or less shall be considered compliant. 
R402.4.1.4.2 Total air leakage rate for corner multifamily dwelling units. Corner multifamily units with a measured, "unguarded" total leakage result of less than 5.0 ACH50 shall be considered compliant. 
R402.4.1.5 Sampling options for R2 multifamily dwelling units. For buildings having three or more dwelling units, a minimum of 15% of the dwelling units in each building must be tested as required by Section R402.4.1.2. Prior to beginning sampling for testing, "Initial Testing" is required for each multifamily property. "Initial Testing" shall consist of the 3rd party testing contractor performing the required tests on at least three consecutive dwelling units. Test results from the "Initial Testing" must satisfy minimum code requirements before sampling is permitted. Dwelling units selected for the "Initial Testing" must be within the same building. Dwelling units selected for "Initial Testing" shall not be included in a "sample group" or counted toward the minimum 15% of dwelling units tested. The building official shall randomly select the three dwelling units for "Initial Testing." The building official may delegate the random selection to the designated 3rd party testing contractor. 
R402.4.1.5.1 Sample group Identification and Sampling. The builder shall identify a "sample group" which may be a building, floor, fire area or portion thereof. All of the dwelling units within the "sample group" must be at the same stage of construction and must be ready for testing. The building official shall randomly select at least 15% of dwelling units from each "sample group" for testing. The building official may delegate the random selection to the designated 3rd party testing contractor. 
If each tested dwelling unit within a "sample group" meets the minimum code requirements, then all dwelling units in the "sample group" are considered to meet the minimum code requirements. 
Before a building may be deemed compliant with the testing as required, each "sample group" must be deemed compliant with the minimum code requirements. The sum total of all of the tested dwelling units across all "sample groups" shall not be less than a minimum of 15% of the dwelling units in a building. 
R402.4.1.5.2 Failure to Meet Code Requirement(s). If any dwelling units within the identified "sample group" fail to meet a code requirement as determined by testing, the builder will be directed to correct the cause(s) of failure, and 30% of the remaining dwelling units in the "sample group" will be randomly selected for testing by the building official, or third-party testing contractor, regarding the specific cause(s) of failure. 
If any failures occur in the additional dwelling units, all remaining dwelling units in the sample group must be individually tested for code compliance. 
A multifamily property with three failures within a 90-day period is no longer eligible to use the sampling protocol in that community or project until successfully repeating "Initial Testing." Sampling may be reinstated after at least three consecutive dwelling units are individually verified to meet all code requirements. 
A Certificate of Occupancy may not be issued for any building until testing has been performed and deemed to satisfy the minimum code requirements on the dwelling unit(s) identified for testing. 
Section R403.3.3 is amended by adding the following at the end of the section: 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform duct testing leakage testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
Section R403.3.4 is amended by adding Section 40.3.4.1 to read as follows: 
R403.3.4.1 Sampling options for R2 multifamily dwelling units. For buildings having three or more dwelling units, a minimum of 15% of the dwelling units in each building must be tested as required by Section R403.3.3. Prior to beginning sampling for testing, "Initial Testing" is required for each multifamily property. "Initial Testing" shall consist of the 3rd party testing contractor performing the required tests on at least three consecutive dwelling units. Test results from the "Initial Testing" must satisfy minimum code requirements before sampling is permitted. Dwelling units selected for the "Initial Testing" must be within the same building. Dwelling units selected for "Initial Testing" shall not be included in a "sample group" or counted toward the minimum 15% of dwelling units tested. The building official shall randomly select the three dwelling units for "Initial Testing." The building official may delegate the random selection to the designated 3rd party testing contractor. 
R403.3.4.1.1 Sample group Identification and Sampling. The builder shall identify a "sample group" which may be a building, floor, fire area or portion thereof. All of the dwelling units within the "sample group" must be at the same stage of construction and must be ready for testing. The building official shall randomly select at least 15% of dwelling units from each "sample group" for testing. The building official may delegate the random selection to the designated 3rd party testing contractor. 
If each tested dwelling unit within a "sample group" meets the minimum code requirements, then all dwelling units in the "sample group" are considered to meet the minimum code requirements. 
Before a building may be deemed compliant with the testing as required, each "sample group" must be deemed compliant with the minimum code requirements. The sum total of all of the tested dwelling units across all "sample groups" shall not be less than a minimum of 15% of the dwelling units in a building. 
R403.3.4.1.2 Failure to Meet Code Requirement(s). If any dwelling units within the identified "sample group" fail to meet a code requirement as determined by testing, the builder will be directed to correct the cause(s) of failure, and 30% of the remaining dwelling units in the "sample group" will be randomly selected for testing by the building official, or third-party testing contractor, regarding the specific cause(s) of failure. 
If any failures occur in the additional dwelling units, all remaining dwelling units in the sample group must be individually tested for code compliance. 
A multifamily property with three failures within a 90-day period is no longer eligible to use the sampling protocol in that community or project until successfully repeating "Initial Testing." Sampling may be reinstated after at least three consecutive dwelling units are individually verified to meet all code requirements. 
A Certificate of Occupancy may not be issued for any building until testing has been performed and deemed to satisfy the minimum code requirements on the dwelling unit(s) identified for testing. 
Section C402.2/R402.2 (N1102.2) is amended by adding Section C402.2.8 and R402.2.14 (N1102.2.14) to read as follows: 
Section C402.2.8/R402.2.14 (N1102.2.14) Insulation installed in walls. Insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing or other equivalent material approved by the building official. 
Section C403.7.4 is amended by adding Exception #12 to read as follows: 
12.  Individual ventilation systems that serve an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit. 
Section C403.11.1 is amended by adding the following at the end of the section: 
Environmental ducts and plenums installed in vertical chases, both supply and exhaust, where the ducts or plenums will not be accessible after construction completion, shall be leak tested in accordance with the SMACNA HVAC Air Leakage Test Manual to the installed ductwork class and pressure requirements. 
Documentation shall be furnished demonstrating that representative sections totaling not less than 25 percent of the duct area have been tested and that all tested sections comply with the requirements of this section. 
Section R404.1 (N1104.1) is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
Section R404.1 (N1104.1) Lighting equipment (Mandatory). Not less than 75 percent of the lamps in permanently installed lighting fixtures or not less than 75 percent of the permanently installed lighting fixtures shall contain only high-efficacy lamps. 
Section R405.2 (N1105.2) is amended to read as follows: 
Section 405.2 (N1105.2) Mandatory requirements. Compliance with the section requires that the mandatory provisions identified in Section 401.2 be met. Supply and return ducts not completely inside the building thermal envelope shall be insulated to an R-value of not less than R-6. 
Exceptions: 
1.  For one and two family dwellings the maximum envelope leakage of 4 ACH50 is permitted provided the envelope leakage in the Standard Reference Design is 3 ACH50 and all other requirements of Section R405 are met, including all other mandatory measures. The annual energy cost or source energy usage of the Proposed Design must be equal to or less than that of the Standard Reference Design. 
2.  For multifamily or townhomes and buildings classified as Group R2 and Group R4 of three stories or less the maximum envelope leakage of less than 5 ACH50 is permitted provided the envelope leakage in the Standard Reference Design is 3 ACH50 and all other requirements of Section R405 are met, including all other mandatory measures. The annual energy cost or source energy usage of the Proposed Design must be equal to or less than that of the Standard Reference Design. 
Section 405.6.2 is amended by add the following sentence to the end of paragraph: 
Acceptable performance software simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM Rate™, Energy Gauge and IC3. Other performance software programs accredited by RESNET BESTEST and having the ability to provide a report as outlined in R405.4.2 may also be deemed acceptable performance simulation programs and may be considered by the building official. 
Section C405.9 is deleted. 
TABLE R406.4 is amended to read as follows: 
TABLE R406.4 (N1106.4) 1 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	65 
 
1 This table is effective until August 31, 2019. 
TABLE R406.4 (N1106.4) 2 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	63 
 
2 The table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022. 
TABLE R406.4 (N1106.4) 3 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	59 
 
3 This table is effective on or after September 1, 2022. 
Section C408.3.1 is amended to read as follows: 
C408.3.1 Functional Testing. Prior to passing final inspection, the registered design professional or approved agency shall provide evidence that the lighting control systems have been tested to ensure that control hardware and software are calibrated, adjusted, programmed, and in proper working condition in accordance with the construction documents and manufacturer's instructions. Functional testing shall be in accordance with Sections C408.3.1.1 through C408.3.1.3 for the applicable control type. 
(Ord. No. 2649, § 3, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2840, § 3, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2973, § 3, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3271, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3407 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3609 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Secs. 22-242—22-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FENCES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 94. 
 
Sec. 22-261. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fence means any wall or structure more than 12 inches in height, erected or maintained for the purposes of enclosing, screening, restricting access to or decorating the surrounding lot, parcel, building or structures. 
Subdivision fence means a fence located adjacent to a public right-of-way constructed of the same materials with substantially the same continuous design that has been installed as an architectural feature, screening device, or sound barrier across the front yard, rear yard and/or side yard of four or more adjacent lots, with breaks in the fence only at intersections with public rights-of-way, utility, drainage or pipeline easements, or creeks, streams, and/or other water ways. 
(Code 1969, § 8-35; Ord. No. 3002, § 2, 10-21-2008) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-262. - Permit to construct required. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to construct a fence in the city without first obtaining a permit as required by the building code of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 8-36)  
Sec. 22-263. - Height—Rear yard and alley line. 
No fence shall be constructed at a height exceeding eight feet along the rear yard or alley line of any property within the city. 
(Code 1969, § 8-37)  
Sec. 22-264. - Same—Side yard. 
No fence shall be constructed at a height exceeding eight feet on any side yard line between the front building line and the rear lot line on any property within the city. 
(Code 1969, § 8-38)  
Sec. 22-265. - Maintenance of subdivision fences. 
(a)  Subdivision fences must be maintained in accordance with this chapter and Chapter 56 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Whether or not one or more portions or segments of a subdivision fence are owned by more than one person and/or entity, a subdivision fence must be maintained uniform in appearance and construction for the entire length of the subdivision fence in accordance with subsection 22-272(a). 
(c)  If a subdivision fence is owned by more than one person and/or entity and the owners cannot agree on a uniform color for materials, including paint, if applicable, of the subdivision fence on or before the fifteenth day following delivery of written notice from the building official to select a color, the building official shall have the authority to select the required color of the subdivision fence materials or paint, whichever is applicable, in which case the subdivision fence shall be constructed in the color selected by the building official. 
(d)  If a subdivision fence is replaced in its entirety, the finished side of the fence must face the public right-of-way. 
(Code 1969, § 8-39; Ord. No. 2157, § 2, 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 3002, § 3, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 22-266. - Side yards of corner lots. 
On corner lots, where side yards are required adjacent to the street to conform to minimum front yard setback of lots fronting upon such street, within the same block and upon the same side, no fence shall be constructed or maintained within such required side yard. 
(Code 1969, § 8-40)  
Sec. 22-267. - Fences dangerous to traffic. 
On any lot, no fence shall be constructed or maintained which constitutes a danger to traffic. 
(Code 1969, § 8-41)  
Sec. 22-268. - Variances. 
Appeals to the conditions of this article shall be heard by the zoning board of adjustment. The zoning board of adjustment shall have the authority, upon appeal in specific cases, to authorize such variances from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a strict enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this article shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(Code 1969, § 8-42)  
Sec. 22-269. - Electrified fences. 
Electrically charged fences, whether battery, transformer, or any other type, shall not be installed or used within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1331, § 1, 11-17-1980)  
Sec. 22-270. - Required as buffer elements. 
Any fence which is required to serve as visual screening, a noise barrier or any other buffering purpose in any multifamily, office, retail, commercial or industrial district may exceed eight feet in height with city council approval of a site plan; provided, however, that such fence is approved by the city's chief building official and, in the opinion of the building official, poses no threat to safety, is not a nuisance, and in no way violates any other pertinent city code, ordinance, section or provision. 
(Ord. No. 1900, § 1, 8-20-1990)  
Sec. 22-271. - Side and rear yard fence materials. 
Fences along the rear yard line and the side yard line of any property from the front yard building setback line to the rear property line or rear easement line, within a residentially zoned area of the city, may be constructed of materials or products such as chainlink, wood planks and boards, masonry as defined by the building code, and wrought iron or ornamental iron. Materials or products such as rope; string; wire and wire products including, but not limited to, barbed wire, razor ribbon wire, chicken wire, wire fabric and welded wire fabrics; chain; netting; cut or broken glass; paper; corrugated metal panels; and plywood are prohibited. Other wood, metal or plastic products that are designed specifically for uses other than fence construction are also prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2157, § 1(8-47), 12-19-1994)  
Sec. 22-272. - General fence provisions. 
(a)  Fences that are constructed on any property within the city must be of approved materials and must be of uniform construction throughout the fence. Once a pattern of materials and construction method is established, it must be carried throughout the entire length of fence section from corner post to corner post. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to erect a fence which alters the natural drainage or planned drainage on any residential lot. 
(c)  Used or secondhand materials shall not be used in the construction of any fence in a residential area. 
(d)  The exterior surface of all masonry fences, including concrete block materials, shall be free from projections, inequalities or unevenness of surface, ridges or hollows, and obstructions. The exterior surface of masonry fences in residential areas shall be finished with a stain, pigment, paint or other surface treatment or material that is consistent with other finishes existing on the primary structure existing on the property. 
(e)  All fence materials, construction, and workmanship shall comply with all requirements of the building code and all approved plans and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2157, § 3(8-48), 12-19-1994)  
Secs. 22-273—22-305. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Housing Advisory and Appeals Board, § 2-156 et seq.; junked, wrecked, abandoned vehicles, § 34-201 et seq.; nuisances, § 34-284 et seq.; accumulations of lumber, boxes, etc., prohibited, § 34-289. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-306. - Title of article. 
This article shall be known as the Minimum Housing Code of the City of Farmers Branch, and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this article." A copy of such article shall be maintained at all times in the office of the building official of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § I(a), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-307. - Scope of article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings or portions of buildings used, or designed or intended to be used, for human habitation. Buildings in existence and occupied at the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived may continue to be occupied if such occupancy was legal at the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived, provided such continued use is not dangerous to life, and except such structures as are found to be substandard as defined in this article. 
(b)  Where any building or portion of a building is used or intended to be used as a combination apartment house-hotel, the provisions of this article shall apply to the separate portions as if they were separate buildings. 
(c)  Every roominghouse or lodginghouse shall comply with all the requirements of this article for dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § I(b), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-308. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. For the purpose of this article, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in the building code of the city. 
Building code means the building code, adopted in section 22-86. 
Efficiency living unit means any room having cooking facilities used for combined living, dining and sleeping purposes and meeting the requirements of subsection 22-363(b). 
Hot water means water at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Nuisance means: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
(3)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the health officer. 
(4)  Overcrowding a room with occupants. 
(5)  Insufficient ventilation or illumination. 
(6)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities. 
(7)  Uncleanliness, as determined by the health officer. 
(8)  Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the health officer. 
Occupied space means the total area of all buildings or structures on any lot or parcel of ground projected on a horizontal plane, excluding permitted projections as allowed by this code. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § IV, 11-18-1974) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-309. - Penalty for violation of article. 
No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit such work to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this article, or any order issued by the building official under this article. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or portion of a day, during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted and, upon conviction of any such violation, such persons shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § II(4), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-310. - Alteration or enlargement of existing buildings. 
Existing buildings which are altered or enlarged shall be made to conform to this article insofar as the new work is concerned and in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Additions, alterations and repairs (more than 50 percent). When additions, alterations or repairs within any 12-month period exceed 50 percent of the value of an existing building or structure, such building or structure shall be made to conform to the requirements for new buildings or structures. 
(2)  Additions, alterations and repairs (25 to 50 percent). Additions, alterations and repairs exceeding 25 percent but not exceeding 50 percent of the value of an existing building or structure and complying with the requirements for new buildings or structures may be made to such building or structure within any 12-month period without making the entire building or structure comply. The new construction shall conform to the requirements of the building code for a new building of like area, height and occupancy. Such building or structure, including new additions, shall not exceed the areas and heights specified in the building code. 
(3)  Additions, alterations and repairs (25 percent or less). Structural additions, alterations and repairs to any portion of an existing building or structure, within any 12-month period, not exceeding 25 percent of the value of the building or structure, shall comply with all of the requirements for new buildings or structures, except that minor structural additions, alterations or repairs, when approved by the building official, may be made with the same material of which the building or structure is constructed. Such building or structure, including new additions, shall not exceed the areas and heights specified in this article. 
(4)  Nonstructural alterations and repairs (25 percent or less). Alterations or repairs, not exceeding 25 percent of the value of an existing building or structure, which are nonstructural and do not affect any member or part of the building or structure having required fire resistance, may be made with the same materials of which the building or structure is constructed. 
Exception: The installation or replacement of glass in hazardous locations, as specified in the building code, shall be as required for new installations. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § I(c), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-311. - Relocation. 
Existing buildings which are moved or relocated shall be considered as new buildings and shall comply with all the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § I(d), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-312. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  Authority. The building official or his authorized representative is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the building official or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building, or upon any premises, any condition which makes such building or premises substandard, the building official or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect such building or premises or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this article; provided, however, that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and demand entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the building official or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper demand is made as provided in this subsection, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official or his authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Responsibilities of owners and occupants. Every owner remains liable for violations of duties imposed upon him by this article even though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of his building, and even though the owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of furnishing required equipment or of complying with this article. Every owner, or his agent, in addition to being responsible for maintaining his building in a sound structural condition, shall be responsible for keeping that part of the building or premises which he occupies or controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the shared or public areas in a building containing two or more dwelling units. Every owner shall, where required by this article, the health ordinance and/or other codes and ordinances, furnish and maintain such approved sanitary facilities as required, and shall furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities for the prevention of insect and rodent infestation. Where infestation has taken place, the owner shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests when such extermination is not specifically made the responsibility of the occupant by law or ruling. Every occupant of a dwelling unit, in addition to being responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling or dwelling unit or premises which he occupies and controls, shall dispose of all his rubbish, garbage and other organic waste in a manner required by the health ordinance and other ordinances of the city. Every occupant shall, where required by this article, the health ordinance and other ordinances of the city, furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities necessary to keep his premises safe and sanitary. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § II(1), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-313. - Substandard buildings declared public nuisances. 
All buildings or portions of buildings which are determined to be substandard are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § II(2), 11-18-1974)  
Secs. 22-314—22-335. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 22-336. - Required. 
No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure, or cause or permit such work to be done, without first obtaining a separate building permit for each such building or structure from the building official in the manner and according to the applicable conditions prescribed in the building code. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § III(1), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-337. - Fee. 
Whenever a building permit is required, the appropriate fees shall be paid to the building official as specified in the building code. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § III(2), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-338. - Inspection. 
All buildings or structures within the scope of this article and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official in accordance with and in the manner provided by this Code and the building code. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § III(3), 11-18-1974)  
Secs. 22-339—22-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 22-361. - Space and occupancy standards—Locations on property. 
(a)  Access to public property. All buildings shall be located with respect to property lines and to other buildings on the same property as required by the building code. Each dwelling unit and each guestroom in a dwelling or a lodginghouse shall have access to a passageway, not less than three feet in width, leading to a public street or alley. Each apartment house or hotel shall have access to a public street by means of a passageway not less than four feet in width. 
(b)  Occupied space. Interior lots occupied by buildings within the scope of this article shall have not more than 50 percent of the lot in occupied space. Corner lots used for such buildings shall have not more than 75 percent of the lot in occupied space. Where housing units are in a floor above the first floor, roof area at or below the floor level of the housing units need not be considered as occupied space. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § V(1), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-362. - Same—Yards and courts. 
(a)  Scope of section. This section shall apply to yards and courts having required windows opening therein. 
(b)  Yards. Every yard shall be not less than three feet in width for one-story and two-story buildings. For buildings more than two stories in height, the minimum width of the yard shall be increased at the rate of one foot for each additional story. Where yards completely surround the building, the required width may be reduced by one foot. For buildings exceeding 14 stories in height, the required width of yard shall be computed on the basis of 14 stories. 
(c)  Courts. Every court shall be not less than three feet in width. Courts having windows opening on opposite sides shall be not less than six feet in width. Courts bounded on three or more sides by the walls of the building shall be not less than ten feet in length, unless bounded on one end by a street or yard. For buildings more than two stories in height, the court shall be increased one foot in width and two feet in length for each additional story. For buildings exceeding 14 stories in height, the required dimensions shall be computed on the basis of 14 stories. Adequate access shall be provided to the bottom of all courts for cleaning purposes. Every court more than two stories in height shall be provided with a horizontal air intake at the bottom not less than ten square feet in area and leading to the exterior of the building unless abutting a yard or public space. The construction of the air intake shall be as required for the court walls of the building, but in no case shall be less than one-hour, fire-resistive. 
(d)  Projection into yards. Eaves and cornices may project into any required yard not more than two inches for each foot of yard width. Unroofed landings, porches and stairs may project into any required yard, provided that no portion extends above the floor level of a habitable room, and provided further that no such projection shall obstruct a required exitway. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § V(2), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-363. - Same—Room dimensions. 
(a)  Ceiling heights. Habitable rooms, storage rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet, six inches. Hallways, corridors, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet, measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half the area thereof. No portion of the room measuring less than five feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof. If any room has a furred ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height is required in two-thirds the area thereof, but in no case shall the height of the furred ceiling be less than seven feet. 
(b)  Floor area. Every dwelling unit shall have a kitchen, bathroom and at least one habitable room, other than rooms used for sleeping purposes, which shall have not less than 150 square feet in floor area. Other habitable rooms, except kitchens and bathrooms, shall have an area of not less than 70 square feet. 
Exception: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of an efficiency living unit within an apartment house meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The unit shall have a living room of not less than 220 square feet of superficial floor area. An additional 100 square feet of superficial floor area shall be provided for each occupant in such unit in excess of two. 
(2)  The unit shall be provided with a separate closet. 
(3)  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this Code shall be provided. 
(4)  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower. 
(c)  Sleeping room area. Every room designed and/or used as a room for sleeping purposes shall have a minimum area of not less than 70 square feet. Where more than one person over the age of 12 years occupies a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be increased at the rate of 50 square feet for each occupant in excess of one. Not more than two persons over the age of 12 years may occupy a room used for sleeping purposes. 
Exception: 
(1)  Two children, age 12 or under, may occupy a room used for sleeping purposes with a minimum area of 70 square feet. Where more than two children, age 12 or under, occupy a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be increased at a rate of 35 square feet for each child in excess of two. Not more than four children, age 12 or under, may occupy a room used for sleeping purposes. 
(2)  Up to two children under the age of one year may share occupancy of a sleeping room with one or two persons without additional sleeping room area being provided. 
(d)  Width. No habitable room shall be less than seven feet in any dimension and no water closet space less than 30 inches in width and shall provide a clear space in front of the toilet stool not less than 24 inches. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § V(3), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991; Ord. No. 2323, § 1, 6-16-1997)  
Sec. 22-364. - Same—Light and ventilation. 
(a)  Natural light and ventilation. All guestrooms, dormitories and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall be provided with natural light by means of windows or skylights with an area of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of ten square feet. All bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of windows or skylights with an area of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of three square feet. Not less than one-half of the required window or skylight area shall be openable to provide natural ventilation. 
(b)  Origin of light and ventilation. Required windows shall open directly onto a street or public alley or a yard or court located on the same lot as the building. 
Exception: Required windows may open into a roofed porch where the porch: 
(1)  Abuts a street, yard, or court; 
(2)  Has a ceiling height of not less than seven feet; and 
(3)  Has the longer side at least 65 percent open and unobstructed. 
A required window in a service room may open into a vent shaft which is open and unobstructed to the sky and not less than four feet in its least dimension. No vent shaft shall extend through more than two stories. For the purpose of determining light and ventilation requirements, any room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining room when one-half of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the interior room or 25 square feet, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Mechanical ventilation. In lieu of openable windows for natural ventilation, a mechanical ventilation system may be provided. Such system shall be capable of providing two air changes per hour in all guestrooms, dormitories, habitable rooms and in public corridors. One-fifth of the air supply shall be taken from the outside. In bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms, a mechanical ventilation system connected directly to the outside, capable of providing five air changes per hour, shall be provided. 
(d)  Hallways. All public hallways, stairs and other exitways shall be adequately lighted at all times in accordance with the requirement of the building code. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § V(4), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-365. - Same—Sanitation. 
(a)  Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a water closet, a lavatory and a bathtub or shower. 
(b)  Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, there shall be provided on each floor for each sex at least one water closet and lavatory and one bath accessible from a public hallway. Additional water closets, lavatories, and baths shall be provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one for every additional ten guests, or fractional number thereof in excess of ten. Such facilities shall be clearly marked for "men" or "women." 
(c)  Kitchen. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen. Every kitchen shall be provided with a kitchen sink. No wooden sink or sink of similarly absorbent material shall be permitted. 
(d)  Fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and cold running water, except water closets shall be provided with cold water only. All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed earthenware type or of a similarly nonabsorbent material. 
(e)  Water closet compartments. Walls and floors of water closet compartments, except in dwellings, shall be finished in accordance with the requirements of the building code. Water closet compartments in dwellings shall be finished with approved nonabsorbent materials. 
(f)  Room separations. Every water closet, bathtub or shower required by this article shall be installed in a room which will afford privacy to the occupant. A room in which a water closet is located shall be separated from food preparations or storage rooms by a tightfitting door. 
(g)  Installation and maintenance. All sanitary facilities shall be installed and maintained in safe and sanitary condition and in accordance with all applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § V(5), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-366. - Structural requirements. 
(a)  Generally. Buildings or structures may be of any type of construction permitted by the building code. Roofs, floors, walls, foundations and all other structural components of buildings shall be capable of resisting any and all forces and loads to which they may be subjected. All structural elements shall be proportioned and joined in accordance with the stress limitations and design criteria as specified in the appropriate sections of the building code. Buildings of every permitted type of construction shall comply with the applicable requirements of the building code. 
(b)  Shelter. Every building shall be weather protected so as to provide shelter for the occupants against the elements and to exclude dampness. 
(c)  Protection of materials. All wood shall be protected against termite damage and decay as provided in the building code. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § VI(1)—(3), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-367. - Mechanical requirements; heating, ventilation and air conditioning. 
(a)  Heating. Every dwelling unit and guestroom shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of at least 15 degrees warmer than the outside temperature, but not less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit at a point three feet above the floor in all habitable rooms. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with the requirements of the building code, mechanical code and all other applicable laws and ordinances. No unvented fuel-burning heater shall be permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type. 
(b)  Air conditioning. Every dwelling unit and guestroom shall be provided with air conditioning facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of at least 15 degrees cooler than the outside temperature, but not more than 85 degrees Fahrenheit at a point three feet above the floor in all habitable rooms. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with the requirements of the building code, mechanical code and all other applicable laws and ordinances. All air conditioning devices or appliances shall be of an approved type. 
(c)  Electrical equipment. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type. Where there is electrical power available within 300 feet of the premises of any building, such building shall be connected to such electrical power. Every habitable room shall contain at least two supplied electric light fixtures. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public hallway shall contain at least one supplied electric light fixture. 
(d)  Ventilation. Ventilation for rooms and areas and for fuel-burning appliances shall be provided as required in the mechanical code and in this article and other codes and ordinances of the city. Where mechanical ventilation is provided in lieu of the natural ventilation required by this article, such mechanical ventilating system shall be maintained in operation during the occupancy of any building or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § VII(1)—(3), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 3550 , § 1, 1-8-2019)  
Sec. 22-368. - Exits. 
(a)  Every dwelling unit or guestroom shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with exits, exitways and appurtenances, as required by the building code. 
(b)  Every sleeping room below the fourth floor shall have at least one window or exterior door approved for emergency exit or rescue. Where windows are provided, they shall have a sill height not more than 48 inches above the floor. 
(c)  Windows with a net clear openable area of not less than five square feet with no dimension less than 22 inches shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this section, provided the sill heights are not over 48 inches above the floor. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § VIII, 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-369. - Fire protection. 
All buildings or portions of buildings shall be provided with the degree of fire-resistive construction as required by the building code, for the appropriate occupancy, type of construction and location on property or in the fire zone; and shall be provided with the appropriate fire extinguishing systems or equipment required by the building code. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § IX, 11-18-1974)  
Secs. 22-370—22-390. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 22-391. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Repair of substandard building(s) shall mean the complete rework, remodeling or rehabilitation of a structure to the point when the work is complete the building(s) shall comply with all of the provisions of the most recently adopted construction and maintenance standards, including amendments, based on the type of construction and occupancy of the structure. This shall include, but is not limited to, requirements for fire sprinkler systems, fire resistant rated construction, energy conservation, exiting, accessibility, sanitation, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, structural, and zoning requirements. 
Substandard building means any building or portion of a building, including any dwelling unit, guestroom or suite of rooms, or the premises on which such structures are located, in which there exists any of the conditions listed in this division to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public, or the occupants of such building, shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard building. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § X(1(a)), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 3038, § 2, 8-11-2009) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-392. - Inadequate sanitation. 
Inadequate sanitation shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Lack of or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit. 
(2)  Lack of or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel. 
(3)  Lack of or improper kitchen sink. 
(4)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel. 
(5)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit. 
(6)  Lack of adequate heating and/or air conditioning facilities. 
(7)  Lack of or improper operation of required ventilating equipment. 
(8)  Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this article. 
(9)  Room and space dimensions less than required by this article. 
(10)  Lack of required electrical lighting. 
(11)  Dampness of habitable rooms. 
(12)  Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents, as determined by the health officer or building official. 
(13)  General dilapidation or improper maintenance. 
(14)  Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system. 
(15)  Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the health officer or building official. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § X(1(b)), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991; Ord. No. 3550 , § 2, 1-8-2019)  
Sec. 22-393. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be subject to a fine, upon conviction, as provided in section 22-309. Each and every day that the prohibited condition remains and restoration, if required, is not accomplished, it shall constitute a separate offense. These fines shall be in addition to and accumulative of the provisions for the abatement of the nuisance by tearing down and removal and restoration, if required by this division, as well as all other costs provided for by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XVII, 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-394. - Structural hazards. 
Structural hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations. 
(2)  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports. 
(3)  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(4)  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
(5)  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(6)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
(7)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(8)  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle, due to defective material or deterioration. 
(9)  Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § X(1(c)), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-395. - Hazardous conditions. 
The following conditions are declared to be hazardous: 
(1)  Nuisance. Any nuisance as defined in this article. 
(2)  Hazardous wiring. All wiring, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation, and which has been maintained in good condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
(3)  Hazardous plumbing. All plumbing, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good condition and which is free of cross connections and siphonage between fixtures. 
(4)  Hazardous mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment, including vents, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good and safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § X(1(d)—(g)), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-396. - Faulty weather protection. 
Faulty weather protection shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster. 
(2)  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors. 
(3)  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering. 
(4)  Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § X(1(h)), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-397. - Fire hazard. 
Fire hazards exist in any building or portion of a building, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department, or his authorized representative, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion, or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § X(1(i)), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-398. - Faulty materials of construction. 
Faulty materials of construction shall be all materials of construction, except those which are specifically allowed or approved by this article and the building code and which have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § X(1(j)), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-399. - Inadequate maintenance. 
Any building or portion of a building which is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with the building code is inadequately maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § X(1(l)), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-400. - Inadequate exits. 
Inadequate exits exist in all buildings or portions of buildings not provided with adequate exit facilities as required by this article, except those buildings or portions of buildings whose exit facilities conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction, and which have been adequately maintained and increased in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. When an unsafe condition exists through lack of or improper location of exits, additional exits may be required to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § X(1(m)), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-401. - Inadequate fire protection or firefighting equipment. 
Inadequate fire protection or firefighting equipment exist in all buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire extinguishing systems or equipment required by this article, except those buildings or portions of buildings which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § X(1(n)), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-402. - Hazardous or unsanitary premises. 
Hazardous or unsanitary premises exist on those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborage, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions constitute fire, health or safety hazards. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § X(1(k)), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-403. - Improper occupancy. 
All buildings or portions of buildings occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies are improperly occupied. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § X(1(o)), 11-18-1974)  
Secs. 22-404—22-435. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Administration[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 22-436. - Notices and orders of the building official—Commencement of proceedings. 
Whenever the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is a substandard building, he shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, rehabilitation, vacation or demolition of the building. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XI(1(a)), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-437. - Same—Issuance; contents. 
The building official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall set a public hearing before the housing advisory and appeals board for determination as to whether the building complies with this division's standards and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located. 
(2)  A statement that the building official has found the building to be substandard with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of section 22-313. 
(3)  A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the building official. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within such time (not to exceed 30 days from the date of order) and completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure shall be vacated within a certain time from the date of the order as determined by the building official to be reasonable. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the building official shall determine reasonable, not to exceed 30 days from the date of the order; that all required permits be secured therefor within 30 days from the date of the order; and that the demolition be completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable. 
(4)  Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work, without vacation also being required, is not commenced within the time specified, the building official will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and may proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owner. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XI(1(b)), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-438. - Same—Service. 
(a)  The notice of public hearing and order or any amended or supplemental notice and order shall be served upon the record owner, and posted on the property. One copy shall be served on each of the following, if known to the building official or disclosed from official public records: 
(1)  The holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; 
(2)  The owner or holder of any lease of record; and 
(3)  The holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. 
The failure of the building official to serve any person required in this section to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings under this subdivision as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him by the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Method of service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at his address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the city, or as known to the building official. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the building official, then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this subdivision. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing. 
(c)  Proof of service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgement of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XI(1(c)—(e)), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-439. - Same—Recording. 
If compliance is not had with the order within the time specified therein, and no appeal has been properly and timely filed, the building official shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the property and certifying that the building is a substandard building and that the owner has been so notified. Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as a substandard building on the property described in the certificate, the building official shall file a new certificate with the county recorder certifying that the building has been demolished, or all required corrections have been made so that the building is no longer substandard, whichever is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XI(2), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-440. - Same—Notice to vacate. 
(a)  Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in section 22-438(a), be posted at or upon each exit of the building, and shall be in substantially the following form: 
DO NOT ENTER 
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice. 
Building Official 
City of Farmers Branch 
(b)  Compliance. Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification in the notice and order issued by him under this subdivision, reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XI(4), 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-441. - Same—Repair, vacation and demolition; standards to be followed. 
The following standards shall be followed by the building official in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of any substandard building or structure: 
(1)  If any building declared a substandard building under the ordinance shall either be repaired in accordance with the current building code or shall be demolished at the option of the building owner. 
(2)  If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or of the occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XI(3), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-442. - Enforcement of the order of the building official or the housing advisory and appeals board—Compliance. 
(a)  Generally. After any order of the building official or the housing advisory and appeals board made pursuant to this article shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Failure to obey order. If, after any order of the building official and housing advisory and appeals board made pursuant to this article has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection (a) of this section or institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance. 
(c)  Failure to commence work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 30 days after any final notice and order issued under this article becomes effective: 
(1)  The building official shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading: 
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING 
DO NOT OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice. 
Building Official 
City of Farmers Branch 
(2)  No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this subsection. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the building official have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. 
(3)  The building official may, in addition to any other remedy provided in this section, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building substandard as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition, to cause the building to be demolished, and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the costs paid and recovered in the manner provided in section 22-445. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning the lot shall be paid over to the persons lawfully entitled thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XIII(1), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-443. - Same—Extension of time to perform work. 
Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order and an agreement by such person that he will comply with the order if allowed additional time, the building official may, in his discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional 30 days, within which to complete such repair, rehabilitation or demolition, if the building official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The building official's authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect or extend the time to appeal his notice and order. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XIII(2), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-444. - Same—Interference with repair or demolition work. 
No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this article, or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this article, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building pursuant to the provisions of this article, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XIII(3), 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-445. - Recovery of cost of repair or demolition. 
(a)  All costs for the taking down and removal and/or restoring of such substandard building or structures, including costs for mailing of notice, and/or publication, filing of a statement with the county clerk, bid procedures costs, and/or interest shall be levied, assessed and collected against such property upon which such building is located. If there are any obstructions or other difficulties encountered in the taking down and removal and/or restoring, if required by this division, of such building or structure, such additional costs shall be levied, assessed and collected against such property and/or shall also become a personal obligation to the owners of such property upon which such building is located. 
(b)  The cost provided in this section shall be levied, assessed and collected by the city. If any owner of such property shall fail to pay the costs so assessed within 30 days after being notified of such costs, the city shall file, with the county clerk, a statement signed by the mayor of such costs. 
(c)  The city shall have a privileged lien on the premises and/or the personal obligation of the owners of such property, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements to receive the costs so made and ten percent interest on the amount from the date payment is due. For any such costs and interest, suit may be instituted and foreclosure had in the name of the city, and the statement so made by the mayor, or a certified copy of the statement shall be prima facie proof of the costs expended in such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XIV, 11-18-1974)  
Sec. 22-446. - Waiver of cost. 
The owner of such property may appeal to city council for a waiver of all or part of the cost incurred by the city in the taking down and removal or restoration of a substandard building. The city council may waive any or all costs when sufficient evidence is submitted by an owner showing that payment of such costs would create a hardship. All appeals to the city council for waiver of costs or assessments shall be made in writing on forms provided by the building official, and the hearing shall be held only after publication of the hearing in the official newspaper of the city. The publication shall appear in the official newspaper a minimum of ten days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XV, 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-447. - Appeals to the city council. 
(a)  The owner of such property or the city administration may appeal any decision or order of the housing advisory and appeals board to the city council by filing, at the office of the city secretary, within five days of such decision or order of the housing advisory and appeals board, a written appeal to the city council on a form to be supplied by the city secretary. 
(b)  As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the city secretary shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the city council. Written notice of such date, time and place of the hearing shall be given to each appellant by the city secretary, either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy of the notice, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the written appeal. 
(c)  Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this article within five days of the decision or order of the housing advisory and appeals board shall constitute a waiver of his right to a hearing by the city council and adjudication of the decision or order of the housing advisory and appeals board. 
(d)  Except for vacation orders made pursuant to sections 22-436—22-441, enforcement of any notice and order of the building official issued under this article shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § XVI, 11-18-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-448. - Substandard apartment complex (multiple-family dwelling complex). 
The following system shall be used to determine if an apartment complex shall be deemed as a substandard apartment complex. Apartment complexes shall be inspected as specified in chapter 26. Information regarding minimum housing code violations, property maintenance code violations, crime statistics and other related information shall be collected and analyzed to establish a score as set forth in this article. Should at any time, within a period not to exceed 365 days, the total habitability combined with the crime index for the entire apartment complex exceeds 300, the entire apartment complex shall be deemed as substandard and subject to an order for repair or demolition by the building official as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3038, § 3, 8-11-2009)  
Sec. 22-449. - Habitability score. 
A habitability score for an apartment complex shall be determined by tabulating the category valuation (Table A) for each violation found during an inspection of the property. The total tabulation shall be divided by the total number of units at the apartment complex and then multiplied by 100 to provide a numerical score based on 100 apartment units. 
Table A 
The Building Official shall categorize each violation found at an apartment complex into one of the following categories. 
Category 	Valuation 
Inadequate Sanitation 	4 
Structural Hazard 	3 
Hazardous Conditions 	4 
Faulty Weather Protection 	2 
Fire Hazard 	4 
Faulty Materials of Construction 	2 
Inadequate Maintenance 	3 
Inadequate Exits 	4 
Inadequate Fire Protection or Fire Fighting Equipment 	3 
Improper Occupancy 	1 
Hazardous or Unsanitary Premises 	3 
Prohibited Storage of Items or Materials 	1 
Overcrowding 	3 
Misc. Violation not covered in above 	1 
 
(Ord. No. 3038, § 3, 8-11-2009)  
Sec. 22-450. - Crime index. 
A crime index for an apartment complex is calculated as provided in section 26-453 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3038, § 3, 8-11-2009)  
Sec. 22-451. - Public hearing. 
The zoning board of adjustment shall act as the housing authority and appeals board. The housing authority and appeals board shall hold the required public hearing regarding substandard buildings as follows: 
(1)  The housing authority and appeals board shall hold a public hearing as scheduled for the building code board of appeals. 
(2)  Ten days prior to the scheduled public hearing, a notice shall be sent to the property owners within 200 feet of the subject property. 
(3)  During the public hearing, the building official shall provide documentation as to how the determination that the property is declared substandard was arrived at. 
(4)  The housing authority and appeals board shall consider any additional testimony presented at the public hearing. 
(5)  Following the public hearing, the housing authority and appeals board shall find that the subject building(s) meet the standards for declaration that the building(s) are "substandard"; or, that the building or buildings do not meet requirements for "substandard" declaration. 
(6)  Should the housing authority and appeals board find the building(s) are "substandard," the housing authority and appeals board shall render an order to the property owner to repair, remove or demolish any structure that has been declared substandard. 
a.  Such order may contain provisions for vacating and securing the structure. 
b.  Such order shall provide for a reasonable time to comply with the order. 
c.  Such order may provide for the relocation of the occupants of the building. 
d.  Such order shall be personally delivered to or mailed to the owner of the building and each identified mortgagee and lienholder by certified mail with return receipt requested, or delivery by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation services. 
e.  Such order shall be filed with the city's secretary's office and published in a newspaper of general circulation within ten days of the order being rendered. 
(7)  Should the housing authority and appeals board find that the building(s) do not meet the standards for "substandard," the housing authority and appeals board may: 
a.  Allow the buildings to be occupied in their current condition, or 
b.  Order sufficient rehabilitation made to the building(s). 
c.  Provide for a timeline in which the rehabilitation is to be completed. 
d.  Such order shall be personally delivered to, or mailed to the owner of the building and each identified mortgagee and lienholder by certified mail with return receipt requested, or delivery by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation services, and 
e.  Such order shall be filed with the city's secretary's office and published in a newspaper of general circulation within ten days of the order being rendered. 
(8)  At the public hearing, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the ordinances and the time it will take to perform the work." 
(Ord. No. 3038, § 3, 8-11-2009)  
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3186, § 1, adopted April 3, 2012, repealed Div. 5, §§ 22-452—22-457, which pertained to the building and standards commission and derived from Ord. No. 3090, § 2, adopted Sept. 21, 2010. 
 
Secs. 22-452—22-459. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - MUNICIPAL COURT JURISDICTION REGARDING SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 22-460. - Municipal court powers and duties regarding substandard buildings. 
(a)  The municipal court of record has the power and duty to hold a public hearing pursuant to Chapter 214.001 of the Texas Local Government Code to determine whether a structure complies with the minimum standards set out in this chapter. 
(b)  The municipal court of record has the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To require the reduction in occupancy load of an overcrowded structure or the vacation of a structure found to be an urban nuisance. 
(2)  To require the repair of a structure found to be substandard. 
(3)  To require the demolition of a structure found to be substandard. 
(4)  To require the removal of personalty from a structure ordered vacated or demolished. Removal may be accomplished by use of city forces or a private transfer company if the owner of the personalty is not known, or the whereabouts of the owner cannot be ascertained, or the owner fails to remove the personalty. Costs of any removal and storage are the responsibility of the owner of the personalty. 
(5)  To require that an open and vacant structure or open and vacant portion of a structure be secured. 
(6)  To require or cause the correction of a dangerous condition on the land. Correction of a dangerous condition may be accomplished by city forces or a private contractor. Costs of correction are the responsibility of the owner. 
(7)  To assess a civil penalty, not to exceed $1,000.00 a day per violation or, if the property is the owner's lawful homestead, $10.00 a day per violation, against a property owner for each day or part of a day that the owner fails to repair or demolish a structure in compliance with a court order issued under this article. 
(8)  Any additional authority as prescribed by Chapter 214 Subchapter A of the Texas Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 3167, § 1, 12-20-2011)  
Sec. 22-461. - Initiation of proceeding; petition requirements. 
(a)  A petition filed with the municipal court by the city attorney initiates a civil proceeding under this article. The proceeding must be kept and organized separately from the criminal dockets of the municipal court. 
(b)  The petition must include: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and the property on which it is located; and 
(2)  A description of the alleged violation or violations of minimum standards that are present on the property. 
(c)  The proceeding will be styled "City of Farmers Branch, Plaintiff v. (Property Description), Defendant." The municipal court shall set the matter for a hearing not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days after the filing of the petition. 
(Ord. No. 3167, § 1, 12-20-2011)  
Sec. 22-462. - Notice of hearing before the municipal court. 
(a)  The city attorney or the building official shall give notice of a municipal court hearing on the repair, demolition, vacation, or securing of a structure, or the relocation of the occupants of a structure, to any owner, mortgagee, or lienholder of the structure. A diligent effort must be made to discover each owner, mortgagee, or lienholder of the structure and to give such persons notice of the hearing. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing must include: 
(1)  The date, time, and place of the hearing; 
(2)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and the property on which it is located; 
(3)  A description of the alleged violation or violations of minimum standards that are present on the property; and 
(4)  A statement that the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder must submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this chapter and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(c)  On or before the tenth day before the hearing date, notice of the hearing must be: 
(1)  Mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record owners of the affected property, and each holder of a recorded lien against the property, as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the property is located if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained from the deed of trust establishing the lien or any other applicable instruments on file in the office of the county clerk; 
(2)  Posted, to all unknown owners, on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable; and 
(3)  Published on one occasion in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(d)  The city attorney or the building official may file in the official public records of real property in the county in which the property is located a notice of hearing that contains: 
(1)  The name and address of the property owner, if that information can be determined; 
(2)  A legal description of the property; and 
(3)  A description of the hearing. 
(e)  A notice issued under this section or section 22-465, or an order entered by the municipal court under this article, that is filed in accordance with subsection (d) is binding on any subsequent grantee, lienholder, or other transferee of an interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice or order and constitutes notice of the matter or order to any subsequent grantee, lienholder, or other transferee. 
(Ord. No. 3167, § 1, 12-20-2011)  
Sec. 22-463. - Request for continuance of hearing. 
A continuance of a hearing requested and set under this article may only be considered and granted in open court by the presiding judge of the court on the date and time of the originally scheduled hearing. A continuance must be requested in writing and may only be granted for good cause shown. The court may continue the hearing no more than 60 days and must notify the parties appearing in open court of the new date and time of the hearing. No other notice of the continued hearing date and time is required to be filed, sent, published, or posted. 
(Ord. No. 3167, § 1, 12-20-2011)  
Sec. 22-464. - Hearing procedures before the municipal court; court orders. 
(a)  At the civil hearing in municipal court: 
(1)  The city attorney shall present evidence of notice of the hearing, the violation or violations of minimum standards that are present on the property, and other relevant issues; 
(2)  An owner, lienholder, mortgagee, or other person shown to have an interest in the property may present evidence of the scope of work and time required to comply with minimum standards under this chapter, present evidence on other relevant issues, and cross-examine witnesses; 
(3)  The owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the provisions of this chapter and the time it will take to reasonable perform the work; and 
(4)  The city attorney may cross-examine or rebut any evidence offered by an opposing party or other witness. 
(b)  At the close of evidence at the hearing, the municipal court judge may do one or more of the following: 
(1)  Find by a preponderance of the evidence that the structure is substandard, specifically describing each minimum standard found to be violated, and order one or more of the following: 
a.  Demolition of the structure by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee within 30 days, unless an extension is granted under subsection (c); 
b.  Repair of the structure by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee as needed to correct every violation of minimum standards found by the court to exist at the structure, the repair to be accomplished within 30 days, unless an extension is granted under subsection (c); 
c.  Vacation of the structure by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee, within a specified period of time; or 
d.  The assessment of a civil penalty against the owner for each day or part of a day that the owner fails to repair or demolish the structure in compliance with a court order issued under this subsection. 
(2)  Find that the structure is open and vacant and order securing of the structure from unauthorized entry by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee. 
(3)  Order relocation of the occupants of a structure affected by a court order, within a specified period of time, by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee. 
(c)  Time extensions for complying with an order to repair or demolish a structure. 
(1)  The court may allow more than 30 days to comply with an order to repair or demolish a structure under subsection (b)(1), if the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days. The court shall establish a specific time schedule for the commencement and performance of the work and require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed. 
(2)  The court may not allow more than 90 days to comply with an order issued under subsection (b)(1) unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee: 
a.  Submits at the hearing a detailed plan and time schedule for the work; and 
b.  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
(3)  If the court allows more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to repair or demolish the structure under subsection (b)(1), it shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the court demonstrating compliance with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the court to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. 
(4)  If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee owns property, including structures and improvements on property, within the city boundaries that exceeds $100,000.00 in total value, the court may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing or demolishing a structure under subsection (c)(3). In lieu of a bond, the court may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party approved by the city. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third party guaranty provided, not later than the 30th day after the date the court issues the order. The court shall establish rules and procedures, to be approved by the city attorney, governing when a bond, letter of credit, or third party guaranty will be required under this paragraph. 
(d)  Demolition, vacation, and securing of a structure, and the relocation of the occupants of a structure, may be accomplished by the city if not timely accomplished by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee. Repair of a structure may be accomplished by the city if not timely accomplished by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee, but only to the extent necessary to bring the structure into compliance with minimum standards. If, at the close of evidence at the hearing, the court orders a structure to be repaired, vacated, secured, or demolished, or orders relocation of the occupants of a structure, the court shall in its order also authorize the City of Farmers Branch, through its agents or contractors, to enter the property and repair, vacate, secure, or demolish the structure on the property, or relocate the occupants of the structure, whichever applies, if the ordered action is not accomplished by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee by the deadline given by the court pursuant to subsection (b) or (c). Performance of work by the city under this subsection does not limit the ability of the city to collect on a bond or other financial guaranty that may be required from the property owner, lienholder, or mortgagee under subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
(e)  An order entered by the court must also include a statement that any order entered by the municipal court, when filed in the official public real property records of the county in which the property is located, binds any subsequent grantee, lienholder, or other transferee of an interest in the property who acquires the interest after the filing of the order. 
(f)  After the hearing, the city attorney or the building official shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally deliver with proof of delivery, a copy of the order to each owner, lienholder, and mortgagee of the structure and shall file a copy of the order in the official public real property records of the county in which the property is located. Best efforts must be made to determine the identity and address of any owner, mortgagee, or lienholder and to give such persons notice of the order. If an order to repair, demolish, vacate, reduce in occupancy load, or secure a structure, or to relocate the occupants of a structure, is timely effected, the building official shall, upon written request and payment of the cost by the owner, file a notice of compliance in the deed records of the county in which the property is located. Every notice given under this subsection must include an identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and property on which it is located, and a description of the violation of minimum standards that is present at the property. 
(g)  Within ten days after the date the order is issued, the city attorney or the building official shall: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and 
(2)  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Farmers Branch an abbreviated copy of the order containing: 
a.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
b.  The date of the hearing; 
c.  A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and 
d.  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 3167, § 1, 12-20-2011)  
Sec. 22-465. - Noncompliance with court orders; civil penalties; liens. 
(a)  If the City of Farmers Branch determines that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of a structure has not timely complied with a municipal court order issued under section 22-464 and the order included a provision authorizing the city to perform work upon failure of the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to comply with the order, the city may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, repair, demolish, vacate, or secure the structure, or relocate the occupants of the structure, whichever is applicable, in accordance with the court order. Before the city begins performance of the work, the city attorney or the building official shall issue a notice including: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and the property on which it is located; 
(2)  An identification of the court order; 
(3)  A description of each violation of minimum standards found by the court to be present on the property when the court order was issued; 
(4)  A description of any work ordered by the court to correct each violation on the property; 
(5)  A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has not timely complied with the court order and a description of the provisions of the court order that still require compliance; 
(6)  A statement of the city's intent to cause the repair, demolition, vacation, or securing of the structure, or the relocation of the occupants of the structure, whichever is applicable; and 
(7)  The date and time the city will begin performance of the work in accordance with the court order. 
(b)  At least ten days before the City of Farmers Branch begins the performance of work under this section, the notice required under subsection (a) must be: 
(1)  Mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each owner, lienholder, and mortgagee of the structure; 
(2)  Posted on the front door of the structure or as close to the front door as practicable; and 
(3)  Published on one occasion in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(c)  Any costs incurred by the city in performing work under this article may be enforced in accordance with subsection (e) of this section and through any other remedies provided by city ordinance or state law. 
(d)  Assessment of civil penalties. 
(1)  If the city attorney or the building official determines that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of a structure has not timely complied with a municipal court order issued under section 22-464, the city attorney may file an action in municipal court for the assessment of a civil penalty against the property. The city attorney or the building official shall promptly give notice to each owner, lienholder, and mortgagee of the hearing to assess a civil penalty. The notice must include: 
a.  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and the property on which it is located; 
b.  An identification of the court order affecting the property; 
c.  A description of each violation of minimum standards found by the court to be present on the property when the court order was issued; 
d.  A description of any work ordered by the court to correct each violation on the property; 
e.  A statement that the city attorney or the building official has determined that an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has not timely complied with the court order and a description of the provisions of the court order that still require compliance; and 
f.  A statement that the court will conduct a hearing to consider assessment of a civil penalty on the property and the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(2)  The notice required under subsection (d)(1) for a municipal court hearing to consider the assessment of a civil penalty on property subject to a court order must be given in compliance with the notice requirements set forth in section 22-462 for other hearings under this article. 
(3)  A hearing to consider the assessment of a civil penalty on property subject to a court order must be conducted in compliance with the requirements and procedures set forth in this article for other hearings before the municipal court, except that, in addition to any other evidence presented, an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee may present evidence of any work performed or completed on the property to comply with the court order. 
(4)  The court, after hearing evidence from each interested person present, may assess a civil penalty against the owner in a specific amount in accordance with section 22-460(b)(7) of this article. 
(5)  Notice of a court order issued under this subsection must comply with the requirements and procedures of section 22-464(f) and (g) and section 22-469 for notice of other board orders. 
(6)  A civil penalty assessed under this subsection may be enforced in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. 
(7)  A civil penalty assessment hearing may be combined with any other hearing before the municipal court concerning the same property. 
(e)  Liens. 
(1)  The expense of the repair, demolition, vacation, or securing of a structure or the relocation of the occupants of a structure, when performed under contract with the city or by city forces, and any civil penalty assessed against the owner of the structure, constitute a nontransferable lien against the real property on which the structure stands or stood and runs with the land, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution. The city's lien attaches when notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the property is located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner, if reasonably determinable, a legal description of the real property, the amount of expenses incurred by the city, and the balance due. 
(2)  The city's lien for the expenses is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens, if each mortgagee and lienholder is given notice and an opportunity to repair, demolish, vacate, or secure the structure, or relocate the occupants of the structure, whichever applies. Otherwise, the city's lien for expenses, or for any civil penalties imposed, is superior to all other previously recorded judgment liens except for any previously recorded bona fide mortgage lien attached to the real property, if the mortgage lien was filed for record in the county clerk's office of the county in which the real property is located before the date the civil penalty was assessed or the action for which the expenses were incurred was begun by the city. 
(3)  A lien acquired by the city under this section for repair expenses may not be foreclosed if the structure upon which the repairs were made is occupied as a residential homestead by a person 65 years of age or older. 
(4)  The city may use lawful means to collect expenses and civil penalties assessed under this article from an owner. Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed under this article accrues interest at the rate of ten percent a year from the date of the assessment until paid in full. The city may petition a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil suit for a final judgment in accordance with the assessed civil penalty. To enforce the civil penalty, the city must file with the district clerk of a county in which the city is located a certified copy of the municipal court order assessing the civil penalty, stating the amount and duration of the penalty. The assessment of a civil penalty under this article is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty. No other proof is required for the district court to enter final judgment on the penalty. 
(Ord. No. 3167, § 1, 12-20-2011)  
Sec. 22-466. - Reserved.  
Sec. 22-467. - Modification of court orders. 
(a)  Within 15 days after the municipal court enters an order under this article, the City of Farmers Branch or an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of a structure that is the subject of the order may request that the court modify its order. The request must be in writing and filed with the court. 
(b)  The court shall schedule a hearing on the motion not less than five days or more than ten days after the request for modification is filed. The movant must promptly deliver a copy of the request and notice of the hearing date and time, in writing, to the city attorney and each owner, lienholder, and mortgagee by either personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  If circumstances have changed and the court finds good cause, the court may modify the order. The city attorney or the building official shall notify the owner, lienholder, and mortgagee of the structure of the modified order in accordance with sections 22-464(f) and (g). 
(Ord. No. 3167, § 1, 12-20-2011)  
Sec. 22-468. - Appeal of court orders. 
Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record who is jointly or severally aggrieved by a municipal court order issued under this article may appeal by filing in state district court a verified petition setting forth that the municipal court's decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be filed by an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record within 30 calendar days after the respective dates a copy of the municipal court order is mailed to each in compliance with section 22-464(f); otherwise, the order will become final as to each person upon expiration of each person's respective 30-calendar-day period. An appeal in state district court is a trial de novo. 
(Ord. No. 3167, § 1, 12-20-2011; Ord. No. 3186, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 22-469. - Miscellaneous notice provisions. 
(a)  Any notice required by this article to be given to the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of any structure must also be given to any legal occupant of the structure, if the subject of the notice involves the demolition, vacation, or reduction of occupancy load of the structure or the relocation. Notice required under this subsection must be given to the legal occupants either: 
(1)  In the same manner required by this article for notice to the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the structure; or 
(2)  By personal service, using the time and procedural requirements set forth in this article for notice to the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the structure. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, a requirement to use "best efforts" or "a diligent effort" is satisfied by a search of the following records: 
(1)  County real property records of the county in which the structure is located; 
(2)  Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the structure is located; 
(3)  Records of the secretary of state for the State of Texas; 
(4)  Assumed name records of the county in which the structure is located; 
(5)  Tax records of the City of Farmers Branch; and 
(6)  Utility records of the City of Farmers Branch. 
(c)  If any notice, order, or other document is mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, as required by this article, and is returned by the United States Postal Service as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice, order, or other document is not affected, and the notice, order, or other document will be deemed as delivered." 
(Ord. No. 3167, § 1, 12-20-2011)  
Secs. 22-470—22-570. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Dangerous Buildings Board of Appeals, § 2-76 et seq.; nuisances, § 34-284 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-571. - Purpose of article. 
It is the purpose of the provisions of this article to provide a just, equitable and practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to, any other remedy provided by the building code, or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings or structures, which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1(a), 8-5-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-572. - Scope of article. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all dangerous buildings or structures which are now in existence or which may hereafter be constructed in this city. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1(b), 8-5-1974)  
Sec. 22-573. - Alterations, additions and repairs. 
All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the provisions of this article shall be subject to the provisions of the building code. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 3, 8-5-1974)  
Sec. 22-574. - Violations. 
It is unlawful for any person, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit such work to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this article, or any order issued by the building official under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 7, 8-5-1974)  
Sec. 22-575. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine, upon conviction in the municipal court, as provided in section 22-309, and each and every day that the prohibited condition remains and restoration, if required, not accomplished, it shall constitute a separate offense. These fines shall be in addition to and accumulative of the provisions for the abatement of the nuisance by tearing down and removal and restoration, if required by this article, as well as all other costs provided for by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 25, 8-5-1974)  
Secs. 22-576—22-595. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 22-596. - Enforcement and inspection. 
(a)  Authority of building official. The building official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Inspecting officers. The city health officer, the fire marshal and the building official are hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the building official or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises, any condition which makes such building or premises dangerous as defined by this article, the building official or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the building or premises or perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this article; provided, however, that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present credentials and demand entry, and if such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the building official or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. The term "authorized representative" shall include the officers named in subsection (b) of this section and their authorized inspection personnel. No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper demand is made as provided in this subsection, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official or his authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 4, 8-5-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-597. - Scope of article. 
All buildings or structures within the scope of this article and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official in accordance with and in the manner provided by this article and the building code. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 5, 8-5-1974)  
Sec. 22-598. - Abatement. 
All buildings or portions of buildings which are determined after inspection by the building official to be dangerous are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 6, 8-5-1974)  
Sec. 22-599. - Hearing of appeals. 
Requests for final interpretation of the provisions of this article, and appeals for relief from the requirements and provisions of this article shall be heard by the dangerous building board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 8, 8-5-1974)  
Sec. 22-600. - Enforcement procedures; notice and order; service. 
(a)  Commencement of proceedings. Whenever the building official has inspected or cause to be inspected any building or structure, and has found and determined that such building or structure is a dangerous building or structure, he shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building or structure. 
(b)  Notice and order. The building official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building or structure. The notice and order shall set a public hearing before the dangerous building board of appeals for a determination as to whether the building complies with this article's standards and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building or structure is located. 
(2)  A statement that the building official has found the building or structure to be dangerous with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building or structure dangerous under the provisions of this article. 
(3)  A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the building official. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within such time, not to exceed 30 days from the date of order, and completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure shall be vacated within a certain time from the date of order as determined by the building official to be reasonable. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable (not to exceed 30 days from the date of the order); that all required permits be secured therefor within the 30 days from the date of the order; and that the demolition be completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable. 
(4)  Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work is not commenced within the time specified, the building official will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and may proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owner. 
(c)  Service of notice and order. The notice of public hearing and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner, and posted on the property. 
(d)  Method of service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at his address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the city or as known to the building official. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the building official, then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner provided in this section shall be effective on the date of mailing. 
(e)  Proof of service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgement of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 11, 8-5-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-601. - Standards to be followed in ordering repair, vacation or demolition. 
The following standards shall be followed by the building official in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of any dangerous building or structure: 
(1)  Any building declared a dangerous building under this article shall either be repaired in accordance with the current building code or shall be demolished at the option of the building owner. 
(2)  If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 12, 8-5-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-602. - Notice to vacate. 
(a)  Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in section 22-600, be posted at or upon each exit of the building, and shall be in substantially the following form: 
DO NOT ENTER 
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice. 
Building Official 
City of Farmers Branch 
(b)  Compliance. Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification in the notice and order issued by him under section 22-600(b), reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 13, 8-5-1974)  
Sec. 22-603. - Enforcement of the order of the building official or the dangerous building board of appeals. 
(a)  Generally. After any order of the building official or the dangerous building board of appeals made pursuant to this article shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Failure to obey order. If, after any order of the building official and dangerous building board of appeals made pursuant to this article has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may cause such person to be prosecuted under the provisions of this article or institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance. 
(c)  Failure to commence work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 30 days after any final notice and order issued under this article becomes effective: 
(1)  The building official shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading: 
DANGEROUS BUILDING 
DO NOT OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice. 
Building Official 
City of Farmers Branch 
(2)  No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this section. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the building official have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. 
(3)  The building official may, in addition to any other remedy provided in this section, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition, to cause the building to be demolished and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished, and the costs shall be paid and recovered in the manner provided for in section 22-606. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 19, 8-5-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-604. - Extension of time to perform work. 
Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order and an agreement by such person that he will comply with the order if allowed additional time, the building official may, in his discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional 30 days, within which to complete such repair, rehabilitation or demolition, if the building official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The building official's authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect or extend the time to appeal his notice and order. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 20, 8-5-1974)  
Sec. 22-605. - Interference with repair or demolition work. 
No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city; or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this article; or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this article, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building, pursuant to the provisions of this article; or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 21, 8-5-1974)  
Sec. 22-606. - Abatement; recovery of costs; lien. 
All costs for the taking down and removal and/or restoring of such dangerous building or structures, including costs for mailing of a notice and/or publication, filing of a statement with the county clerk, bid procedures costs and/or interest shall be levied, assessed and collected against such property upon which such building or structure is located. If there are any obstructions or other difficulties encountered in the taking down and removal and/or restoring, if required by this article, of such building or structure, such additional costs shall be levied, assessed and collected against such property and/or shall also become a personal obligation to the owner of such property upon which such building or structure is located. The costs provided in this section shall be levied, assessed and collected by the city. If any owner of such property shall fail to pay the costs so assessed within 30 days after being notified of such costs, the city shall file, with the county clerk, a statement signed by the mayor of such costs. The city shall have a privileged lien on the premises and/or the personal obligation of the owner of such property, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements to receive the costs so made and ten percent interest on the amount from the date the payment is due. For any such costs and interest, suit may be instituted and foreclosure had in the name of the city. The statement so made by the mayor, or a certified copy of the statement, shall be prima facie proof of the costs expended in such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 22, 8-5-1974)  
Sec. 22-607. - Waiver of costs or assessments; appeals. 
The owner of such property may appeal to the city council for a waiver of all or part of the cost incurred by the city in the taking down and removal or restoration of a dangerous building or structure. The city council may waive any or all costs when sufficient evidence is submitted by an owner showing that payment of such costs would create a hardship. All appeals to the city council for waiver of costs or assessments shall be made in writing on forms provided by the building official, and the hearing shall be held only after publication of the hearing in the official newspaper of the city. The publication shall appear a minimum of ten days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 23, 8-5-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 1-6-1991)  
Sec. 22-608. - Appeals to city council from decisions by board of appeals; hearing. 
(a)  The owner of such property or the city administration may appeal any decision or order of the dangerous building board of appeals to the city council by filing at the office of the city secretary, within five days of such decision or order, a written appeal to the city council on a form to be supplied by the city secretary. 
(b)  As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the city secretary shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the city council. Written notice of such date, time and place of the hearing shall be given to each appellant by the city secretary, either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy of the notice, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the written appeal. 
(c)  Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall constitute a waiver of his right to a hearing by the city council and adjudication of the decision or order of the dangerous building board of appeals. 
(d)  Except for vacation orders made pursuant to section 22-601, enforcement of any notice and order of the building official issued under this article shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 24, 8-5-1974; Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 1-6-1991)  
Secs. 22-609—22-630. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONDITIONS AND DEFECTS 
 
Sec. 22-631. - Structural characteristics deemed dangerous. 
For the purpose of this article, any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects described in this section shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered: 
(1)  Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit that is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  The stress in any materials, member or portion of such materials, due to all dead and live loads, that is more than 1½ times the working stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(3)  Any portion of a building or structure that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause to such an extent that the structural strength or stability of such building part is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(4)  Any portion or member or appurtenance of a building or structure that is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(5)  Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior of a building or structure, that is not of sufficient strength or stability; or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location, without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings. 
(6)  Any portion of a building or structure that has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
(7)  The building or structure, or any portion of such building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or any other cause, that is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(8)  The building or structure, or any portion of such building or structure, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(9)  The exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base. 
(10)  The building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members. 
(11)  The building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children; a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts. 
(12)  Any building or structure that has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this city, as specified in the building code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or city relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings. 
(13)  Any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, that has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion, less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or characteristics or weather resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location. 
(14)  A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities or otherwise, is determined to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(15)  Any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus or other cause, is determined by the building official or fire marshal to be a fire hazard. 
(16)  Any building or structure that is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(17)  Any portion of a building or structure that remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(18)  Any vacant building that is unlocked or open at its doors or windows. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 10, 8-5-1974)  
Secs. 22-632—22-660. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - NUMBERING[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 74; zoning, ch. 94. 
 
Sec. 22-661. - Placing and maintaining by owner or occupant required; designation of official number; exception. 
The owner or occupant of each building in the city shall place and maintain on the building an official building address number in a conspicuous place that can be clearly seen from the street and/or fire lane. The building official shall designate the official number which is to be placed on each building. Structures designated as accessory buildings by the building official shall be exempt from this section. 
(Ord. No. 1119, § 1, 12-20-1976)  
Sec. 22-662. - Building complexes; individual units; display of numbers. 
(a)  A building complex with multiple structures must have an official number assigned to each building. The official number must be prominently posted on the building so that it is visible from the public street and/or fire lane. 
(b)  Each separate unit, lease space, suite, apartment, office or living area within a building must also display a number. The owner or owner's representative or the occupant or occupant's representative of the building complex shall submit a numbering system to the building official or his designated representative for approval. The number shall be posted in a conspicuous place at each outside entrance to the unit, lease space, office, suite, apartment or living area. 
(Ord. No. 1119, § 2, 12-20-1976)  
Sec. 22-663. - Building number specifications. 
An official building address number placed pursuant to this article must be at least three inches high, composed of a material approved by the building official or his designated representative, and of a color which provides a contrast to the color of the material on which it is placed. 
(Ord. No. 1119, § 3, 12-20-1976)  
Sec. 22-664. - Unit number specifications. 
A number identifying a separate unit, lease space, office, suite, apartment or living area and placed pursuant to this article must be constructed of a material approved by the building official or his designated representative, of a color which contrasts with the color of the material on which it is placed, and of a size approved by the building official or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 1119, § 4, 12-20-1976)  
Sec. 22-665. - Submission of number systems by owners in compliance with article not required. 
The owners or occupants of existing buildings, which contain separate units, lease spaces, offices, suites, apartments or living areas need not submit a numbering system to the building official for approval when it has been determined by the building official or his designated representative that the numbering system in the existing building complies with the requirements of section 22-662(b). 
(Ord. No. 1119, § 5, 12-20-1976)  
Sec. 22-666. - Certain building numbers may be exempted from article specifications. 
Building address numbers which are placed on a building, in a conspicuous place that can be clearly seen from the public street and/or fire lane, on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, may not be required to meet the requirements of section 22-663. 
(Ord. No. 1119, § 6, 12-20-1976)  
Sec. 22-667. - Enforcement of article. 
The building official, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1119, § 7, 12-20-1976)  
Secs. 22-668—22-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - VACANT BUILDING REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-701. - Registration required. 
Pursuant to this article, buildings deemed to be vacant shall maintain a valid vacant building registration with the city and shall be maintained in accordance with the codes and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3170, § 2, 2-7-2012)  
Sec. 22-702. - Revocation. 
(a)  The building official may revoke the vacant building registration if: 
(1)  The owner fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article, any other city ordinance, state law, or federal law applicable to vacant buildings or properties, or 
(2)  The owner intentionally makes false statement regarding a material matter on the registration form or in a hearing concerning the property. 
(b)  Prior to revoking the registration, the building official shall deliver written notice of the possible revocation, the basis for the revocation, and a statement that the owner has ten days after delivery to comply with the notice to prevent revocation. 
(c)  Upon revocation of the registration, the building official shall send written notice of revocation to the owner of the property, which shall include a summary of the reasons for the revocation. 
(d)  The building official may reinstate a registration one time during the registration period if the basis of the revocation is remedied within 30 days of the revocation and a fee equal to 50 percent of the registration fee is paid. 
(Ord. No. 3170, § 2, 2-7-2012)  
Sec. 22-703. - Definitions. 
Building means any enclosed structure designed or constructed for use as a habitation or for a commercial use, including engaging in trade or manufacture. 
Building official means the building official of the City of Farmers Branch or designee or the city manager's designee charged with the enforcement of this article. 
Occupy, occupies or occupied means an area of a building where one or more persons actually conduct a lawful business or resides as the legal business-occupant, or occupant, or tenant on a permanent, non-transient basis, pursuant to a valid certificate of occupancy. 
Owner means the person that owns the real property on which a building is located according to: 
(a)  The real property records in the office of the Dallas County Clerk; or 
(b)  The records of the Dallas Central Appraisal District. 
In the event of a conflict between the records of the Dallas County Clerk and the Dallas Central Appraisal District, the most recently updated records shall control. 
Unit means an enclosed area designed or constructed for habitation by a single family or for a commercial tenant. 
(Ord. No. 3170, § 2, 2-7-2012)  
Sec. 22-704. - Enforcement. 
The building official or designee shall implement and enforce the provisions of this article in conformance with Chapter 56 "Property Maintenance" Article II "Health and Safety Requirements" Division 2 "Administration and Enforcement". 
(Ord. No. 3170, § 2, 2-7-2012)  
Sec. 22-705. - Applicability. 
The requirements of this article shall be applicable to each owner of a building that has been presumed vacant. A building shall be presumed vacant if: 
(a)  All lawful residential, commercial recreational, charitable, or construction activity at the building have ceased or reasonably appears to have ceased for more than 150 days; or 
(b)  The building contains more than three units, 75 percent or more of which have not been used lawfully, or reasonably appear not to have been used lawfully, for more than 150 days. 
(Ord. No. 3170, § 2, 2-7-2012)  
Sec. 22-706. - Violations; penalty. 
In addition to any other enforcement remedies that the city may have under other city ordinances or state law, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in municipal court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation continues, it shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 3170, § 2, 2-7-2012)  
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS (INCLUDING MULTIPLE FAMILY STRUCTURES) 
 
Sec. 22-707. - Vacant building determination. 
(a)  If the building official has reason to believe that a building has been vacant for at least 150 days and has not been registered as a vacant building the building official shall evaluate the building and make a determination as to whether the building is vacant pursuant to section 22-705. If the building official determines the building is vacant, the building official shall state in writing that determination and the factual basis for the determination. The building official shall give written notice of the determination by either mailing such notice to the owner(s) of the property or by personal delivery to the owner(s) of the property. If such notice is addressed and mailed through the United States Postal Service to the owner at the owner's address as shown in the records of the Dallas Central Appraisal Districts and the United States Postal Service returns the notice, the validity of the notice is not affected and the notice is considered delivered. 
(b)  The notice shall identify the building; street address or legal description of the property; state the factual basis for the determination; and, the obligation of the owner to register the building as set forth in this article. 
(c)  Within 30 days of the building official's determination that the building is vacant the property owner may provide a written dispute to the determination and provide evidence reflecting why the building should not be deemed vacant. The building official shall consider the owners dispute and after evaluation of all of the evidence, inform the owner of any determination made regarding the status of the vacant building determination. 
(d)  Appeals to the building official's determination shall be set forth in section 22-704. 
(Ord. No. 3170, § 2, 2-7-2012)  
Sec. 22-708. - Registration. 
(a)  Any owner of a vacant building shall obtain and maintain a current and valid registration for each vacant building. 
(b)  The city, an independent school district, the United States of America, the State of Texas, or any political subdivision, department, or agency of any of the foregoing are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(c)  The owner shall complete the application for registration and pay the required fees as set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
(d)  The building official shall issue the vacant building registration when the building official determines: 
(1)  The owner has submitted the completed form, 
(2)  All required fees have been paid, 
(3)  The building official has inspected the building in conformance with section 22-709. 
(e)  If the building official determines that all of the requirements of this section have not been met, the building official shall deny the registration. The building official shall deliver written notice of denial to the owner including the basis for denial. 
(f)  The registration required by this section shall expire on the earlier of: 
(1)  One year after the date of issuance; 
(2)  Upon demolition of the building; 
(3)  When ownership of the building changes; or 
(4)  When the building becomes legally occupied pursuant to a valid certificate of occupancy. 
(g)  A registration of a vacant building issued pursuant to this section is not transferable. 
(h)  The owner shall place a sign made of durable, weather-resistant material which is not less than three inches by eight inches in size on or near the front door of the building which contains in clearly legible print: 
(1)  The name and 24-hour contact phone number of the person that is authorized by the owner to make decisions regarding the day-to-day supervision, management and maintenance of the building and premises; 
(2)  The words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY . . ." and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL"; and 
(3)  Such other information which will identify the property to the owner's agent. 
(Ord. No. 3170, § 2, 2-7-2012)  
Sec. 22-709. - Inspections. 
Prior to the initial issuance and each renewal of the registration by the building official, the owner shall allow the building official or designee to perform an inspection of the building and property. The building official shall provide a report to the owner denoting any issues found to be in non-compliance with any provisions of the applicable building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, property maintenance, zoning, dangerous building code or any other applicable code adopted by the city. The building official shall determine what issues found during the inspection need immediate attention and issues that may be corrected prior to occupancy of the building. All of the noted issues shall be addressed or, in the case of a renewal inspection, readdressed, on the vacant building plan. 
(Ord. No. 3170, § 2, 2-7-2012)  
Sec. 22-710. - Maintenance bond. 
(a)  The building official may require the owner of vacant property to post a cash bond, letter of credit or escrow deposit in the amount of $2,500.00 to secure future compliance when a vacant commercial and residential building has been the subject of action by the city to abate any violation city ordinance within the 12 months preceding the date of the initial or renewal registration. The owner shall post the bond or other security within 30 days after the receipt of notice from the building official that such bond is required. In the event the amount of the bond or other security is reduced or depleted for the purpose of bringing the property into compliance with applicable city code violations after the bond or other security has been posted with the city, the owner shall, within 15 days after the notice from the city, provide such additional sums to the bond or other security so as to maintain the amount at the minimum level of $2,500.00. Any funds obtained by the city under a bond, letter of credit, or escrow account posted under this section shall be used only for the purpose of bringing the property into compliance with applicable city codes, and shall not be part of the city's general fund. 
(b)  If: 
(1)  The owner of a property has remedied all violations noted by the building official for a period of 12 months following the posting of the bond or other security; or 
(2)  The property is sold or occupied following the posting of the bond or other security. 
The person who posted the bond or other security shall be entitled to the cancellation of the bond, letter of credit or a refund of the actual amounts then held for the property in the escrow account, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 3170, § 2, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 26 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; billiard halls, § 14-31 et seq.; coin-operated machines, § 14-106 et seq.; numbering of buildings, § 22-661 et seq.; alarm systems, § 30-71 et seq.; junked, wrecked, abandoned vehicles, § 34-201 et seq.; noise regulations, § 34-246 et seq.; lawn and garden maintenance equipment, § 34-253; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 54; crafted precious metals sales, § 58-91 et seq.; signs, ch. 62; sales and use tax, § 78-116 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Miscellaneous business regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NEWSRACKS 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Newspaper means a publication intended for general circulation, and published regularly at short intervals, containing intelligence of current events and news of general interest. 
Newspaper box means a receptacle or container used for holding or placing a newspaper for sale or offered for sale. 
Person means any natural person, association of natural persons, trustee, receiver, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, or the manager, agent, servant, or employee, including, but not limited to, independent contractors, of any of them. 
Public place means any publicly owned property dedicated for public purposes other than streets and rights-of-way. 
Right-of-way means any publicly owned property dedicated for pedestrian or vehicular passage, which is used for public transportation purposes, public utility purposes or other government use, including but not limited to sidewalks, curbs, streets, paved or unpaved spaces, and spaces improved with lawn. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a right-of-way between the curbline, or lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Single-family detached dwelling means an enclosed building having accommodations for and occupied by only one family. 
Street means that portion of a right-of-way improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder, including alleys. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 9-19-1983) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-32. - Size and appearance. 
(a)  Size. No newspaper box shall be installed, placed, used or maintained on any street, right-of-way, or other public place within the city which shall exceed the dimensions, including the coin box, of 24 inches in width, 18 inches in depth, and 50 inches in height, nor which shall exceed, in the aggregate, 150 pounds when empty, including materials authorized in section 26-34. 
(b)  Appearance. The following shall apply to all newspaper boxes installed, placed, used or maintained on any street, right-of-way, or other public place within the city: 
(1)  No newspaper box shall be constructed of a material other than metal, except as provided in section 26-34. 
(2)  No newspaper box shall be painted or otherwise colored, including lettering thereon, with more than two colors or with any design or pattern other than that used for lettering or the official logo of the newspaper, if any. The limitation regarding use of colors, and design or pattern shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Instructions used to inform purchasers of newspapers or other users of the newspaper box of the method of operating the newspaper box. 
b.  Advertisements permitted in subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
c.  Information required to be affixed to a newspaper box pursuant to the terms of subsection (b)(5) of this section. 
(3)  No newspaper box shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper sold therein. 
(4)  Each newspaper box shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. 
(5)  Every person who installs, places or maintains a newspaper box shall have his name, and current address and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 3, 9-19-1983)  
Sec. 26-33. - Location. 
(a)  No newspaper box shall be installed, placed or maintained on, in, or over any street or right-of-way within the city which is adjacent and contiguous to any tract of land developed with a single-family detached dwelling or a structure devoted to religious worship, unless the owners of the tract of land consent. 
(b)  No person shall install, place, or maintain any newspaper box which rests, wholly or partly, upon, along or over any portion of a city street. 
(c)  No person shall install, place, or maintain any newspaper box which in whole or in part rests upon in or over any sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, placement, maintenance, or the use thereof endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other government use, or when such newspaper box unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business, or any legally parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near the location. 
(d)  No newspaper box shall be installed, placed, or maintained: 
(1)  Within one foot of the edge of any property line. 
(2)  Within two feet of the edge of any street. 
(3)  Within three feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility. 
(4)  Within three feet of any driveway. 
(5)  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than three feet. 
(e)  No person shall install, place or maintain more than one newspaper box within one-quarter mile of another newspaper box containing the same newspaper along the same street or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 4, 9-19-1983)  
Sec. 26-34. - Methods of securing. 
Newspaper boxes may be secured only through the use of concrete blocks, or other similar material or substance used for increasing weight, preferably concealed within the newspaper boxes, or by changing one newspaper box to another. No newspaper box shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the newspaper box or to any permanently fixed object without the consent of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 5, 9-19-1983)  
Sec. 26-35. - Fee and indemnity agreement. 
(a)  Fee. 
(1)  Each and every person seeking to install, place or maintain a newspaper box on a street, right-of-way, or other public place within the city shall pay the fee listed in appendix A at the office of the city administrator during regular business hours, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., prior to installing, placing, or maintaining such newspaper box. 
(2)  The fee shall cover the cost and expense of enforcement of this article. 
(3)  Upon payment of the fee, a permit shall be issued by the city administrator, or his designated agent, to the person installing, placing or maintaining the newspaper box, which permit shall show the following information: 
a.  The data the fee was paid; 
b.  The amount paid; 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person installing, placing or maintaining the newspaper box on a street, right-of-way, or other public place within the city; 
d.  The name, address and telephone number of the person publishing the newspaper and the name of an officer, employee, agent of other representative who may be contacted at the address regarding matters concerning this article; and 
e.  The location by lot and block number and/or street number and the name of the placement of the newspaper box. 
(4)  A separate permit shall be issued showing the information required in subsection (a)(3) of this section for each newspaper box, and each permit shall automatically expire at 5:00 p.m. on the first anniversary date following the issuance of the permit. 
(5)  The permit shall be made in duplicate with the original being retained by the person installing, placing or maintaining the newspaper box and the duplicate copy being retained in the records of the city at the office of the city administrator. 
(6)  It shall be the responsibility of the person installing, placing or maintaining a newspaper box to immediately notify the city administrator in writing of any change in the names and addresses required in subsection (a)(3)c. of this section and subsection (a)(3)d. of this section or any change in the information regarding the location of a newspaper box required in subsection (a)(3)e. of this section. No additional fee shall be required to make changes to a current permit under this subsection. Upon receiving written notice of any such change, the city administrator, or his designated agent, shall securely attach the written notice of the change to the copy of the permit on file in the office of the city administrator. 
(b)  Indemnity agreement. Each and every person installing, placing or maintaining and each and every owner of a newspaper box on a street, right-of-way or other public place within the city shall, at the time of payment of the fee, sign an agreement stating that the individual signing the agreement is authorized to sign such agreement and stating that the person agrees to hold harmless the city and its agents, employees, and servants from any and all liability resulting from the installation, placement, use or maintenance of the newspaper box. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 6, 9-19-1983)  
Sec. 26-36. - Relocation of newspaper boxes. 
Any newspaper box installed, placed, used or maintained in such a manner as to create an imminent danger or hazard to the safety of persons or property may be summarily moved and relocated by any public officer of this city in such a manner as to correct the dangerous or hazardous condition. The public officer who so relocates a newspaper box shall thereupon immediately give notice of such fact to the chief of police and the chief of police shall thereupon immediately take reasonable steps to notify, in writing, the person who installed, placed or is maintaining the newspaper box of the fact of its changed position. The person shall have five days from receipt of the city's notice of the changed position of the newspaper box to file with the office of the city administrator a written request that a hearing be held before the city council regarding the placement and the changed position of the newspaper box. The date of filing shall be deemed to be the date the written notice is received by the office of the city administrator. Within seven days of receipt of such written request by the office of the city administrator, timely filed, a hearing shall be held before the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 7, 9-19-1983)  
Sec. 26-37. - Other structures prohibited. 
No other objects or structures shall be permitted to be installed, placed, used or maintained on streets, rights-of-way or other public places within the city except as permitted pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article, applicable franchise ordinances, or other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 8, 9-19-1983)  
Sec. 26-38. - Printed matter prohibited. 
No person shall sell, offer for sale, or keep or maintain for sale any obscene material as such terms are defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.21, as amended, in any newspaper box installed, placed, used or maintained on any street, right-of-way or other public place within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 9, 9-19-1983)  
Sec. 26-39. - Notice. 
Notice required pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be given by certified or registered mail as follows: 
(1)  To the city. Addressed to the City Manager, Paul West, City of Farmers Branch, 13000 William Dodson Parkway, Farmers Branch, Texas 75234. 
(2)  By the city. Addressed to the name and address stated on the permit of the person installing, placing or maintaining the newspaper box and if different, to the representative of the newspaper or, if written notice of any change in the names or addresses of the notice is attached to the permit, then notice sent by the city shall be mailed to the names and addresses indicated on the written notice attached to the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 10, 9-19-1983)  
Secs. 26-40—26-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SINGLE-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 94. 
 
Sec. 26-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bedroom means a room used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes and not as a kitchen, bathroom, living room, closet, hallway, utility space, entryway, garage, patio or breezeway. 
Building official means the chief building official of the city or his designated representative. 
Dwelling unit means a structure, or that part of a structure, which is used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons maintaining a common household to the exclusion of all others. 
Family means any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit in which not more than two individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption when residing in multifamily zoning districts, or high-density residential areas, or in a single-family dwelling containing one or two bedrooms; or not more than three individuals unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption when residing in a single-family dwelling containing three or more bedrooms. Foster children shall be considered as a related member of the family. 
Foster child means a person under the age of 19 years of age who is reared by another, though not related by blood or adoption. 
Landlord means any owner, resident or nonresident, who leases, barters or rents his single-family residence to another. 
Lease, barter or rent means any agreement which gives rise to a relationship of landlord and tenant. 
Nonresident owner means any person who does not live, stay or dwell in a single-family residence which he owns. 
Owner means the person who, in accordance with the most recently recorded deed, deed of trust, security instrument, trust instrument, affidavit of heirship, muniment of title or other similar document indicating title to real property recorded in the Official Public Records of Dallas County, Texas, is vested in, the ownership, dominion or title of real property, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The owner of a fee simple title; or 
(2)  The owner of a life estate; or 
(3)  The purchaser named in an executory contract for conveyance entered in compliance with Title 2, Chapter 5, Subchapter D of the Texas Property Code, as amended, and recorded in the Official Public Records of Dallas County, Texas if required by V.T.C.A., Propety Code § 5.076, as amended; or 
(4)  A mortgagee, receiver, executor or trustee in control of real property. 
Person means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal or community entity. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structure thereon, and furthermore, including a dwelling unit, appurtenances thereto, grounds and facilities held out for the use of tenants generally and any other area or facility the use of which is promised to the tenant. 
Property manager means a person who for compensation has managing control of a single-family residence for a nonresident owner. 
Resident manager means a property manager or agent of a property manager who resides in the single-family residence. 
Resident owner means any person who lives, stays, or dwells in a single-family residence which he owns. 
Single location means property held in common ownership that is compact and contiguous property separated only by public streets. 
Single-family residence means a single-family residence as referred to in this article which includes the following: 
(1)  One-family dwelling (detached): A dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one family and located on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract. 
(2)  One-family dwelling (attached): A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall and which is designed for occupancy by one family and is located on a platted separate lot, delineated by front, side and rear lot lines. 
(3)  Two-family dwelling: A single structure designed and constructed with two dwelling units under a single roof for occupancy by two families, one in each unit. 
(4)  Condominium: The separate ownership of single dwelling units in a multiple unit structures with common elements. 
Single-family residence license means the license issued by the building official pursuant to this article and referred to as the "license" in this article. 
Tenant means any person who occupies a dwelling unit for living or dwelling purposes with the landlord's consent. 
(Ord. No. 1420, § 2, 4-18-1983; Ord. No. 1468, § 1, 10-31-1983; Ord. No. 2999, § 2, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 3001, § 2, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 3097, § 1, 9-7-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-72. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any nonresident owner to lease, barter or rent a single-family residence in the city without a current and valid license having been issued for a single-family residence. Any nonresident owner leasing or renting a single-family residence at more than one location shall obtain a license for each separate location. 
(b)  A nonresident owner, or the nonresident owner's authorized agent, of a single-family residence shall file with the building official any and all trade names under which he operates with respect to the leasing or renting of each single-family residence. 
(Ord. No. 1420, § 3, 4-18-1983; Ord. No. 1468, § 1, 10-31-1983; Ord. No. 2999, § 2, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 3001, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 26-73. - License application; place of business; issuance; renewal and expiration. 
(a)  An applicant for a license shall file with the building official, either an electronic on-line application or a written application upon a form provided for that purpose, which shall possess an electronic signature or be signed by the nonresident owner, the nonresident owner's agent, or the property manager or resident manager, if there be such. Should an applicant own more than one single-family residence which is leased or rented, a separate application shall be filed for each location. The following information shall be required in the application: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the nonresident owner, property manager, resident manager, and mortgagee, if there is a mortgage against property. 
(2)  Trade name of nonresident owner. 
(3)  Names and addresses of all registered agents should the parties named in this subsection be corporations. 
(4)  Zoning classification(s). 
(5)  Number of bedrooms. 
(6)  Acknowledgement of receipt of a copy of the single-family residence licensing ordinance and agreement to comply with all provisions of the licensing ordinance as a condition to receiving and maintaining a license. 
(b)  Nonresident owners leasing or renting a single-family residence shall make an application for a license 30 days of being notified by the building official of the license requirement or within one year of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, whichever occurs first. 
(c)  All licenses shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance of the license. 
(d)  The building official may, at any time, require additional relevant information of the nonresident owner or property manager to clarify any aspect of the application. 
(e)  Upon changing ownership of the single-family residence, a new license shall be obtained within 30 days of the change. The nonresident owner shall notify the city within 30 days of the change of ownership, property manager or resident manager. 
(Ord. No. 1420, § 4, 4-18-1983; Ord. No. 1468, § 1, 10-31-1983; Ord. No. 2999, § 2, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 3001, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 26-74. - License fees. 
The annual fee for a license, including any reinstatement license renewal required under subsection 26-77(a) is listed in appendix A. The fee for issuing a replacement for a lost, destroyed or mutilated license is listed in appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 1420, § 5, 4-18-1983; Ord. No. 1468, § 1, 10-31-1983; Ord. No. 2999, § 2, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 3001, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 26-75. - License display, replacement and transferability. 
(a)  A copy of each license issued pursuant to this article for a single-family residence shall be given by the landlord to each head of household tenant to be maintained at all times at the single-family residence for which such license is issued. 
(b)  A replacement license may be issued for one lost, destroyed or mutilated upon application on the form provided by the building official. A replacement license shall have the word "replacement" applied across its face and shall bear the same license number as the one it replaces. 
(c)  A single-family residence license is not assignable or transferable. 
(d)  The form of the license shall be prepared by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1420, § 6, 4-18-1983; Ord. No. 1468, § 1, 10-31-1983; Ord. No. 2999, § 2, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 3001, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 26-76. - License standards. 
(a)  Compliance with standards. Continued maintenance and observance of the standards contained in this section are conditions that shall be complied with, in order to retain a license and to obtain any renewal of a license. 
(b)  Limitation on number of families. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow more than one family to reside in any single-family residence dwelling unit. 
(c)  Building, electrical, plumbing, etc., standards. All city building, electrical, plumbing, health, zoning and other applicable ordinances, including but not limited to the property maintenance code and minimum housing code, shall be complied with at all times. 
(d)  Records; contents. The licensee shall keep records that reflect the following information in a current manner: 
(1)  Names of all tenants occupying each unit. 
(2)  Name of the head of household. 
(3)  Degree of relation, if any, by blood, marriage, or adoption of tenants in each unit to each other. 
The records shall be available for review by the building official of the city, or his designated representative, during regular working hours and upon receipt of reasonable notice. 
(e)  Overcrowding. No single-family residence shall be maintained in an overcrowded condition as defined by the minimum housing code. 
(Ord. No. 1420, § 7, 4-18-1983; Ord. No. 1468, § 1, 10-31-1983; Ord. No. 2999, § 2, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 3001, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 26-77. - Inspections; reinspections; certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Inspections; access. The nonresident owner, resident manager and property manager, as a condition to the issuance of a license required by this article, shall consent and agree to permit and allow the city's building official to make the following inspections of the single-family residence when and as needed to ensure compliance with this article: 
(1)  Right and access to inspect all portions of the premises and structures located on the premises that are not dwelling units. This includes all storage areas, community buildings, swimming pools, athletic facilities, club rooms, equipment rooms and all other portions of the facilities not constructed as dwelling units, upon reasonable advance notice being given to the nonresident owner, property manager or resident manager. 
(2)  Right and access to inspect all unoccupied dwelling units upon giving reasonable notice to nonresident owner, resident manager or property manager. 
(3)  Right and access to inspect all occupied dwelling units when, upon receipt of reliable information, the building official has reason to believe that violations of the ordinances of the city or state law exist that involve serious threats to life, safety, health and property. 
(4)  Upon change in tenancy, the nonresident owner, resident manager or property manager shall request an inspection and make all dwelling units in the single-family residence available for inspection by the building official. The building official and the nonresident owner, resident manager and property manager shall agree on a reasonable date and time for the requested inspection. 
(b)  Admission to premises. The building official, or his agent, may enforce the provisions of this article, upon presentation of proper identification to the occupant in charge of any unit, and may enter, with the occupant's permission, any unit between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; provided, however, that in cases of emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist which may involve imminent injury to persons, loss of life or severe property damage, the building official may enter the dwellings referenced in subsection (a) of this section at any time and the requirement for presentation of identification and the occupant's permission shall not apply. Whenever the building official is denied admission to inspect any premises under this provision, inspection shall be made only under authority of a warrant issued by a magistrate authorizing the inspection. In applying for such a warrant, the building official shall submit to the magistrate an affidavit setting forth his belief that a violation of this article exists with respect to the place sought to be inspected and the reasons for such belief. Such affidavit shall designate the location of such place and the name of the person believed to be the occupant thereof. If the magistrate finds that probable cause exists for an inspection of the premises in question, a warrant authorizing the inspection may be issued, such warrant describing the premises with sufficient certainty to identify the premises. Any warrants issued will constitute authority for the building official to enter upon and inspect the premises described herein. 
(c)  Reinspection; fee. If any of the inspections authorized by this article require a second reinspection due to noted violations, then a reinspection fee as listed in appendix A shall be paid prior to the second reinspection. 
(d)  Certificate of occupancy. Failure to comply with the terms of this article after receipt of written notice of the violation from the building official setting out the violations and the time allowed to rectify the violations, the nonresident owner's certificate of occupancy may be withdrawn and the license authorized by this article may be canceled. The building official may notify all public utility companies serving the single-family residence that the certificate of occupancy has been withdrawn and request that all public utility services be discontinued. 
(e)  Reinstatement. Any person requesting a reinstatement or reissuance of the certificate of occupancy shall be required to apply for and receive a new license issued under this article as a condition precedent to the reissuance or reinstatement of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1420, § 8, 4-18-1983; Ord. No. 1468, § 1, 10-31-1983; Ord. No. 2999, § 2, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 3001, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 26-78. - Appeals. 
(a)  The nonresident owner, resident manager or property manager of such property may appeal any decision or order of the building official to the city council by filing at the office of the city manager, within five working days (Monday through Friday), during regular business hours, a written appeal of such decision or order to the city council on a form to be supplied by the city manager. 
(b)  As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the city manager shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the city council. Written notice of such date, time and place of the hearing shall be given to each appellant by the city manager, either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the written appeal. 
(c)  Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this Code shall constitute a waiver of his right to a hearing by the city council and the building official's decision shall be final. 
(d)  Orders of the building official are stayed pending appeal. 
(e)  Decisions of the city council are final. 
(Ord. No. 1420, § 9, 4-18-1983; Ord. No. 1468, § 1, 10-31-1983; Ord. No. 2999, § 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 26-79. - Presumption; presentation of documents or affidavit. 
(a)  Presumption. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that a single-family residence that is not occupied by the owner but is occupied by one or more people who are not the owner is being occupied pursuant to an agreement between the owner and the occupant(s) of the single-family residence wherein the occupant(s) have agreed to lease, barter or rent said residence from the owner. 
(b)  Presentation of documents or affidavits. Any non-resident owner claiming that the owner is not required to obtain a license pursuant to section 26-72 for single-family residence shall, not later than five business days following receipt of a written request of the building official or, in the case of an appeal filed pursuant to section 26-78, the city manager, deliver to the building official or city manager a true and correct copy of any agreements, documents of title, letters of administration, letters testamentary, executory contracts for conveyance (also known as "contracts for deed"), affidavits, or other documents that establish to the satisfaction of the building official or the city manager that a landlord/tenant relationship does not exist between the owner and the occupant(s) of the single-family residence. Unless an extension of the time for delivery of such documents or affidavits is granted by the building official or city manager, as the case may be, the failure of the owner to present the requested documents within the time provided by this subsection (b) shall result in the presumption described in subsection (a), above becoming irrefutable. 
(Ord. No. 3097, § 1, 9-7-2010)  
Secs. 26-80—26-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - APARTMENT COMPLEX RENTAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 94. 
 
Sec. 26-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment complex license means the license issued by the building inspector pursuant to this article and referred to as "license" in this article. 
Bedroom means a room used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes and not as a kitchen, bathroom, living room, closet, hallway, utility space, entryway, garage, patio or breezeway. 
Building inspector means the properly identified chief building official of the city or his designated representative. 
Dwelling unit means a structure, or that part of a structure, which is used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons maintaining a common household to the exclusion of all others. 
Efficiency unit means the equivalent of a one-bedroom unit. 
Family means any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit in which not more than two individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption when residing in a dwelling containing one or two bedrooms; or not more than three individuals unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption when residing in a dwelling unit containing three or more bedrooms. Foster children shall be considered as a related member of the family. 
Multiple-family dwelling complex (referred to as an apartment complex in the body of the article) means any building or portion thereof which is rented, leased or let to be occupied for compensation as three or more dwelling units or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more families living in independent dwelling units located in the city. 
Owner means a person claiming, or in whom is vested, the ownership, dominion or title of real property, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Holder of fee simple title. 
(2)  Holder of life estate. 
(3)  Holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five years or more. 
(4)  The buyer in a contract for deed. 
(5)  A mortgagee, receiver, executor or trustee in control of real property; but not including the holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for an initial term of less than five years. 
Person means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest or any other legal or community entity. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structure thereon, and furthermore, including a dwelling unit, appurtenances thereto, grounds and facilities held out for the use of tenants generally and any other area or facility whose use is promised to the tenant. 
Property manager means a person who for compensation has managing control of an apartment complex for the owner. 
Resident manager means a property manager or agent of a property manager who resides in the apartment complex. 
Single location means property held in common ownership that is compact and contiguous property separated only by public streets. 
Tenant means any person who occupies a dwelling unit for living or dwelling purposes with the landlord's consent. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 4, 12-21-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-112. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate, manage or maintain an apartment complex in the city without a current and valid license having been issued for the apartment complex. Any person owning, operating, managing or maintaining an apartment complex at more than one location shall obtain a license for each separate location. 
(b)  An owner, or the owner's authorized agent, of an apartment complex shall file with the building inspector the trade name of his apartment complex and it shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit to be used more than one trade name at a single location. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 5, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 26-113. - License application; place of business; issuance; renewal and expiration. 
(a)  An applicant for a license shall file with the building inspector a written application upon a form provided for that purpose which shall be signed by the owner or the owner's agent and the property manager. Should an applicant own an apartment complex at more than one location, a separate application shall be filed for each location. The following information shall be required in the application: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number of the owner, property manager, resident, manager, mortgagee, if there is a mortgage against the property. 
(2)  Trade name of the apartment complex. 
(3)  Names and addresses of all registered agents of the owner. 
(4)  Number of dwelling units broken down as to number of efficiencies, one-bedroom, two-bedroom, and three-bedroom. 
(5)  Acknowledgment of receipt of a copy of the multiple-family residence licensing ordinance (i.e., this article) and agreement to abide by such licensing ordinance as a condition to receiving and maintaining a license. 
(6)  Acknowledgment of receipt of copy of the mandatory crime reduction program for apartment complexes ordinance (i.e., chapter 26, article VII of this Code) and agreement to abide by such ordinance, where applicable, as a condition to receiving and maintaining a license. 
(b)  For new apartment complexes, a multi-family license shall be obtained prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the first building constructed within said complex. 
(c)  All licenses expire on December 31 of each year. 
(d)  The building inspector may at any time require the owner or property manager to provide additional relevant information in order to clarify information contained within the application. 
(e)  The owner of an apartment complex shall notify the city of a change of ownership, property manager or resident manager with respect to an apartment complex not later than the 30th day after such change becomes effective. 
(f)  Not later than the 30th day after a change in ownership of an apartment complex becomes effective, the new owner of the apartment complex shall apply for a new license pursuant to this article. A new license will be issued for said apartment complex after 100 percent of the units within the complex have passed inspection and the license fee is paid. The fee for the license obtained pursuant to this subsection (f) shall be prorated based on the number of days remaining in the calendar year as of the date the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 3419, § 1, 2-21-2017 ; Ord. No. 3537 , § 1, 10-16-2018)  
Sec. 26-114. - License fees. 
The annual fee for a license, including any reinstatement license renewal under section 26-117(e), shall be as listed in appendix A for each dwelling unit within an apartment complex. The license fee calculation shall include all occupied and vacant dwelling units. The fee for licenses issued during the year shall be prorated on the basis of whole months. The fee for issuing a replacement for a cost, destroyed or mutilated license is as listed in appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 7, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 26-115. - License display, replacement and transferability. 
(a)  Each license issued pursuant to this article for an apartment complex shall be posted and displayed in the apartment complex office in a conspicuous place to which tenants have access. 
(b)  A replacement license may be issued for one lost, destroyed or mutilated upon application on the form provided by the building inspector. A replacement license shall have the word "Replacement" stamped across its face and shall bear the same number as the one it replaces. 
(c)  An apartment complex license is not assignable or transferable. 
(d)  The form of the license shall be prepared by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 8, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 26-116. - License standards. 
(a)  Continued maintenance and observance of the standards contained in this section are conditions that shall be complied with in order to retain a license and to obtain any renewal of a license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow more than one family to reside in any apartment complex dwelling unit. 
(c)  All city building, electrical, plumbing, health, zoning and other applicable ordinances, including the minimum housing code and property maintenance code, shall be complied with at all times. 
(d)  Not more than one family may occupy a dwelling unit and the maximum number of persons that may occupy a dwelling unit shall not exceed the allowable density as established in section 22-363 of the Minimum Housing Code. This shall not prohibit the licensee from establishing density requirements that are stricter than the cited standards. The licensee shall be required to post the occupancy standards for the complex in a conspicuous place in the leasing office. 
(e)  The owner and/or property manager shall require that an apartment lease contract be executed between the apartment complex and the tenant and/or tenants who will occupy a dwelling unit. The lease shall contain a provision which allows the owner or property manager to show the apartment or dwelling unit to city or government inspectors. If the apartment complex's standard lease form does not contain the provision stated in this section, the owner and/or property manager shall require the tenant to sign, as a condition for occupancy of a dwelling unit, a document provided by the city which will allow the owner or property manager to show the apartment or dwelling unit to the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 9, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 3038, § 4, 8-11-2009)  
Sec. 26-117. - Inspections; reinspections; certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Inspections. As a condition to the issuance of the license required by this article, the owner, resident manager and property manager shall consent and allow the building inspector to make the following inspections of the apartment complex when and as needed to ensure compliance with this article: 
(1)  Right and access to inspect all portions of the premises and structures located on the premises that are not dwelling units, including, but not limited to, all storage areas, community buildings, swimming pools, athletic facilities, club rooms, equipment rooms and all other portions of the facilities not constructed as dwelling units, upon reasonable advance notice being given to the owner, property manager or resident manager. 
(2)  Right and access to inspect all unoccupied dwelling units upon giving reasonable notice to owner, resident manager or property manager. 
(3)  Right and access to inspect all occupied dwelling units when, upon reliable information, the building inspector has reason to believe that violations of the ordinances of the city or state law exist that involve serious threats to life, safety, health and property. 
(4)  Annually, the owner, resident manager or property manager shall make all dwelling units in the apartment complex available for inspection by the building inspector. The building inspector and the owner, resident manager or property manager shall agree on a reasonable date and time for each annual inspection. Apartment complexes shall be inspected as follows: 
Apartment Complex Age 	Minimum Inspection Frequency 
0-5 years 	Complaint basis + 100% exterior 
6-10 years 	25% of the units 
11-20 years 	50% of the units 
21 or more years 	100% of the units 
 
(b)  Enforcement of admission to inspect. The building inspector may enforce the provisions of this article and, upon presentation of proper identification and notification to the property manager or resident manager, enter any dwelling unit between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; provided, however, in cases of emergency where extreme hazards that may involve imminent injury to persons, loss of life or severe property damage are known to exist, the building inspector may enter the dwellings mentioned in subsection (a) of this section at any time and the requirement for presentation of identification and notification to the management shall not apply. Whenever the building inspector is denied admission to inspect any premises under this article, inspection shall be made only under authority of a warrant issued by a magistrate authorizing the inspection. In applying for such a warrant, the building inspector shall submit to the magistrate an affidavit setting forth his belief that a violation of this article exists with respect to the place sought to be inspected and the reasons for such belief. Such affidavit shall designate the location of such place and the name of the person believed to be the occupant thereof. If the magistrate finds that probable cause exists for an inspection of the premises in question, he may issue a warrant authorizing the inspection, such warrant describing the premises with sufficient certainty to identify the premises. Any warrants issued will constitute authority for the building inspector to enter upon and inspect the premises described therein. 
(c)  Reinspection; fee. A reinspection fee in an amount determined in accordance with Appendix A of this Code shall be assessed and paid for each reinspection conducted by the building inspector required to verify repairs and/or corrections of each noted violation in a dwelling unit within an apartment complex and each noted exterior violation item. Failure to pay the required reinspection fee shall be a violation of this article and subject to penalties in section 1-14, but not to exceed the amount listed in Appendix A per unit within the apartment complex. 
(d)  Certificate of occupancy. Upon failure to comply with the provisions of this article after receipt by the owner, property manager, and/or resident manager of written notice from the building inspector of a violation setting forth the violations and the time allowed to correct the violations, the owner's certificate of occupancy may be withdrawn and the license authorized by this article may be canceled. The building inspector may notify all public utility companies serving the apartment complex that the certificate of occupancy has been withdrawn and request that all public utility services be discontinued. 
(e)  Reinstatement. Any person requesting a reinstatement or reissuance of the certificate of occupancy shall be required to apply for and receive a new license issued under this article as a condition precedent to the reissuance or reinstatement of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 10, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 3537 , § 2, 10-16-2018)  
Sec. 26-118. - Appeals to the city. 
(a)  The owner, resident manager or property manager of such property may appeal any decision or order of the building inspector to the city council by filing at the office of the city manager, within five working days (Monday through Friday) of such decision or order, a written appeal to the city council on a form to be supplied by the city manager. 
(b)  As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the city manager shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the city council. Written notice of such date, time and place of the hearing shall be given to each appellant by the city manager, either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the written appeal. 
(c)  Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this Code shall constitute a waiver of his right to a hearing by the city council and the building inspector's decision shall be final. 
(d)  Orders of the building inspector are stayed pending appeal. 
(e)  Decisions of the city council are final. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 11, 12-21-1998)  
Secs. 26-119—26-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Smoking prohibited in certain public areas, § 34-143. 
 
DIVISION 1. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3214, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2013 , amended Div. 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 1, §§ 26-151—26-154, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 26-151. - Adoption of Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
The Texas Food Establishment Rules codified at Texas Administrative Code Title 25 Chapter 228 adopted by the Texas Department of State Health Services effective October 11, 2015 with exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended pursuant to section 26-152 are hereby adopted as the minimum standards for food service operations within the corporate limits of the city, and shall constitute regulations governing the preparation, service, and sale of food within the city. For purposes of this division, the phrase "food establishment rules" means collectively (i) the Texas Food Establishment Rules as adopted by this section and (ii) the local amendments adopted pursuant to section 26-152. The city manager, or authorized representative is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the food establishment rules. 
( Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 1-22-2013 ; Ord. No. 3413 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3413, § 1, 12-13-2016 ; Ord. No. 3549 , § 1, 1-8-2019)  
Sec. 26-152. - Local rules adopted. 
For purposes of enforcement of the provisions of the food establishment rules within the incorporated limits of the city, the following sections, paragraphs, and sentences of the Texas Food Establishment Rules are hereby amended as follows: 
Section 228.2 "Definitions" is amended as follows: 
A.  The following definitions are added to read as follows: 
Catering Operation - A food establishment that pursuant to a contract or agreement, prepares food in an approved facility and transports food in an approved manner to another location for final cooking or serving. 
Certificate of Occupancy - A certificate of occupancy is a document issued by a local government agency indicating that a building complies with zoning and building laws. 
Change of Ownership - A change of owner or operator of a food establishment business and does not refer to a change of the owner of the property or building in which the business is located or operated from. 
Commissary Approval Letter - A written notarized statement provided by a central preparation facility, or commissary that displays the vehicle identification number of the mobile food establishment, and states that the mobile food establishment receives food, supplies, and/or cleaning and servicing from that facility. 
Commissary - A licensed or permitted food establishment that provides the necessary support and required services to a mobile catering truck. A commissary can be a source for obtaining potable water, disposing of wastewater, storage for food and supplies as well as cooking facilities to prepare the food for sale and consumption. 
Concession Stand - A food establishment operated on a seasonal basis for the purpose of providing food at sporting and special events associated with an independent school district, university, community college, non-profit organization, privately owned school, or the City of Farmers Branch. 
Continental Breakfast - Shall mean a limited supply of food items offered to guests with no involved preparation and or cooking by lodging operators whose facilities and equipment do not meet the required current Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER). Examples of acceptable food items that may be offered for a continental breakfast are fruits in their whole state, hard boiled eggs, pre-packaged food items such as cereals, pastries, yogurt, bagels, donuts, pre-packaged individual single use milk containers and pre-packaged single use condiments such as jams, jellies, or butter. Only single service tableware that does not need to be washed and sanitized can be offered to guests. 
Cottage Food Production Operation - An individual, operating out of the individual's home that is exempt from the requirements of a food service establishment who: 
i.  Produces a baked good, candy, coated and uncoated nuts, unroasted butter nuts, fruit butters, a canned jam or jelly, a fruit pie, dehydrated fruit or vegetables, including dried beans, popcorn and popcorn snacks, cereal, including granola, dry mix, vinegar, pickles, mustard, roasted coffee or dry tea, or a dried herb or dried herb mix. 
ii.  Has an annual gross income of $50,000.00 or less from the sale of the described foods and; 
iii.  Sells the foods produced directly to consumers at the individual's home, a farmer's market, a farm stand, or a municipal, county, or nonprofit fair, festival or event. 
iv.  Delivers products to the consumer at point of sale or another location designated by the consumer. 
v.  A cottage food production operation may not sell a time temperature control safety (TCS) food item to consumers. 
Farmers Market - A designated location used primarily for the distribution and sale directly to consumers of locally grown or manufactured food by farmers and other producers. A farmer's market is not a food establishment and operates on a seasonal basis. 
Farmers Market Vendor - Any person or persons who operate, offers, or sells food typically known as "farm grown," "farm originating," or "farm obtained" from a location approved on private or public property. Foods included in "farm grown" are whole produce, plants, nuts, certain meats, honey, egg, and pasteurized dairy products. 
Fixed Commercial Location - A building that can obtain a certificate of occupancy that is not mobile in nature. 
FRP Wallboard - Fiber reinforced polyester wallboard with a thickness of 3/32 inches or greater. 
Gourmet Mobile Food Truck - A mobile food establishment upon which food is cooked, and packaged for service, sale, or distribution from a truck, bus, or trailer that specializes in gourmet cuisine, specialty items, or ethnic menus. 
Grease Trap - Also known as a grease interceptor, is a plumbing device designed to intercept most grease wastes and solids before they enter a wastewater disposal system. 
Heavy Food Preparation - Any food establishment in which foods are prepared utilizing a grill, griddle, deep-fat fryer, commercial type oven; and/or any similar food preparation equipment, or any area which processes, or cuts time/temperature control for safety (TCS) food items and requires thorough cleaning and sanitizing. Examples of heavy preparation would be, but are not limited to, BBQ facilities with smokers, cafeterias, fast food restaurants, full service restaurants, meat and fish markets, pizza shops, and donut shops which prepare and serve kolaches, breakfast sandwiches, and or burritos. 
Light Food Service Preparation - Any food establishment in which foods are prepared exclusive of the use of fryers, grills, grills, or other similar equipment. Light food preparation is usually limited to the preparation of hot dogs, cold cut sandwiches, salads, soups, fountain-type drinks and ice cream or other similar foods. Examples of light preparation would include yogurt, ice cream, sandwich shops, as well as limited concession stands. 
Mobile Food Unit - Any self-contained motorized vehicle or push cart unit propelled by a human operator that is not operating at a permanent fixed location from which is served, sold, or distributed any food or beverage. A mobile food unit is vehicle-mounted or wheeled and capable of being readily moveable. An operator may offer from a Mobile Food Unit full service preparation time/temperature control (TCS) food items, non-time/temperature control for safety pre-packaged foods or any combination of these foods depending on capabilities and equipment. 
Non-Time/Temperature Control for Safety Beverage - A non-alcoholic liquid intended for consumption, whether natural or synthetic, that does not require temperature control because it is not capable of supporting the rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms, or the growth and toxin production of Clostridium botulinum. The term includes: 
(i)  Tea and coffee, excluding expresso, with powdered creamer or ultra-high, pasteurized half and half individual servings; 
(ii)  Commercially made, high acid beverages with a pH level of 4.6 or below, such as apple juice, lemonade, limeade, and orange juice; 
(iii)  Fresh squeezed, high acid beverages; 
(iv)  Commercially filled carbonated beverages; 
(v)  High acid beverages made from a commercial mix; and 
(vi)  Mineral water sold in open, single-service cups with ice from an approved source. 
No Food Preparation - Any food establishment area in which foods are provided pre-wrapped, from an approved source with only a microwave type heating device used to heat food items that may require reheating. Examples of no preparation would be convenience stores or other types of stores such as novelty or sundry shops which sell candy, bottled beverages, and pre-packaged food items only. 
Seasonal Permit - A permit which is issued to a food establishment, or farmers market that operates in a fixed location for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days, up to six (6) months. 
Smoker - Any unit, whether mobile or fixed in nature, which uses wood or wood products to provide smoke for the purpose of slow cooking meats intended for human consumption. Smokers must meet local zoning, building, and fire codes. 
Snow Cones and Snow Cone Products - Any crushed or shaved ice product served in a single service container and topped with non-dairy flavored syrups. 
Wholesome - In a sound condition, clean, free of adulteration, and suitable for human consumption. Pre-packaged food items shall be deemed wholesome if it meets the foregoing requirements and is used or sold prior to the "sell by" or expiration date on the package. 
B.  The following definitions are amended to read as follows: 
Plumbing Code - The most current edition of the International Plumbing Code (IPC) published by the International Code Council, inclusive of all local amendments as adopted by the City of Farmers Branch and as amended by 16 TAC § 70.101. 
Regulatory or Health Authority - The City of Farmers Branch, the person or department to whom the City may delegate the enforcement responsibility of the food code. 
Temporary Food Establishment - A food establishment that operates for a single event, or an event over a period of no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days (or for such other time as is authorized by the City Council). Written consent to operate must be obtained from the private or public property owner on which said temporary food establishment will operate. A temporary food permit must be filled out for each event with all the foods listed for sale or to be sampled and submitted to the regulatory authority for review and approval. Temporary food establishments may include food vendor pushcarts, concession stands, and mobile gourmet food trucks. 
Section 228.33(b) and (c) are amended to read as follows: 
(b)  The certified food protection manager or managers of a food establishment will be required to register with the City of Farmers Branch as a food protection manager by providing to the regulatory authority a copy of the original food protection manager's training certificate from an Accredited Program in which the applicant has passed, filling out the required City registration form, and paying the required fee. The Farmers Branch food protection manager's certificate shall then be posted in a location in the establishment that is conspicuous to consumers and available for inspection by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  Except in a temporary food establishment, at least one certified food protection manager must be employed by each food establishment in which open food handling is conducted. There shall be one certified food protection manager available onsite to cover all hours that the food establishment is engaged in the preparation of food items for sale to the public. 
Section 228.39(b) is amended to read as follows: 
(b)  A food employee may not wear fingernail polish, fingernail adornments, or embellishments such as sequins or artificial nails while working with exposed foods even if wearing food handling gloves. 
Section 228.62 is amended by adding subsection (h) to read as follows: 
(h)  Foods Procured from Other Retail Food Establishments. Except for commercially pre-packaged manufactured foods that are purchased from an approved wholesale source and that only need reheating, all time/temperature control for safety foods (TCS) that require preparation from scratch and/or a cooking process must be made onsite at the licensed food establishment and may not be catered from, or purchased in a ready-to-eat or cooked state, from another retail food establishment for resale to consumers. 
Section 228.65(a)(2) is amended to read as follows: 
(2)  Except when washing fruits and vegetables or as specified under subsection (4)(A) and(B) of this section, food employees may not contact exposed, ready-to-eat food items with their bare hands whether or not they are serving a highly susceptible population and shall use suitable utensils such as deli tissues, spatulas, tongs, single-use gloves, or other dispensing utensils. 
Section 228.65(5)(A)—(G) is deleted. 
Section 228.68(c) is amended to read as follows: 
(c)  Linens and napkins, use limitation. All materials that come in direct contact with exposed foods are required to be constructed of an approved food grade contact composition such as clear plastic wrap, aluminum foil, or other approved food grade material that is designed for single use or that can be washed and sanitized. Linen wiping cloths may not be used for continuous contact with foods that can stain, soil, or leave food debris upon the cloth. Colored cloth may impart color or dye into the food and cannot be in direct contact with exposed foods. Non-colored linens and cloth napkins may only be used to line a container for the service of foods such as bread or rolls, provided they are replaced each time the container is refilled for a new customer. In addition, woven mesh rice cooking bags may not be used as liners in rice cookers. 
Section 228.68(g)(1) is amended to read as follows: 
(1)  A re-usable take-home food container may not be returned to a food establishment to be refilled with food. All take-home containers for food products must be single service, non-returnable. A take-home container for beverages only may be refilled with a beverage providing all the criteria is met in Section 228.68(3), (4) and (5). 
Section 228.68(g)(2)(A)(D)(iii) is deleted. 
Section 228.70(c) is amended by adding subsection (4) to read as follows: 
(4)  Food Display. Freshly prepared time/temperature control for safety (TCS) food items for the sole purpose of replenishment shall not be added to and/or mixed in with existing or remaining time/temperature control for safety food items that are displayed on buffets, steam tables, or salad chill units. Any remaining containers or pans of food items on display are to be removed and discarded in their entirety before replacing them with freshly prepared food items. 
Section 228.70 is amended by adding subsections (f) and (g) to read as follows: 
(f)  Ice. Ice shall be protected from contamination by consumers. Ice for consumer use shall be dispensed only by employees, unless the ice is in an enclosed self-dispensing ice machine with a protected dispenser where contact with the ice cannot occur such as a soda fountain dispensing machine. Ice shall not be placed in self-service style coolers or ice chests that are accessible by the public. Employees shall dispense ice using only ice scoops, tongs, or other appropriate ice dispensing utensils, or through the automatic ice dispensing device. Between uses, ice transfer receptacles shall be stored in a manner that protects them from potential contamination such as in a designated ice scoop holder provided inside the bin or stored inside a bucket of mild bleach sanitizing solution. At no time shall the ice dispensing utensil be stored laying on or buried in the ice. It is prohibited to store any items inside the ice storage bin due to potential contamination of the ice. Ice makers are required to be drained through an air gap which meets the current plumbing code. Ice storage bin interiors that includes the interior ceiling, ice chute, sides, and ice guard shall be cleaned and sanitized at least weekly to prevent the build-up of mold and slime. 
(g)  Hot Dog Grills. Food establishments such as convenience stores that sell mainly pre-packaged food items but do grill hot dogs using a portable commercial hot dog grill are required to place the grill at the service counter within reach of the clerk so the clerk can dispense hot dogs to the consumer. Self-service of hot dogs by the consumer is prohibited. 
Section 228.75 (i)(2) is amended by adding paragraph (E) to read as follows: 
(E)  A food establishment that serves a highly susceptible population may not use time as specified under paragraphs (1) or (2) of this subsection as the public health control for raw eggs. 
Section 228.75 (i) is amended by deleting paragraphs (3) and (4). 
Section 228.81 is amended by adding subsection (5) to read as follows: 
(5)  Whenever the regulatory authority observes or discovers any food or drink displayed for sampling or sale that is unwholesome or unsafe for human consumption the regulatory authority shall order that food or drink destroyed or removed. The owner or responsible person in charge shall immediately remove or destroy such unwholesome or unsafe food items at his or her own expense. Destruction may include placing the unwholesome or unsafe food item or items in a proper outside covered waste receptacle and pouring liquid bleach on the food item to render that food inedible. 
Section 228.150(d) is amended to read as follows: 
(d)  Grease traps, or grease interceptors shall be required for all heavy and some light food preparation establishments in which excessive food pulp and or grease is generated or as required by the regulatory authority. This includes, but is not limited to, facilities with foodservice equipment such as griddles, deep fat fryers, grills, and juicing appliances. Grease traps shall be sized and installed according to the currently adopted Plumbing Code. Grease traps must be located to be easily accessible for cleaning and shall be located outside of the building to prevent odor and potential contamination of the food service facility. Upon a change of ownership, any previously grandfathered grease traps which were located inside the food service establishment will have to be relocated to the exterior of the building. A sampling well and securing device on the sewer line shall be provided in accordance with the Plumbing Code and other applicable City ordinances and regulations. The securing device shall be installed not less than two feet (2.0') from the sampling well. The sampling well must be installed in a location that will not allow it to be obstructed by traffic. All food establishments requiring a grease trap shall enter into a contract with a waste hauler licensed by the state regulatory agency having authority over waste haulers, to provide for regularly scheduled service. All grease traps must be serviced effectively and frequently enough to maintain these traps in satisfactory working order and to protect the City sanitary sewer system from stoppage or from excessive contaminants. Service records of such grease traps shall be maintained on the premises and made available to the regulatory authority upon request for inspection. If the existing grease trap is not in good working condition, is grossly undersized by current standards, or plumbing fixtures are being added that would require a grease trap with a larger capacity to be installed, the existing grease trap must be replaced. Convenience stores that sell only pre-packaged food items and those food establishments that offer continental breakfasts in which there is no cooking are not required to have a grease trap. 
Section 228.173(a) is amended to read as follows: 
(a)  Cleanability. The floors, floor coverings, walls, wall coverings and ceilings especially in the food preparation, dishwashing, bar and service areas shall be designed and constructed so they are smooth, durable, non-absorbent, and easily cleanable, except that anti-slip floorcoverings or applications may be used for safety reasons. Floors shall be free of cracks, chips holes, and deterioration. The regulatory authority shall require repair of any floor which fails to meet the requirements of this section. Food establishments involved in heavy or light food preparation shall incorporate quarry tile, cement-based terrazzo tile, or sealed concrete or equivalent floor covering as approved by the regulatory authority. Coated, sealed concrete must be durable with the coating or sealant remaining intact and not subject to peeling or wearing away in order to prevent the concrete from absorbing liquids and food spills and must be approved by the regulatory authority. Carpeting may be allowed in dining areas only and shall be replaced if it becomes excessively soiled or worn. Carpeting or any absorbable floor covering such as rugs are not allowed in rest rooms, food preparation and food storage areas. Non-absorbable cleanable rubber mats may be used to prevent slips or falls in the food preparation and dishwashing areas. All rubber mats must be cleaned in the utility or mop sink. At no time shall rubber mats be cleaned outside the building on the asphalt where the waste water can run into the storm drain. 
(1)  Toilets. Toilet room floors must meet the conditions set forth above. 
(2)  Walk-in coolers. Food establishments shall install in the cooler either stainless steel, sealed concrete, quarry tile flooring or an equivalent material as approved by the regulatory authority. 
(3)  Dry storage areas. All food establishments with a dry food storage must meet the conditions set forth above in this subsection (a). 
Section 228.173 (f) is amended to read as follows: 
(f)  Wall and ceiling coverings and coatings. 
(1)  Food preparation areas. Food establishments involved in heavy and light food preparation shall install wall surfaces of FRP, ceramic tile, certain types of bricks sealed with light-colored epoxy paint or equivalent materials as approved by the regulatory authority in all food preparation, dishwashing and utensil washing areas, and service areas. Wall surface must extent 8 feet in height or to the ceiling if the ceiling height is less than 8 feet. Stainless steel shall be required in heavy food preparation areas behind the stove or range, grills, and fryers from floor to ceiling. The regulatory authority shall require durable and cleanable walls surfaces in areas exposed to excessive splash back of debris in establishments not involved in food preparation. Walls shall be smooth, durable, nonabsorbent and shall be maintained in a condition that facilitates thorough and rapid cleaning and shall be free of cracks, chips, holes and deterioration. The regulatory authority shall require repair or replacement of any wall which fails to meet the requirements of this section. 
(A)  No open or exposed Heating/Ventilation or Air Conditioning (HVAC) components or air supply ducting may be located in or directly above the food service preparation, storage, or serving areas. All HVAC system components must be located in an enclosed area such as a crawlspace above the food service area with a proper barrier such as a ceiling between the HVAC system and the foodservice area. 
(B)  Surface mounted pipes shall not be installed tightly against the surface of the walls. There shall be a gap of at least 2 inches between the pipe and the finished surface of the wall. 
(C)  All holes cut into walls and ceilings for pipes and conduits shall be sealed, and the clearance between the floor surface and the bottom edge of a door shall be tight fitting. 
(D)  In addition, doors and walls on all sally ports or back bay exterior areas off the food preparation area shall be free of gaps, holes, or openings, and doors shall be flush against the floor to exclude access by insects or rodents. Weather stripping may be used to seal any openings between the doors and the floor. 
(2)  Toilet rooms. Food establishments involved in heavy and light food preparation where the employee restroom is located in close proximity or off the food preparation area shall install FRP, ceramic tile, certain types of brick sealed with light-colored, enamel or epoxy paint, or equivalent materials as approved by the regulatory authority. Such wall finishes must extend 4 feet in height with the remainder of the wall surface consisting of any light-colored, smooth, washable material. Wall surfaces in any restrooms of establishments that are not involved in any food preparation shall be of any smooth, light colored, washable material as approved by the regulatory authority. Public access shall not be allowed through the food service preparation to the rest rooms; in such cases where the rest rooms are located off the food preparation area and are accessible to employees only signage shall be posted in a conspicuous location informing customers "Rest rooms are available for employees only". Solid self-closing doors are required on all food establishment rest rooms. A covered waste receptacle is required in the women's rest room and in the men's rest room if a diaper changing area is available. One or more signs must be posted in all restrooms used by employees stating "Employees must wash hands." 
(3)  Walk-in coolers. Wall surfaces shall be smooth, easily cleanable and capable of withstanding effects of low temperature and moisture without deteriorating. Shelving racks shall be stainless steel, epoxy-coated, corrosion-resistant metal, durable, cleanable, hard acrylic plastic, or equivalent as approved by the regulatory authority and shall be replaced if rust or corrosion cannot be removed. 
(4)  Dry food storage area. Shelving shall be light-colored, epoxy or enamel sealed painted wood if the storage area is not subjected to moisture, or durable, cleanable, hard acrylic plastic shelving. If paint or sealant is used on wooden shelving where food or single service containers are stored the paint or sealant must be food grade approved and be free from flaking, chipping, or peeling. Bare wood or particle board racks or shelving is not allowed for the storage of food items that could spill or leak into the wood. 
(5)  Ceilings. Ceilings shall be of light color, smooth, relatively non-absorbent, durable, and easily cleanable. Ceiling materials may be washable drop-in panels, vinyl coated gypsum panels, taped and bedded sheetrock with light-colored epoxy or enamel paint, or an equivalent material as approved by the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority shall require repair or replacement of any ceiling which fails to meet the requirements of this section. 
(6)  Food preparation, bar, and service areas. Food contact surfaces shall be stainless steel with the exception of certain polymer cutting boards. Customer service counters, food packaging areas, take-out windows and similar areas shall be surfaced with a material that is smooth, non-absorbent, durable, and easily cleanable as approved by the regulatory authority. Soft drink syrup canisters or bags shall be situated on six-inch high corrosion-resistant racks or within corrosion-resistant pans with one-inch curbs. Cabinets, tables, or similar equipment shall not be made of wood, particle board, or covered in Formica if subject to moisture. Curtains used for privacy or to segregate bars, or food serving areas such as dining rooms cannot be made of absorbable non-cleanable woven fabric in order to prevent the accumulation of food debris on the material. 
(7)  Foodservice equipment. All foodservice equipment shall be commercial grade and approved by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) for its intended use and shall be maintained in a condition that facilitates thorough and rapid cleaning. No foreign manufactured foodservice equipment such as hibachi grills, or rice cookers may be used unless it meets NSF requirements. Equipment must be mounted on a caster and wheel mechanism which can be pulled out away from the wall for ease of cleaning. Residential use food service equipment is not allowed in commercial food preparation areas. 
(8)  Specialized foodservice equipment. Specialized and portable foodservice equipment which is used to maintain hot and cold holding of time/temperature control for safety (TCS) foods, such as bain-maries, portable hot holding steam or electric tables, hot holding bins and warming cabinets, rice cookers, chiller buffet bars, coolers, and chiller plates must be able to sustain these foods at the required temperatures of 41°F or below, or 135°F. or above. The regulatory authority shall require repair or replacement of any food service equipment which fails to meet the requirements of this section. 
Section 228.175 is amended by adding subsections (g) and (h) to read as follows: 
(g)  Handwashing Sink Devices. No devices such as an eye wash apparatus or a hand operated spigot mounted from the faucet in order to activate the water will be attached to the handwashing sink. Hand sinks must be operated in accordance with the requirements under § 228.146(a)(1) and (2). Foot operated pedals for hand sinks will be allowed providing all the requirements under § 228.146(b)(1), (2), (3), and (4) are met and the foot operated pedals are operational at all times. An eye wash station and all eye wash plumbing fixtures, if required, may be mounted separately and independently from the hand wash sink. 
(h)  Handwashing Sinks Prohibited Storage. No items shall be stored in the handwashing sink basin or on the ledge of the hand sink to prevent potential contamination of the sink. In addition, the sink is to be kept free from dirt, mold, and slime build-up. 
Section 228.221 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
Section § 228.221 Mobile Food Units: 
(a)  General Requirements 
(1)  The regulatory authority may impose additional requirements, including permitting, to protect against health hazards related to the business and operation of the mobile food unit. This may include prohibiting the sale of time/temperature control for safety (TCS) food items. If the vendor is selling a pre-packaged time/temperature control for safety (TCS) food item that is not prepared by an approved licensed commissary, then the vendor shall provide a copy of that supplier's Texas food manufacturing license to the regulatory authority issued to them by the Texas Department of State Health Services (DSHS). 
(2)  There are three (3) classes of mobile food units: 
(A)  Class 1 - "Pre-packaged Food Cart." A self-contained mobile food unit that is usually propelled by human operator but can be bicycle mounted and serves only non-time/temperature controlled for safety food items or beverages such as bagged chips, nuts, candy, pre-packaged ice cream, or bottled beverages. No assembly or preparation of food items are allowed including the dispensing of ice. All beverages must be provided in covered urns or self-dispensing units. A Class 1 mobile food unit includes pre-packaged frozen dessert, prepackaged snack, or bottled beverage carts. 
i.  Handwashing: Not required. 
ii.  Dishwashing: Not required. 
iii.  Potable Water: Not required. 
iv.  Commissary: Required. All pre-packaged food items must come from an approved commissary, central preparation facility, or wholesale facility. 
v.  Restroom Access: Must have access to a restroom. 
(B)  Class 2 - "Unpackaged Mobile Food Unit." These mobile units may either be a cart propelled by a human operator or a motorized food unit such as a cold catering truck. Pre-packaged non-time/temperature control for safety food items as well as pre-packaged and open service food items that require hot or cold holding for temperature control may be served from a Class 2 mobile food unit. No cooking or open preparation of food items is allowed. All condiments should be bulk dispensed or be pre-packaged. A Class 2 mobile food unit includes corn, and hot dog carts, motorized cold catering trucks, and specialized beverage carts. 
i.  Handwashing: If required a sink, or minimum of five gallons of hot and cold potable water as well as soap and paper towels as necessary for proper handwashing. 
ii.  Dishwashing Sinks: Not necessary if using a commissary service with dishwashing capabilities, otherwise a triple compartment sink with approved dishwashing methods may be required depending on the operations involved. 
iii.  Potable Water: Dependent on hand and dishwashing needs. A waste tank may also be required. 
iv.  Commissary: An approved food source will be required such as a central preparation kitchen, or wholesale facility. 
v.  Restroom Access: Must be able to access a restroom as needed. 
(C)  Class 3 "Full Preparation and Service." These mobile food units are usually motorized food trucks or trailers that are fully outfitted with all the required equipment necessary for full foodservice operations including prepping, cooking, hot and cold holding of time/temperature control (TCS) for safety foods onboard. Class 3 mobile food units can offer a specialized or varied menu depending on the scope of their operations. Class 3 mobile food units include hot lunch trucks with a fixed daily service route and gourmet food trucks as approved by the regulatory authority. 
i.  Handwashing: A proper handwashing sink with hot and cold water as well as paper towels is required. 
ii.  Dishwashing Sinks: A triple compartment sink is required that will accommodate the biggest piece of dishware to be washed. 
iii.  Potable Water: Required for hand and dish washing operations. 
iv.  Commissary: A notarized commissary approval letter is required as an approved food source as well as for servicing and maintaining the vehicle. 
v.  Restroom Access: Must have access to a restroom and may have to show written approval from the property owner. 
(3)  Special Requirements for Class 1 and 2 Mobile Food Units: 
(A)  Push carts and bicycle mounted carts that carry pre-packaged food and unpackaged food items that may require hot or cold holding such as, but not limited to, corn, hot dogs, or ice cream are prohibited from routine operation within the City limits including residential and commercial areas, City right of way and City owned property; 
(B)  Under special circumstances as approved by the regulatory authority, push carts may be allowed to participate in certain temporary events pursuant to a temporary food permit; 
(C)  A motorized cold catering truck may service construction sites and industrial commercial properties provided they have been requested to be onsite by the property owner and have been approved and permitted by the regulatory authority; 
(D)  Motorized cold catering trucks shall not sell, distribute, or offer food for sale, goods, or services that have not been approved by the regulatory authority. 
(4)  Ice cream push carts are allowed to use the City right of way in order to traverse into other cities that allow them to operate; however, ice cream push carts cannot use audible sounds such as bells, verbalization, or any other means while on the City right of way to indicate they are in service. The regulatory authority is hereby authorized to impound such carts that are witnessed to be operating within the City. Ice cream, if not immediately removed by the vendor, is from an approved source, and in sound condition, may be stored at a City facility for a maximum time of seventy-two (72) hours, after which time the ice cream shall be destroyed. A $50.00 transport and storage fee shall be paid to the City by vendors who reclaim pre-packaged ice cream from a City facility within the allotted time period. 
(b)  Operational Requirements for Class 3 Full Preparation and Service Mobile Food Units. 
(1)  Food Protection Manager. A current certified food protection manager who is registered with the City is required to be onboard all motorized full preparation and service food units at all the times the vehicle is in service. A copy of the City registration certificate must be kept onboard the vehicle at all times and must be made available to the regulatory authority upon request. 
(2)  Construction. All surfaces located in the food preparation area of the Class 3 mobile food unit shall be constructed of stainless steel or equivalent material. Construction joints and seams shall be sealed. The juncture between the floor and walls shall be sealed or have adequate enough space in which to clean. Space around pipes, conduits, or hoses that enter through cabinets, floors or outer walls shall be sealed. There shall be an unobstructed height over the aisle-way portion of the unit of at least seventy-six inches (76") from floor to ceiling, and a minimum of thirty-six inches (36") of unobstructed horizontal aisle space. 
(3)  Equipment. A three-compartment sink and hand washing sink shall be provided. Sink compartments shall be large enough to accommodate, fully submerged, the equipment and utensils being washed, but shall in any case be not less than twelve inches (12.0") long, twelve inches (12.0") wide, and ten inches (10.0") deep. Drain boards shall be not less than twelve inches (12.0") long by twelve inches (12.0") wide. Equipment for cooling and heating food, as well as for holding hot and cold food, shall be sufficient in number and capacity to provide food temperatures as specified under Subchapter C of this code. No re-usable dishware can be provided to customers, only single services articles. 
(4)  Service Openings. Service openings shall not exceed 216 square inches each. Service openings may be no closer than eighteen inches (18.0") apart. Service openings shall be constructed with screen doors that shall remain closed except when serving food to customers through the opening. Screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch shall be used. for all customer service openings to prevent the intrusion of insects. All food service operations shall be conducted inside the preparation area of the Class 3 mobile food unit. 
(5)  Power Supply. Whenever the Class 3 mobile food unit is in service, adequate electrical power shall be provided to operate the approved exhaust, lighting and refrigeration systems, and any other accessories and appliances that may be installed on a Class 3 mobile food unit. Electricity shall be from a generator or an electrical outlet via a portable cord that is in conformance with the current Electrical Code. 
(6)  Water Supply, Plumbing. All equipment used on the Class 3 mobile food unit for a potable water supply system shall be listed for such use by an organization acceptable to the regulatory authority. A water supply tank of sufficient capacity (but in no case less than thirty (30) gallons) to furnish an adequate quantity of potable water for food preparation, cleaning, and hand washing purposes must be provided. A water inlet tank shall be 19.1 mm (¾-inch) in the inner diameter or less. Hose-connection valves must be of a size or type that will prevent its use for any other service and shall be not less than five feet (5.0') above the ground and be covered at all times with a protective, screw-type cap which is attached to the mobile food preparation vehicle. The water system shall deliver not less than one (1.0) gallon per minute to each sink basin in the Class 3 mobile food unit. The fill hose and water holding tank shall be labeled as "Potable Water". A water heater with a minimum capacity of ten (10) gallons, or an instantaneous heater capable of producing water of 120° F. interconnected with the potable water supply, shall be provided and shall heat the water independently of the vehicle engine. 
(7)  Liquid Waste. A liquid waste tank having a capacity at least fifty percent (50%) greater than the fresh water tank shall be provided and labeled as "waste water". The tank shall be sized to receive and be adequate to hold melting ice water resulting from one day's operation. All waste lines shall be connected to the waste tank with watertight seals and all connections on the vehicle for servicing the Class 3 mobile food unit's waste facilities shall be of a different size or type than those used for supplying potable water. The water supply tank shall be filled and the waste storage tanks shall be emptied only at the commissary or other facility approved by the regulatory authority. 
(8)  Safety. An approved automatic fire extinguishing system shall be provided over cooking surfaces that require mechanical exhaust ventilation. A fire suppression system and fire extinguisher is required for all mechanical vent hood systems with grilling and deep fat frying operations and is to be inspected annually as mandated by the Farmers Branch Fire Marshall. Covers for deep fat fryers shall be provided and installed over fryer units while the Class 3 mobile food unit is in motion. Seats designated for the cook and each passenger shall be provided on each Class 3 mobile food unit and shall be located outside of the food preparation area. A physical separation shall be provided between the food preparation area and the cab area of the Class 3 mobile food unit. No food preparation shall be allowed while the Class 3 mobile food unit is in motion. All exposed food, single service items and utensils are to be kept secured in place and in covered containers or completely wrapped and or packaged to protect from potential contamination while the Class 3 mobile food unit is in motion. Violation of any provision in paragraph (8) shall be grounds for the immediate suspension of the mobile food permit by the regulatory authority for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
(9)  Time/Temperature Control for Safety (TCS) Food Items. Packages containing time/temperature control for safety (TCS) foods shall be sealed, and properly labeled and dated with the date of preparation. All time/temperature control for safety (TCS) food items shall be disposed at the end of each day of operation. 
(10)  Approved Food Source. If food items other than commercially pre-packaged snacks, candy, or bottled beverages are purchased from a licensed restaurant, or grocery store, and not from an approved commissary or central preparation facility for the sole purpose of resale from the Class 3 mobile food unit, that food establishment must be licensed with the Texas Department of State Health Services (DSHS) Food Manufacturing Division as a food manufacturer. The Class 3 mobile food unit must maintain a copy of that license onboard the Class 3 mobile food unit in order to be able to sell food from that food establishment. 
(11)  Beverages. All beverages not provided in individual containers shall be dispensed from stainless steel covered urns or a similar type of beverage dispensing device from the Class 3 mobile food unit. Beverages shall only be added to the urns from a commissary or central preparation facility. 
(12)  Trash Receptacles. All Class 3 mobile food units shall be equipped with at least one self-closing lidded trash receptacle. The trash receptacle must be placed outside next to the Class 3 mobile food unit for use by patrons of the food unit. The area around the Class 3 mobile food unit shall be kept clean and free from litter, garbage and food debris. 
(13)  Auxiliary Storage. Class 3 mobile food units may use auxiliary storage if it is limited to impervious, nonabsorbent, covered containers stored in a manner as to preclude contamination or infestation from rodents and insects. Auxiliary storage shall be limited to items necessary for that day's operation. No self-service, assembly, or preparation activities may occur from auxiliary storage. 
(14)  Overhead Protection. Class mobile food units that operate outdoors shall have overhead protection where food is exposed. The overhead protection shall consist of, but not be limited to roofing, ceiling, awnings, or umbrellas. Overhead protection is not required for a barbecue unit that has a lid or covering that will protect foods from contamination. The overhead protection must be easily cleaned. 
(15)  Liquid Food Waste. Grease and liquid waste shall not be disposed of or leaked into tree pits, creeks, storm drains, the sanitary sewer system, public streets, or any other unapproved location. All liquid food waste must be collected in leak proof containers and properly recycled or disposed of. 
(16)  Barbecue Units. All operations and equipment shall be an integral part of the Class 3 mobile food unit, including the use of a barbecue unit. A separate barbecue unit can only be used under the following conditions: 
(A)  It must be in close proximity to the mobile food unit; 
(B)  Food shall only be cooked on the barbecue. Processing, portioning, preparation, or assembly of food must be conducted inside the mobile food unit; and 
(C)  An approved handwashing system shall be provided adjacent to the barbecue. 
(c)  Base of Operations. 
(1)  Mobile food units shall operate only from a licensed restaurant, central preparation facility, or warehouse in regards to supplies, cleaning, and servicing operations as follows: 
(A)  The interior of the mobile food unit shall be cleaned at least once daily and shall be stored at a commercial location not used as a residence when not in operation. 
(B)  The mobile unit shall acquire supplies from an approved commissary central preparation facility, or other approved vendor. 
(C)  An existing food establishment may serve as a central preparation facility or commissary for a mobile unit only if approved by the regulatory authority. The existing food establishment would be required to have an approved vehicle storage facility, approved potable water hook-ups, approved wastewater drainage facilities, approved grease interceptor hook-ups, and any other accommodations as determined by the regulatory authority. 
(D)  The mobile food unit shall be able to provide documentation of all visits to a central preparation facility, or commissary for service or repair and these documents shall be kept for a period of one year on the mobile food unit for review if requested by the regulatory authority. All servicing documentation shall be provided by the commissary providing the service and shall specify when and which service or repair was provided. A mobile food unit shall not be in operation without a valid servicing record in his/her possession. 
(2)  If only pre-packaged goods are sold or served from the mobile food unit, a warehouse or wholesale facility may be accepted in lieu of a central preparation facility, or commissary. Warehouses shall be required to meet only those rules necessary to prevent the contamination of stored foods, or single-service articles, utensils, and equipment. In general, warehouses shall be exempt from the rules relating to finished walls, ceilings, or storage bases, light colored surfaces, restrooms, lavatories and utility facilities, provided foods are protected from contamination from dust, insects, rodents, flooding, drainage, or other contaminants. Handling of unpackaged foods, dishwashing, and ice making are prohibited in a warehouse. The regulatory authority may impose additional requirements on warehouses utilized in lieu of commissaries as deemed necessary to prevent the contamination of stored foods, single-service articles, utensils, and equipment. 
(3)  Upon approval of the regulatory authority, self-contained mobile food units may operate without a base of operation if the mobile food unit contains all the equipment and utensils necessary to assure the following: 
(A)  Maintaining proper hot and cold food temperatures during storage and transit; 
(B)  Providing adequate facilities for cooling and reheating of foods; 
(C)  Providing adequate dishwashing facilities and assuring proper cleaning and sanitizing of the unit; 
(D)  Providing adequate handwashing facilities; 
(E)  Obtaining food and water from approved sources; 
(F)  Sanitary removal of waste water and garbage at approved locations. 
(4)  Mobile food units must be parked at the base central preparation facility/commissary when not in actual operation. The ability to operate without a base of operation shall be determined by the regulatory authority. 
(5)  A mobile food unit may not serve as a central preparation facility or commissary for another mobile food unit or as a base of operation for a caterer." 
(d)  Food Transportation by Mobile Food Units and Food Catering Vehicles. 
(1)  During transportation, food and food utensils shall be kept in covered containers or completely wrapped or packaged in a manner that protects the food and utensils from potential contamination. Foods in original individual packaging are not required to be wrapped or covered if the original packaging is intact. 
(2)  Time/temperature control for safety food items (TCS) shall be maintained at required temperatures at all times during transport. Mobile food units or catering units that are not equipped to maintain proper hot and cold holding temperatures may be required to provide an onboard power source, such as a battery or generator, to assure maintenance of food at proper temperatures during transit. Approved hot and cold holding equipment for food transportation includes bain-maries, cold plates, refrigerated units, and insulated food transportation containers. 
(3)  Catering vehicles used to transport food and all necessary equipment must be used for food service operations only. The vehicles used shall be clean and not used in activities or to transport items incompatible with safe and sanitary food service operations. 
(e)  Additional Inspections and Licensing Procedures for Mobile Food Units. 
(1)  Approved Routes for Full Preparation and Service Lunch Trucks. Full preparation and service lunch trucks that run a daily fixed route in the City may apply for a permit. The operation of full preparation and service lunch trucks shall be restricted to industrial and commercial properties and construction sites for the sole purpose of providing breakfast and/or lunch service to laborers at such facilities or sites. Full preparation and service lunch trucks are prohibited from offering service in the public right of way, or to drive up customers. Permission must be obtained from the property owner for the full preparation and service lunch truck to operate on that property and the truck is only allowed to be on private property for no more than 15 minutes at a time during servicing operations. 
(2)  Permit Application. All full preparation and service lunch trucks with a daily route in the City are required to apply for an initial permit and pay the license fee established by the City Council. The permit is valid for one (1) year from the initial date of issuance and must renewed annually if the vehicle is to continue to operate within the City after the expiration of the current permit. 
(3)  Itinerary. All permitted full preparation and service lunch trucks must provide to the regulatory authority a current itinerary of all daily service stops in the City. Any service changes on this itinerary must be provided to the regulatory authority. Failure to maintain and provide to the regulatory authority a current schedule of all stops may result in suspension of the permit to operate in the City. 
(4)  Notarized Approved Food Source. All permitted full preparation and service lunch trucks are required to have a copy of a notarized commissary approval letter which is to be given to the regulatory authority along with the application for a permit. All full preparation and service lunch trucks are required to be supplied, serviced, maintained and housed, when not in service at the commissary. 
(5)  Inspections. Before a permit is issued, the regulatory authority shall inspect and approve the full preparation and service lunch service truck for the required mobile food unit construction standards and sanitation compliance. An inspection will be done at least once annually and thereafter at the discretion of the regulatory authority based upon the full preparation and service lunch truck's compliance with applicable regulations and potential of causing a foodborne illness. 
(6)  Permit Decals. Upon issuance of a permit for the operation of a full preparation and service lunch truck, the regulatory authority shall affix a permit decal to the back of the said truck. Decals will have a permit number and are color coded for each year issued and will expire a year from the issuance date. All permit decals must be renewed annually if the truck is still operating in the City. 
(7)  Gourmet Food Trucks. Gourmet food trucks do not have fixed daily routes at commercial properties. These trucks operate under a temporary food permit for a special event, once they have passed an initial sanitation compliance inspection by the regulatory authority. Gourmet food trucks may also operate at closed private events on commercial properties as requested by the property owner or at a designated location as allowed and approved by the regulatory authority. In addition to passing a required sanitation compliance inspection, gourmet food trucks must provide to the regulatory authority a copy of a notarized commissary approval letter for all food supplies, a current copy of the truck operator's food protection manager's certification, a copy of a current health permit from a city in which they are permitted or licensed, and a copy of a recent sanitation compliance report from the regulatory authority that inspected the truck before being granted a temporary food permit to operate in the City. 
(f)  Violations, Closure, or Suspension of Mobile Food Units. 
(1)  Refusal of an owner to allow the regulatory authority, upon presentation of credentials, to inspect any permitted mobile food unit during normal business hours will result in an immediate suspension of the mobile food permit, at which time all permitted operational activities in the City are to cease until after such time as a hearing may be held in accordance with § 228.247 (Permit Requirement, Prerequisite for Operation) of this ordinance. 
(2)  Violations that are observed during any sanitation inspection by the regulatory authority shall be described on a sanitation compliance report by citing the rule/regulation violated, giving a brief statement of the specific problem and required corrections. 
(3)  Priority item or priority foundation item violations shall result in closure of a mobile food unit, if the regulatory authority determines that an imminent danger to public health exits, and if the violation cannot be corrected immediately or an approved alternative procedure has not been implemented. If the mobile unit is ordered closed, the reason for closure shall be stated on the inspection form. For priority item or priority foundation item violations not resulting in closure, the time limit by which the correction must be made shall be within but not to exceed 14 days. All other violations shall be corrected by the next inspection, or re-inspection. 
Section 228.244 (a) is amended to read as follows: 
(a)  Review of plans. 
(1)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled or whenever an existing structure is converted for use as a food establishment, or the nature of the operation changes, or the menu is substantially changed, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work begins. Such plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical, and plumbing schematic, construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment types including dimensions and installation specifications. The plans and specifications shall be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this ordinance. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in the construction, remodeling or conversion of a food establishment without any alteration unless approved by the regulatory authority. Failure to do so may result in the denial of the of the food establishment being able to open. 
(2)  A Farmers Branch Food Establishment Plan Review document will be filled out and reviewed by the regulatory authority for each new food establishment facility or each extensively remodeled facility and shall include the following: 
(A)  Intended menu items. 
(B)  Anticipated volume of food to be stored, prepared, and sold or served. 
(C)  List of equipment and usage. 
(3)  Any food establishment which closes for business operations for a period of 30 days or more and was grandfathered under a previously existing food code requirement that has since been repealed must be brought into compliance under the current Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER) as adopted by the City. This includes layout, structure, and equipment before reopening as a food establishment and shall be approved by the regulatory authority. 
(4)  Failure to construct or remodel the food establishment in accordance with the approved plans and specifications shall result in a denial, suspension or revocation of a food establishment permit. 
(5)  Whenever plans and specifications are required by this section to be submitted to the regulatory authority, the regulatory authority shall inspect the food establishment prior to the start of operations to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of the current Food Establishment Rules as adopted by the City. 
(6)  For purposes of this subsection, "extensive remodeling" means that 20% or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. 
(7)  Whenever a food establishment undergoes partial remodeling of a non-food preparation area such as a lobby or dining room while remaining open for business from the drive thru window only, a proper containment barrier such as sheetrock must be erected to protect the foodservice area from aerosolized particulate matter during the construction process. A plastic curtain used as a temporary barricade is not allowed. 
Section 228.244(b) is deleted. 
Section 228.247 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 228.247 Permit Requirement, Prerequisite for Operation. 
(a)  Permit Required. A person shall not operate a food establishment without a valid permit to operate issued by the regulatory authority. 
(b)  Permit Application. Any person desiring to operate a permanent, temporary, seasonal or vehicle mounted food establishment within the City shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application shall include such information as the regulatory authority determines is necessary for the enforcement of the current Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER). 
(c)  Permit Fees. The various requirements for permits and such administrative functions of this division shall require the payment of fees to the City in an amount that is set by the Public Health Department and approved by resolution or ordinance of the City Council. Fees are not refundable. (See Appendix A of this Code). 
(d)  Multiple Locations. If an applicant operates at multiple locations, a separate permit application and the payment of a separate fee will be required at each location. 
(e)  Shared/Multi Use Kitchens. A single operating permit shall be issued to one food establishment owner or a food establishment company occupying space in a fixed brick and mortar commercial location and allows for food service operations by that applicant only. The operating permit cannot be used for the purposes of shared/multi use kitchens within that building, or for the purpose of subletting space in that building to other food production tenants, establishments, or companies. 
(f)  Catering. A food establishment, whether located in the City in another city, may cater to businesses located in the City that do not have a restaurant or cafeteria within that building provided: 
(1)  There is a designated space or area for the caterer to set up that is protected from potential customer contact or contamination with the foods being served to include appropriate sneeze guards, as well as a fully operable plumbed handwashing sink with available hot and cold water, paper towels, and soap. Caterers may not set up in a lobby area open to the public or use a temporary handwashing bucket system or sanitizer in place of a handwashing sink. 
(2)  Caterers must have the appropriate hot and cold holding equipment as required for maintaining temperatures of all time/temperature control for safety food items unless this equipment is provided by the business being catered. 
(3)  If not based in the City, caterers will be required to complete an operating permit application, pay the required operating permit fee, and be subject to routine inspections. Food establishments that currently operate a permanent food establishment within the City and possess a valid food permit issued by the regulatory authority may, at the discretion of the regulatory authority, be exempted from the requirement to obtain a food permit for catering operations at other locations within the City but will be subject to routine inspections. 
(4)  Caterers, whether located in the City or in another city, must comply with this Article when servicing businesses within the City. 
(5)  Caterers who supply food upon request for a private function or event to a company, business, or organization in the City are exempt from inspections by the regulatory authority and do not have to apply for an operating permit. 
(g)  An operating permit will be issued only to those food establishments located in a permanent brick and mortar building that meets design and structure requirements of the current Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER) as adopted by the City. Temporary buildings, kiosks, or stands located on asphalt surfaces of shopping centers are not allowed to be in permanent operation as a food establishment and will not be issued an operating permit. 
(h)  The food establishment operating permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location that is visible to consumers. 
(i)  Additional responsibilities of the permit holder: 
(1)  If required to operate under a HACCP plan, the permit holder is to comply with the written plan as specified in § 228.244(c)(1)—(3) and (d)(1)—(5) of this title which plan submittal includes the information specified in § 228.244(a)(1)—(6) of this title. 
(2)  A variance may be granted to a facility that is required to have a HACCP plan that meets all the requirements in the above section and provides to the regulatory authority proper documentation of the proposed variance and justification as well as an analysis for how potential public health hazards and nuisances will be addressed by the variance proposal. 
(3)  Immediately contact the regulatory authority to report an illness of food employee as specified under § 228.35(2) of this title relating to management and personnel. 
(4)  Immediately discontinue operations and notify the regulatory authority if an imminent health hazard exits because of an emergency such as fire, flood, extended interruption of electrical or water service, back-up issue, misuse of a poisonous or toxic material, onset of an apparent foodborne illness outbreak, gross unsanitary occurrence or condition, or other circumstance that may endanger public health. 
(5)  Allow the regulatory authority access to the food establishment under § 228.250(b)-(c)(1)-(2)(e) of this title. 
(6)  Replace existing facilities and equipment specified in 228.241(2)(A)-(D) of this title with facilities and equipment that comply with these rules if the regulatory authority directs replacement because facilities and equipment constitute a health hazard or nuisance or no longer comply with the criteria upon which the facilities and equipment were accepted, or the facilities and equipment need replacing in the normal course of operation, or the regulatory authority directs the replacement of equipment and facilities because of change of ownership. 
(7)  Comply with directives of the regulatory authority including time frames for corrective actions specified in inspection reports, notices, orders, warnings, and other directives issued by the regulatory authority in regard to the permit holder's food establishment or in response to community emergencies. 
(8)  Accept notices issued and served by the regulatory authority according to law. 
(9)  Be subject to administrative, civil, injunctive, and criminal remedies authorized in law for failure to comply with these rules or a directive of the regulatory authority, including time frames for corrective actions specified in inspection reports, notices, orders, warnings, and other directives. 
(10)  Notify customers that a copy of the most recent establishment inspection report is available upon request by posting a sign or placard in a location in the food establishment that is conspicuous to customers or by another method acceptable to the regulatory authority. 
(11)  Have on the premises at all times the most recent copy of the Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER) as well as the local City food code ordinance that adopts these rules, be familiar with, and adhere to all required food code rules and regulations. 
(j)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Public schools accredited with the State of Texas shall be exempt from the payment of a permit fee to operate food establishments but must fill out an initial and annual permit application request. 
(2)  Church kitchens where food is prepared and served to members only and child care centers licensed by the State of Texas Department of Health Services (DSHS) shall be exempt from the permit requirements to operate food establishments. 
(3)  Food establishments who are licensed and inspected by the Texas Department of Health Services (DHS) as food manufacturers are exempt from the permit requirements and shall not be inspected by the City unless they also conduct retail business with the public, in which case only the retail portion of that business will be permitted and inspected by the regulatory authority. 
(4)  Permit Term. Permits for food establishments, excluding temporary and seasonal snow cone type food establishments, shall be valid for one (1) year from the date issued by the City unless suspended or revoked. Permits must be renewed on an annual basis by filing a permit renewal application and payment of the required fee with the regulatory authority. 
(5)  Permits for temporary food establishments shall be valid for no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days, except when the City Council authorizes the establishment to operate for a different period, in which case the permit shall be valid for the time authorized by the City Council. Permits for temporary food service establishments that are NOT operating in conjunction with a City of Farmers Branch sponsored special event or community-based event shall be limited to six (6) permits a year. There is no fee charged for a temporary food establishment permit. 
(6)  Seasonal snow cone type food establishments shall be valid for the lesser of the time approved by the City Council in a Specific Use Permit (SUP) - Interim Use; or six (6) to twelve (12) months from the date issued. 
(7)  Mobile Food Preparation Vehicle Permits. Upon issuance of a permit for operation of a Mobile Food Catering Vehicle, the regulatory authority shall affix to the vehicle a sticker bearing the expiration date of the permit. This sticker shall be prominently displayed at all times. The permit shall be renewed annually from the date in which it is issued. 
(8)  Certain Push Carts Prohibited. Ice cream, corn, and hot dog carts are prohibited from operating within the City. 
(k)  The regulatory authority shall issue a permit to the applicant after inspection reveals that the proposed food service establishment complies with the requirements of the Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER). 
(l)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required in this subsection of this ordinance. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(m)  The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten (10) day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(n)  Notice. A notice as required in these Food Establishment Rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. The hearings provided for in these Food Establishment Rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by the regulatory authority. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
( Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 1-22-2013 ; Ord. No. 3413 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3413, § 1, 12-13-2016 ; Ord. No. 3549 , § 1, 1-8-2019)  
Sec. 26-153. - Penalties. 
Any person, or responsible officer of that person, who violates a provision of this article and any person, or responsible officer of that person, who is the holder of a permit, or who otherwise operates a food establishment that does not comply with the requirements of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense; and each day and every day such violation continues, it shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 1-22-2013 )  
Sec. 26-154. - Fees. 
Fees established by resolution or ordinance of the city council and set forth in Appendix A of this Code shall be paid for the following purposes: 
(1)  A fee shall be paid for review of food service establishment plans as requested by an applicant. 
(2)  A permit fee shall be paid by each applicant to operate a mobile food unit, which includes full preparation and service lunch trucks, cold catering vehicles, and other mobile food units as required by this chapter unless otherwise exempted by this chapter or by the regulatory authority when authorized. A permit fee shall not be required from any applicant to operate a temporary food service establishment or a food stand at the farmers market. 
(3)  A permit fee, based on the number of employees employed at the food establishment, shall be paid by each applicant desiring to operate a fixed location brick and mortar food service establishment. 
(4)  A fee shall be paid by each applicant for issuance of any duplicate permit. 
(5)  A fee shall be paid by each applicant to register as a food protection manager. 
(6)  A transport and storage fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the city by push cart ice cream vendors who reclaim their confiscated product from a city facility within the maximum holding time period of up to 72 hours. 
( Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 1-22-2013 ; Ord. No. 3413 , § 2, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3413, § 2, 12-13-2016 ; Ord. No. 3549 , § 2, 1-8-2019)  
Sec. 26-155. - Seasonal snow cone mobile food establishments. 
(a)  Operation. A seasonal permit may be obtained for food establishments at which only snow cone related foods shall be prepared or offered for sale. The preparation or sale of any time/temperature control for safety (TCS) foods at such establishments is prohibited. 
(b)  Ice. Ice to be used for snow cones shall be obtained in chipped, crushed, cubed or block form and in single-use safe plastic bags filled and sealed at the point of manufacture. Snow cone ice shall be held in its sealed bags until the ice is dispensed in a way that protects the ice from contamination. 
(c)  Equipment. A three-compartment sink and hand washing sink shall be provided. Sink compartments shall be large enough to accommodate, fully submerged, of the equipment and utensils being washed, but shall in any case be not less than 12 inches long, 12 inches wide, and ten inches deep. Drain boards shall be not less than 12 inches long by 12 inches wide. 
(d)  Service openings. Service openings for a snow cone establishment shall be constructed with screen doors which shall remain closed except when serving customers through the opening. Screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch shall be used. 
(e)  Water supply, plumbing. All equipment used for a potable water supply system shall be listed for such use by an organization acceptable to the regulatory authority and shall be installed and operated according to law. All potable water not provided directly by pipe to the establishment from an approved source shall: 
(1)  Be transported in a bulk water transport system or individual containers and delivered by direct connection to a closed-water system or be delivered to a closed-water system by direct hose attachment from an approved water source. 
(2)  All potable water containers or hoses shall be used only for water supply purposes. 
(3)  A closed-water system of sufficient capacity to furnish an adequate quantity of potable water for cleaning and handwashing purposes, but in no case less than 15-gallon capacity tank, shall be provided and labeled "potable water". An instantaneous water heater system capable of producing water with a temperature of 120 degrees Fahrenheit interconnected with the potable water supply shall be provided. 
(4)  The water system shall be capable of delivering a water supply under pressure of at least 15 pounds per square inch (psi) at all times. If such water pressure cannot be provided by gravity flow, then a tank and a pump or other means, which will provide not less than 15 psi shall be installed. 
(5)  If the snow cone type establishment is not connected to a public sanitary sewer system, all liquid waste from the operation shall be held in an approved permanently installed liquid waste retention tank which shall be labeled "waste water". The liquid waste tank shall have a capacity at least 50 percent greater than the potable water tank. All waste lines shall be properly installed and connected to the liquid waste tank with watertight seals. The liquid waste discharge pipe from the holding tank shall not be located inside the building. There shall be separate size fittings required between water supply and liquid waste connections. All liquid waste from the holding tank shall be transported and disposed of in an approved manner. 
(6)  Snow cone type establishments shall have adequate, conveniently located, and accessible toilet and lavatory facilities for use by its employees at all times. If such facilities are not located within the establishment, they must be located within a 400-foot radius of the establishment to be considered convenient use. If restrooms are located off-site, a notarized letter must be submitted with the permit application giving written permission for the food establishment's personnel to use such restroom facilities and acknowledging that the restrooms will be available for use at all times during the food establishment's business hours. 
(7)  An easily cleanable, covered trash container shall be provided on the outside of the building if outside seating is provided. 
( Ord. No. 3413, § 3, 12-13-2016 ; Ord. No. 3549 , § 3, 1-8-2019)  
Sec. 26-156. - Summer food service programs. 
(a)  Any qualified charitable or governmental organization wishing to conduct a summer food service program in the city shall prepare and serve food from a commercial permanent kitchen in a non-residential facility authorized by a food establishment permit. The regulatory authority may authorize a permit for a kitchen in the city that provides, at a minimum, mechanical refrigeration, hot and cold running water under pressure for hand sinks, a three-compartment sink equipped with dual drain boards, a mop sink onsite, restroom facilities, and approved finish materials in food preparation and service areas. 
(b)  Notification. The Farmers Branch regulatory authority must be notified in writing prior to operations as is required by the Texas Department of Agriculture and United States Department of Agriculture (TDA/USDA). This notice shall include the name and address of the food establishment preparing the food, the name of the person in charge, the site and address where the food is to be distributed, the dates and times of the operation, and a list of the food and beverages to be served. A current food protection manager must be in place during the time the food items are being prepared. If the food establishment preparing the food is not located in Farmers Branch, then a copy of that facility's current health permit as well as a copy of the most current health inspection report conducted by the city, or county the facility is located in must be furnished to the regulatory authority upon giving notice they will be participating in the summer feeding program. 
(c)  Food. All food items used in the summer food service program must come from an approved source. All foods must be packaged in individual containers at the permitted food preparation facility. Bare-handed food contact is not allowed. All foods requiring time/temperature control for safety must be maintained at the proper temperatures of 41 degrees F. or below or 135 degrees F. or above. The use of warmers, mechanical refrigeration, or cold packs are permitted to keep foods at the required temperatures. A stem thermometer shall be used and kept onsite to ensure received food items meet the required temperatures. Additionally, a temperature log must be maintained onsite for recording these temperatures. 
(d)  Facilities. All food must be served in an acceptable eat-in facility such as a club house, lunch room, or cafeteria with access to handwashing rest room facilities unless otherwise approved by the regulatory authority. 
( Ord. No. 3413, § 4, 12-13-2016 ; Ord. No. 3549 , § 4, 1-8-2019)  
Sec. 26-157. - Farmers market. 
(a)  Permits. Each food vendor wishing to sell or distribute food at the farmer's market must complete an application for a permit to be approved by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable. The permit must be visibly displayed at each booth. Failure to comply with this subsection (a) may result in the revocation of the permit/and or municipal court citations. 
(b)  Foods. All foods sold at the farmer's market must be domestically produced, or locally grown or manufactured. No internationally produced or manufactured foods will be allowed, and all foods must fall under one of the following categories: 
(1)  Produce which must be sold in a whole state with no cutting or sampling allowed; 
(2)  Manufactured foods with a license from the Texas Department of State Health Services (DSHS); 
(3)  Commercially produced pre-packaged items from a licensed facility or commissary subject to the following: 
(A)  Commercially pre-packaged foods. Only commercially prepared pre-packaged goods prepared in a certified commercial kitchen and labeled according to the manufactured food requirements of the Texas Department State of Health Services (DSHS) will be allowed. 
(B)  Labels must include the manufacturer, common name of the food item, ingredients if more than one, the name of the food source for each major food allergen contained in the food, unless the food source is already part of the common name of the respective ingredient and approximate net weight. In addition, a nutrition label must also be included on the packaging. 
(C)  Absolutely no unlabeled foods, or foods from any source other than the documented commissary may be sold to the public. 
(D)  All food must be sold retail only. Without proper wholesale licenses, sales to restaurants are prohibited. 
(E)  No foods may be re-packaged from a bulk state for sale or re-sale. 
(c)  Cottage food producers. Cottage food producers can only sell the following: 
(1)  Baked goods, breads, sweet baked goods, cakes such as birthday or wedding cakes without time/temperature control for safety food ingredients or icings, rolls, muffins, coated and uncoated candy, a canned jam or jelly, a fruit pie, dehydrated fruits or vegetables, including dried beans, popcorn, and popcorn snacks, cereal, including granola mix, vinegar, pickles made from cucumbers only, mustard, roasted coffee, or dried tea, or a dried herb mix. 
(2)  All cottage food produced items must be labeled legibly with the following information: 
(A)  The name and address of the cottage food production operation; 
(B)  The common or usual name of the product especially if the food is made with a major food allergen such as nuts, eggs, soy, milk, or wheat; and 
(C)  A statement that says: "This food is made in a home kitchen and is not inspected by the Department of State Health Services (DSHS) or a local health department." 
(d)  Manufactured products. All vendors selling time/temperature control for safety (TCS) food items such as meat, eggs, or milk will be required to have mechanical refrigeration to keep the product at the required cold holding temperatures. All meat will be frozen at 0 degrees F., whole shell eggs at 45 degrees F. or below and milk at 41 degrees F. or below. 
(1)  Egg products. An egg producer that sells only ungraded eggs from their own flock may be exempt from licensing from the Texas Department of Agriculture but must be permitted by the Department of State Health Services (DSHS) or the local regulatory authority subject to the following: 
(A)  The eggs must be stored under mechanical refrigeration at 45 degrees F. or less and meet specific labeling requirements (safe food handling instructions; name and address of distributor or packer); and 
(B)  Eggs from fowl other than chickens such as quail and ducks are not graded in Texas and cannot be sold. 
(2)  Meat products. Only frozen packaged meat will be allowed. All meat must come from an approved source United Sates Department of Agriculture (USDA) stamp or Department of State Health Services (DSHS)—Meat and Safety Assurance. 
(A)  All meat items must be stored and displayed in a mechanical freezer approved by the City of Farmers Branch Environmental Health Division. 
(B)  All labeling requirements must comply with USDA and DSHS rules and regulations. 
(C)  The processing plant must be USDA inspected unless it has a small producer exemption. A small producer must provide proof of exemption and meet labeling requirements. The producer shall provide either a grant of inspection or exemption. 
(D)  The meat storage facility must provide proof that it is a licensed facility under the Department of State Health Services (DSHS); provided, however, if the meat is stored in a facility other than the processing plant, a copy of the latest health inspection must be provided to the local regulatory authority. 
(E)  The following must be provided to the City of Farmers Branch farmer's market: 
(i)  Completed Farmers Branch permit application; 
(ii)  Equipment inspection; 
(iii)  Processing license (or proof of exemption); 
(iv)  Storage license; and 
(v)  Copy of product labels. 
(3)  Milk products. Fluid milk and milk products complying with grade A standards will be obtained pasteurized. Raw unpasteurized milk will not be allowed. 
(e)  Food sampling. Sampling may be allowed in compliance with the following: 
(1)  All food items are covered and protected from contamination, access by insects and served in a sanitary manner by the use of utensils. All samples must be served in single service sample cups with single service utensils if needed. 
(2)  All food items must be stored at least six inches above the ground. 
(3)  All food items must be able to be served without cooking. Cooking of a raw food product is not allowed. Examples of approved samples include candy, granola, salsas on commercially bagged chips or bagel bits, baked goods, cookies, muffins, and jellies on bread, dehydrated fruit or vegetables, coated and uncoated nuts, brewed coffees, and teas. 
(4)  Commercially prepared products such as corn dogs, hot dogs, and tamales may be given as samples if the items are fully cooked and only need to be re-heated. Proper re-heating equipment such as grills must be provided. 
(5)  When food sampling is conducted, at least one person must have a State of Texas accredited basic food handler's certificate or card. 
(6)  Each person when distributing samples must wear proper hair restraints, have properly wash hands, and be wearing food handler gloves. 
(7)  Each person distributing samples must refrain from chewing gum, eating, or drinking from open spill-able beverage containers while distributing samples. 
(8)  All cutting surfaces must be smooth, easily cleaned and non-absorbent. Re-useable utensils must be sanitized in a household unscented bleach solution at 50 parts per million (ppm), or quaternary ammonium (QUAT) at 200 ppm. Sanitizer test strips must be provided for the sanitizer being used. 
(9)  All solid and liquid waste must be properly disposed of as needed. All food waste shall be placed in trash receptacles with tight fitting lids. Liquid waste shall be placed into an approved sanitary sewer or holding tank. 
(10)  A hand sink with hot and cold water, paper towels, and soap will be available on-site, but it is recommended that all vendors handing out samples also have one durable container with a spigot containing free flowing potable water, hand washing soap, paper towels, and a collection container for waste water. Hand sanitizers may not be used in lieu of hand washing but may be used in conjunction with proper hand washing, and if only handing out prepackaged food items. 
(11)  A person 12 years of age o or younger is not work a sampling booth. A person who is at least 13 years of age but younger than 18 years of age may work inside the sampling booths if accompanied and supervised by a person 18 years of age or older. 
(12)  All animals other than service dogs must be kept away from the food sampling stands except when pet foods or pet treats are being sampled. 
( Ord. No. 3413, § 5, 12-13-2016 ; Ord. No. 3549 , § 5, 1-8-2019)  
Secs. 26-158—26-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 26-171—26-210. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3549 , § 6, adopted Jan. 8, 2019, repealed §§ 26-171—26-180, which pertained to food manager certification and derived from Ord. No. 1429, §§ 1—11, 2-7-1983.  
ARTICLE VI. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate sexually oriented businesses, V.T.C.A, Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-211. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Achromatic means colorless or lacking in saturation or hue. The term includes, but is not limited to, grays, tans, and light earth tones. The term does not include white, black, or any bold coloration that attracts attention. 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore and adult video store mean a commercial establishment that as one of its principal business purposes openly advertises or displays or offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult cabaret means a commercial establishment that regularly features the offering to customers of live entertainment that: 
(1)  Is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers; and 
(2)  Is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, simulating, describing, or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or the chief's designated agent. 
Commercial multi-unit center means a building or structure, including a shopping mall or strip shopping center, containing three or more separate premises, each of which is offered by lease or otherwise for separate occupancy or control and each of which occupies an enclosed area having its own door or entranceway opening onto public property, a public way or common area. 
Customer means any person who: 
(1)  Is allowed to enter a sexually oriented business or any portion of a sexually oriented business in return for the payment of an admission fee, membership fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; 
(2)  Enters a sexually oriented business or any portion of a sexually oriented business, rents or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered therein; or 
(3)  Is a member of and on the premises of a sexually oriented business operating as a private or membership clubs or a sexually oriented business that reserves any portion of the premises as a private or membership club. 
Entertainer means any employee of a sexually oriented business that performs or engages in entertainment. 
Entertainment means any act or performance, such as a play, skit, reading, revue, fashion show, modeling performance, pantomime, role playing, encounter session, scene, song, dance, musical rendition or striptease that involves the display or exposure of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "entertainment" shall include any employee or entertainer exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities whatever in the presence of customers. 
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration. 
Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
Historic landmark has the same meaning given that term in Ordinance No. 769, the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress that fails to completely and opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or any part of the female breast that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Person means an individual, partnership, trust, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Residential district means a one-family, two-family, townhouse, or multiple-family district as defined in Ordinance No. 769, the zoning ordinance of the city, or any planned development (PD) zoning district that allows a residential use of any type. 
Residential use means a one-family, two-family, townhouse or multiple-family use as defined in Ordinance No. 769, the zoning ordinance of the city. 
School means any public or private nursery, preschool, day care center, learning center, elementary or secondary school, junior college, college, or university, whether private or public or proprietary. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
Sign means any display, design, pictorial, or other representation that is: 
(1)  Constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened, or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that it is visible from the outside of a sexually oriented business; and 
(2)  Used to seek the attraction of the public to any goods, services or merchandise available at the sexually oriented business. 
The term "sign" also includes any representation painted on or otherwise affixed to any exterior portion of a sexually oriented business establishment or to any part of the tract upon which the establishment is situated. 
Specified anatomical areas mean: 
(1)  Any of the following, or any combination of the following, when less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Any human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair; 
b.  Any buttock; or 
c.  Any portion of the female breast that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this subsection. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities or other ownership interest that constitute a direct, indirect, legal, equitable or beneficial controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device that transfers the direct, indirect, legal, equitable or beneficial ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by request or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control to a person meeting all of the requirements of section 26-237, who shall have notified the chief of police of the transfer and furnished all of the information required to be submitted in an application for a license, within 60 days of the transfer. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-2), 11-17-1997) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-212. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  All the premises and findings in this article are found to be true and correct and are incorporated into the body of this article as if copied in their entirety. 
(b)  It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(c)  It is the intent of the city council that the locational regulations of section 26-406 of this article are promulgated pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq., as they apply to nude model studios and sexual encounter centers only. It is the intent of the city council that all other provisions of this article are promulgated pursuant to the city Charter and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-1), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-213. - Classification. 
A sexually oriented business is defined and classified as any commercial establishment operating in the city, in whole or in part, as any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Adult arcade; 
(2)  Adult bookstore or adult video store; 
(3)  Adult cabaret; 
(4)  Adult motel; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theater; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agency; 
(8)  Nude model studio; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter center. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-3), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-214. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating section 26-406 of this article, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(b)  If a sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation of section 26-236(a) or 26-406 of this article is punishable as a class B misdemeanor. 
(c)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating a provision of this article, other than section 26-406, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 26-236(a), 26-406, or 26-411(d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 26-236(a) or section 26-406 that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(f)  A violation of this article shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-21), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-215. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 26-406 of this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-22), 11-17-1997)  
Secs. 26-216—26-235. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 26-236. - Required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application form shall be sworn to and shall: 
(1)  Include the name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  State whether or not the applicant meets each of the requirements set forth in section 26-237 of this article; 
(3)  Include the name and address of each person required to sign the application pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, and the name, address and type of entity, if any, of each person or entity owned or controlled by such person which owns or controls an interest in the business to be licensed; and 
(4)  Further include such other matters, consistent with this division, as may be specified in the application form. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 26-415 of this article shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of section 26-415. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this division and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the health department, fire department, and building official. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign an application for a license as an applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who directly or indirectly, through one or more intermediaries, owns or controls a ten percent or greater interest in the business must sign and submit, as an applicant, a separate application containing all applicable information required by subsection (b) of this section. Each applicant must be qualified under section 26-237 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-4), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-237. - Issuance. 
(a)  The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed upon the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this division, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city or any other governmental jurisdiction to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months or residing with a person whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. 
(6)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(7)  The license fee required by this division has not been paid. 
(8)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated that he is unable to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers, regardless of the jurisdiction in which the establishment was located. 
(9)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with section 26-239, 26-244, 26-406, 26-410—26-415 or 26-416. 
(10)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving: 
a.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 43: 
1.  Prostitution. 
2.  Promotion of prostitution. 
3.  Aggravated promotion of prostitution. 
4.  Compelling prostitution. 
5.  Obscenity. 
6.  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor. 
7.  Sexual performance by a child. 
8.  Possession of child pornography. 
b.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 21: 
1.  Public lewdness. 
2.  Indecent exposure. 
3.  Indecency with a child. 
c.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 22. 
d.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 25. 
e.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the offenses in this subsection (a)(10) for which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(b)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (a)(10) of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (a)(10) of this section has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-5), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-238. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is as listed in appendix A. 
(b)  In addition to the fee listed in appendix A, an applicant for an initial sexually oriented business license shall, at the time of making application, pay a nonrefundable fee of $500.00 for the city to conduct a survey to ensure that the proposed sexually oriented business is in compliance with the locational restrictions set forth in section 26-406. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-6), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-239. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, community services department, and building inspection division to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the departments described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-7), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-240. - Expiration. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 26-236. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  When the chief of police denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the chief of police finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-8), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-241. - Suspension. 
The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with section 26-239, 26-244, 26-406, 26-410—26-415, or 26-416 of this article. 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article. 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-9), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-242. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 26-241 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 26-237(a)(10) for which the time period required in section 26-237(a)(10) has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 26-237(a)(10), for which a conviction has been obtained, and the persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 34.01 et seq.; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as grounds for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 26-237(a)(10) has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-10), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-243. - Appeal. 
If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the chief of police shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the city council. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief of police in suspending or revoking a license until the city council makes a final decision. The appeal shall be filed with the city secretary within ten days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-11), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-244. - Transfer. 
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-12), 11-17-1997)  
Secs. 26-245—26-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 26-271. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a permit to act as an entertainer or a manager of or in a sexually oriented business. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that no person acts as an entertainer or manager of or in the sexually oriented business unless that person holds a valid permit. 
(c)  An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application form shall be sworn to and shall include: 
(1)  The name, home street address and mailing address (if different) of the applicant. 
(2)  Proof of the date of birth of the applicant and the identity of the applicant, including at least one photographic identification card issued by a governmental agency. 
(3)  A list of any criminal charges pending, convictions, and time of service in jail or prison as related to any applicable offense that is specified in section 26-237(a)(10) of this article. 
(4)  Two passport-type photographs of the applicant of a size specified by the chief of police, which shall become part of the photographic identification cards if a permit is issued. 
(d)  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee listed in appendix A. Each applicant shall be required to provide fingerprints to be used to verify the applicant's identity and criminal history information. Each applicant shall sign a waiver and authorization form authorizing the chief of police to request, on behalf of the applicant, criminal history reports from the state department of public safety and any appropriate federal agency. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-12.1), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-272. - Issuance. 
(a)  The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a permit within ten days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has been convicted of or spent time in jail or prison for an offense specified in section 26-237(a)(10) of this article within the time specified therein. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  The application fee required by this division has not been paid. 
(b)  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a permit, or suspends or revokes a permit, the chief of police shall send to the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the city council. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief of police in suspending or revoking a permit until the city council makes a final decision. The appeal shall be filed with the city secretary within ten days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the chief of police. 
(c)  Any applicant whose application is denied and who files an appeal on the denial shall be scheduled to appear before the city council within 30 days following the filing of the appeal with the city secretary. If the city council rules against the applicant, then the applicant shall be given notice of the right to seek an injunction or judicial review of the decision as the law so provides, including article 6252-13d of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes. 
(d)  If the chief of police fails to issue or deny a permit application within the time specified in subsection (a) of this section or an appeal hearing with the city council is not scheduled within the time specified in subsection (c) of this section, then the applicant shall, upon written request, be immediately issued a temporary permit which shall be valid until the fifth day after the applicant is given notice of the decision of the city council. 
(e)  Each permit issued by the chief of police shall consist of two photographic cards, a personal card and an on-site card. 
(f)  If any personal card or on-site card is lost or stolen, the holder thereof shall immediately notify the chief of police and request a replacement, which shall be issued for a fee listed in appendix A within three days following verification of the identity of the holder. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-12.1), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-273. - Term; transfer; amendment. 
(a)  A permit is valid for two years from the date of its issuance. 
(b)  A permit is personal to the named permit holder and is not valid for use by any other person. 
(c)  Each permit holder shall notify the chief of police of his new address within ten days following any change of address. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-12.3), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-274. - Display. 
(a)  Each manager or entertainer shall conspicuously display his personal card upon his person at all times while acting as an entertainer or manager of or in a sexually oriented business. 
(b)  Each manager or entertainer shall provide his on-site card to the manager or on-site manager in charge of the sexually oriented business to hold while the manager or entertainer is on the premises. 
(c)  In any prosecution under section 26-271 of this division, it shall be presumed that the entertainer or manager did not have a permit unless the permit was in display as required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-12.4), 11-17-1997)  
Secs. 26-275—26-405. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 26-406. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A school as defined in this article; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district as defined in this article; 
(4)  A public park; 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to residential use as defined in this article; 
(6)  Historic landmark; or 
(7)  A hospital. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business located within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion of a building or structure, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion of a building or structure containing another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, measurement must be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or school, hospital, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, residential lot or historic landmark. 
(e)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses must be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(f)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, school, hospital, public park, residential district, residential lot, or historic landmark within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-13), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-407. - Exemption from location restrictions. 
(a)  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of section 26-406 of this division, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 26-406. 
(b)  If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the ten-day limit, the city council shall consider the request. The city secretary shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is received. 
(c)  A hearing by the council may proceed if a quorum is present. The council shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
(d)  The city council may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 26-406 if it makes the following findings that: 
(1)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
(2)  The granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this article; 
(3)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)  The location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(5)  All other applicable provisions of this division will be observed. 
(e)  The council shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the city council is final. 
(f)  If the council grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the council's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of section 26-406 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(g)  If the council denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the council's action. 
(h)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this division other than the locational restrictions of section 26-406 nor is the applicant exempt from the provisions of any other pertinent ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-14), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-408. - Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if he allows: 
(1)  The merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from any point outside the establishment; 
(2)  The exterior portions of the establishment to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by this article; or 
(3)  The exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color, except that this subsection does not apply to an establishment if the following conditions are met: 
a.  The establishment is part of a commercial multi-unit center; and 
b.  The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the establishment, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center. 
(b)  Nothing in this section requires the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-14.1), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-409. - Sign requirements. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance or any other city ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, the owner or operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person commits an offense if he erects, constructs, or maintains any sign for the establishment other than one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided in this section. 
(b)  A primary sign may have no more than two display surfaces. Each display surface must: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed 75 square feet in area; and 
(4)  Not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length. 
(c)  A secondary sign may have only one display surface. The display surface must: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed 20 square feet in area; 
(4)  Not exceed five feet in height or four feet in width; and 
(5)  Be affixed or attached to a wall or door of the establishment. 
(d)  A primary or secondary sign must contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner, and may contain only: 
(1)  The name of the establishment; and/or 
(2)  One or more of the following phrases: 
a.  Adult arcade. 
b.  Adult bookstore or adult video store. 
c.  Adult cabaret. 
d.  Adult motel. 
e.  Adult motion picture theater. 
f.  Adult theater. 
g.  Escort agency. 
h.  Nude model studio. 
i.  Sexual encounter center. 
(e)  A primary sign for an adult motion picture theater may contain the phrase, movie titles posted on premises, in addition to the phrases listed in subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
(f)  Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign must be of a solid color, and each letter must be the same print-type, size, and color. The background behind the lettering on the display surface of a primary or secondary sign must be of a uniform and solid color. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-14.2), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-410. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-15), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-411. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years of age was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises that can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(e)  An employee of a nude model studio, while exposing any specified anatomical areas, commits an offense if the employee touches a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(f)  A customer at a nude model studio commits an offense if he touches an employee who is exposing any specified anatomical areas or touches the clothing of the employee. 
(g)  A licensee or an employee of a nude model studio commits an offense if he permits any customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or not visible by a walk through the premises without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-16), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-412. - Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the person under 18 years of age was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-17), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-413. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" and "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-18), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-414. - Additional regulations for adult cabarets. 
(a)  An employee of an adult cabaret, while exposing any specified anatomical areas, commits an offense if the employee touches a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(b)  A customer at an adult cabaret commits an offense if he touches an employee who is exposing any specified anatomical areas or touches the clothing of the employee. 
(c)  A licensee or an employee of an adult cabaret commits an offense if he permits any customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or not visible by a walk through of the premises without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-18.1), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-415. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at four feet above the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (7) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(8) of this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-19), 11-17-1997)  
Sec. 26-416. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 17 years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, or video cassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  In this section, the term "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover, outside packaging, or contents of the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-20), 11-17-1997)  
Secs. 26-417—26-449. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MANDATORY CRIME REDUCTION PROGRAM FOR DESIGNATED APARTMENT COMPLEXES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3477 , § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 2017, amended Art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, §§ 26-450—26-459, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3419, § 2, 2-21-2017. 
 
Sec. 26-450. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, morals, and welfare of the occupants of apartment complexes and other citizens of the city by obtaining greater compliance with minimum property standards through the establishment of a mandatory crime reduction program for apartment complexes. Reducing the crime rate at an apartment complex is essential to making the apartment complex safe, sanitary, and fit for human use and habitation. 
( Ord. No. 3477 , § 1, 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 26-451. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment complex means a multifamily property that contains ten or more dwelling units, which may be located in one or more buildings, that are leased or offered for lease and are not independently owned. 
Board means the City of Farmers Branch Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
Chief of police and/or chief means the chief of the police department of the city or the chiefs authorized representative. 
Crime means any and all incidents that occur at an apartment complex that cause a criminal offense or arrest report to be generated by the Farmers Branch Police Department. Crime shall include all applicable crimes occurring within the surrounding neighborhood that, through information or investigation, can be traced to the apartment complex premises. The term does not include non-applicable crimes. 
Non-applicable crimes means all offenses involving domestic violence; fraud; and buying, receiving, or possessing stolen property. Also non-applicable are offenses that result from transition onto an apartment complex from the street as a result of a traffic stop and status offenses (i.e., offenses that constitute criminal activity because of the age of the accused). 
Owner means a person claiming, or in whom is vested, the ownership, dominion or title of real property, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Holder of fee simple title; 
(2)  Holder of life estate; 
(3)  Holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five years or more; 
(4)  The buyer in a contract for deed; 
(5)  A mortgagee, receiver, executor or trustee in control of real property; but not including the holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for an initial term of less than five years. 
Part I crimes means murder, sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, theft and auto theft. The term does not include non-applicable crimes. 
Part II crimes means assaults other than those defined as Part I crimes, narcotics offenses, arson, criminal mischief, weapons offenses, prostitution, gambling, and disorderly conduct. The term does not include non-applicable crimes. 
Property manager means a person who, for compensation, has managing control of an apartment complex for the owner. 
( Ord. No. 3477 , § 1, 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 26-452. - Authority of chief of police. 
The chief of police, or his/her designee, shall implement and enforce the provisions under this article. 
( Ord. No. 3477 , § 1, 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 26-453. - Apartment complex crime index and crime risk/safety threshold. 
(a)  The chief of police will calculate the apartment community crime index on an annual basis. Apartment complex crime index will be calculated by dividing the total of Part I crimes (violent Part I crimes are weighted double) and Part II crimes in a specific apartment complex by the total number of units in the apartment complex and multiplying that number by 100, giving a ratio of crime per 100 units. 
(b)  The chief of police will calculate a residential crime index on an annual basis for single-family dwellings within the corporate limits of the city. The residential crime index will be calculated by dividing the total of Part I (violent Part I crimes are weighted double) and Part II crimes for all single-family residences by the total number of single-family residences in the city and multiplying that number by 100, giving a ratio of crime per 100 residences. 
(c)  The chief of police will calculate the crime risk/safety threshold on an annual basis. The crime risk/safety threshold is calculated by multiplying the residential crime index by 2.0. 
(d)  All crime index and crime risk/safety threshold numbers calculated in this article will be rounded to the nearest tenth (e.g., an index number of 10.25 would be rounded up to 10.3 and an index number of 10.24 would be rounded down to 10.2). 
( Ord. No. 3477 , § 1, 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 26-454. - Reserved.  
Sec. 26-455. - Mandatory crime reduction program; when required. 
(a)  An apartment complex must participate in the mandatory crime reduction program whenever the apartment complex's crime index exceeds the crime risk/safety threshold. Apartment complex crime index, residential crime index, and crime risk/safety threshold are calculated in accordance with formulas provided in section 26-453. 
(b)  An apartment complex that is required to participate in the mandatory crime reduction program shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Require all current and future tenants to sign a "crime free lease addendum"; 
(2)  Hold at least one crime watch meeting per quarter on premises in cooperation with the Farmers Branch Police Department; 
(3)  Conduct (at their own expense) a criminal background check on all future residents; 
(4)  Permit a minimum of two inspections of the apartment complex by the chief. The first inspection will evaluate what changes and improvements to the premises and operations are needed to help reduce crime at the apartment complex. The second inspection will be conducted for the purposes of determining whether the complex is in compliance with this article. 
(5)  Participate in the Farmers Branch Police Criminal Trespass Enforcement Program. An owner or manager of the apartment complex shall execute a trespass affidavit on a form provided by the chief for that purpose that authorizes the police department to enforce, on behalf of the apartment complex, all applicable trespass laws on the premises of the apartment complex. Trespass enforcement only applies to common areas of the property, including without limitation, all parking lots, parks, playgrounds and pools. A true and correct copy of the trespass affidavit must be posted at the apartment complex in a manner and location so that it is clearly visible to the public at all times. 
(6)  Residential security survey: The apartment complex owner or manager shall distribute a residential security survey, on a form provided by the chief, to each resident of the apartment complex who is 18 years of age or older. Distribution shall be required within 30 days of mandatory crime reduction program designation notification. The owner or manager of a designated apartment complex shall file all returned surveys with the office of the chief of police within 30 days after distribution. 
(c)  An apartment complex must remain in the mandatory crime reduction program for one calendar year. At the beginning of the next calendar year, the apartment complex's crime index, the residential crime index, and the crime risk/safety threshold are calculated using the outgoing year's crime statistics. If at such time, the apartment complex's crime index is below the crime risk/safety threshold, the apartment complex is no longer required to be in the program. If the apartment complex's crime index exceeds the crime risk/safety threshold, the apartment complex is required to remain in the program. 
(d)  An apartment complex that remains in the mandatory crime reduction program for a period exceeding 24 consecutive months shall be considered a repeat offender. If after an apartment complex is designated a repeat offender, the apartment complex is no longer required to remain in the program because its crime index falls below the crime risk/safety threshold as calculated each calendar year, the apartment complex shall be considered a repeat offender if the apartment complex is required to re-enter the program in less than 24 months after exiting the program, in which case the apartment complex will be placed back in the program at the repeat offender level and must comply with the repeat offender requirements. Notice of an apartment complex's repeat offender status will be provided in accordance with section 26-456(c). Within 60 days of the mailing of notice, the following additional measures shall be implemented and/or completed by the owner or property manager at the apartment complex: 
(1)  Require the presence of on-site security personnel licensed by the Texas Private Securities Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code chapter 1702, or certified peace officers. 
(2)  Security lighting provided, maintained, and operated so that it adequately illuminates all parking areas, walkways, stairs, steps, doorways, and garbage storage areas to such a degree that the facial features of a person at least five feet tall are distinguishable from a distance of 35 feet. 
(3)  Landscaping. No bush or shrub on the premises of the apartment complex may be taller than three and one-half feet. No tree on the premises of the apartment complex may have a canopy lower than six feet above the ground. 
(4)  Locked common areas. All enclosed common areas of the apartment complex (including, but not limited to, laundry rooms, club rooms, and fitness rooms) must be kept locked and may only be accessed with a key, key card, key pad, or similar device. 
(5)  Key control plan. A description of the plan and procedures for storing and accessing keys, key cards, and key codes to dwelling units, enclosed common areas, and other facilities of the apartment complex must be filed with the chief of police. 
(6)  Fencing. The perimeter of the premises of a designated apartment complex must be enclosed with a fence that is at least six feet high, unless a lower height is required by city ordinance. 
(7)  Pay phones. All pay phones on the premises of the apartment complex must be blocked to incoming calls or removed from the premises. 
( Ord. No. 3477 , § 1, 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 26-456. - Notice of designation to participate in program. 
(a)  The chief of police shall provide written notice to the owner or property manager of each apartment complex designated to participate in the mandatory crime reduction program. 
(b)  The notice must include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the apartment complex; 
(2)  A statement that the apartment complex is required to participate in the mandatory crime reduction program, including the apartment complex's crime index and the crime risk/safety threshold, a description of the fee, and other requirements of the program; 
(3)  A statement that a mandatory inspection of the apartment complex premises will be conducted by the chief of police at a scheduled date and time; and 
(4)  A copy of the appeal process contained in section 26-457 of this article. 
(c)  The chief of police shall provide written notice to the owner or property manager of each apartment complex designated a repeat offender in accordance with section 26-455(d). The notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the apartment complex; 
(2)  The apartment complex's crime index and the crime risk/safety threshold used to calculate the apartment complex's qualification for the mandatory crime reduction program; 
(3)  A statement that the apartment complex has been required to participate in the mandatory crime reduction program for 24 or more consecutive months; 
(4)  A description of all program requirements that must be followed while the apartment complex is designated a repeat offender; and 
(5)  A copy of the appeal process contained in section 26-457 of this article. 
(d)  Designation of an apartment complex for participation in the mandatory crime reduction program and application of the requirements of this article are binding upon all subsequent owners or other transferees of an ownership interest in the apartment complex. 
( Ord. No. 3477 , § 1, 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 26-457. - Appeals from designation and repeat offender status. 
(a)  All appeals authorized under this section 26-457 shall be in writing and timely filed with the city secretary. A copy of each designation issued by the chief of police that is the subject of the appeal shall be submitted at the same time. All appeals will be heard by the City of Farmers Branch Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
(b)  If the chief of police designates an apartment complex for participation in the mandatory crime reduction program pursuant to this article, this action is final unless the owner or property manager of the apartment complex files a timely written appeal with the city secretary not later than ten days after receiving notice of being a designated apartment complex. 
(1)  In deciding an appeal under this subsection (b), the board is limited to the issue of whether the apartment complex's crime index is greater than the crime risk/safety threshold calculated under section 26-453(c) for the applicable period. The board shall affirm the decision of the chief if it finds that the apartment complex's crime index exceeds the applicable threshold and shall reverse the chief's decision if it finds that the crime index does not exceed the applicable threshold. 
(c)  If the chief of police designates an apartment complex a repeat offender pursuant to section 26-455(d), this action is final unless the owner or property manager of the apartment complex files a timely written appeal with the city secretary not later than ten days after receiving notice of being a designated a repeat offender. An appeal under this subsection (c) may be filed to appeal the designation of repeat offender status and/or the requirement that the apartment complex implement one or more of the additional requirements under section 26-455(d). 
(1)  In deciding an appeal of the designation of repeat offender status under this subsection (c), the board is limited to a determination of whether the apartment complex's crime index is greater than the crime risk/safety threshold, as calculated under section 26-453(c), for the applicable 24-month period. 
(2)  In deciding an appeal of the requirement that an apartment complex implement one or more additional program requirements under section 26-455(d), the board may consider all evidence relevant to the stated grounds for appeal, including an appeal for a variance to an additional program requirement. The board's decision on appeal for a variance to an additional program requirement while on repeat offender status shall be based upon unique conditions affecting the apartment complex. Economic hardship alone shall not constitute a unique circumstance sufficient to grant a variance upon appeal. 
(d)  The city secretary shall schedule an initial date for each appeal hearing to occur within 60 calendar days after the date the written appeal is timely filed. 
(e)  A hearing on appeal by the board may proceed if a quorum of the board is present. If a quorum is not present to conduct an appeal under this section on the date scheduled, the hearing shall be reset to next regular meeting of the board. 
(f)  The board shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply, provided that the evidence presented shall be limited to evidence as relevant to the scope of the issue on appeal as determined by the board. Any dispute of fact will be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(g)  The board's decision must be by a majority vote of the members present. Failure to reach a majority vote will leave the chief's designation unchanged. The decision of the board is in all things final and no rehearing shall be granted. 
( Ord. No. 3477 , § 1, 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 26-458. - Program fee. 
A program fee of $2,000.00 will be assessed to each apartment complex designated to participate in the program to defray the costs incurred by the chief of police in administering and enforcing the mandatory crime reduction program adopted under this article. An additional program fee of $2,000.00 is required each time an apartment complex is designated to participate in the mandatory crime reduction program. 
( Ord. No. 3477 , § 1, 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 26-459. - Penalty. 
A violation of any provisions of this article shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of such violation, such violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00; provided that a violation of a provision of this article governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, may not exceed the sum of $2,000.00. Each and every day any such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 3477 , § 1, 12-12-2017)  
Secs. 26-460—26-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SHORT-TERM RENTAL HOUSING 
 
Sec. 26-500. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advertise means the written, audio, oral or other methods of drawing the public's attention whether by brochure, written literature, or on-line posting to a short-term rental in order to promote the availability of the short-term rental. 
Hotel/motel occupancy tax means the hotel occupancy tax as defined in Chapter 78, Article III of this Code and Chapter 3 of the Texas Tax Code. 
Local emergency contact means an individual other than the applicant, who resides within 25 miles of the subject property and who is designated by the owner/applicant to act as the owner's authorized agent if the owner has traveled outside of the immediate area or is otherwise unavailable. The local emergency contact should be reachable on a 24-hour basis, have access to the short-term rental property, and be authorized by the owner to act in the owner's absence to address any complaints, disturbances, and emergencies. 
Nonresident owner means any person who does not live, stay or dwell in a single-family residence which the person owns. 
Owner means the person who, in accordance with the most recently recorded deed, deed of trust, security instrument, trust instrument, affidavit of heirship, muniment of title or other similar document indicating title to real property recorded in the Official Public Records of Dallas County, Texas, is vested in, the ownership, dominion or title of real property, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The owner of a fee simple title; 
(2)  The owner of a life estate; 
(3)  The purchaser named in an executory contract for conveyance entered in compliance with title 2, chapter 5, subchapter D of the Texas Property Code, as amended, and recorded in the Official Public Records of Dallas County, Texas if required by V.T.C.A., Property Code § 5.076, as amended; or 
(4)  A mortgagee, receiver, executor or trustee in control of real property. 
Person means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal or community entity. 
Resident owner means any person who lives, stays, or dwells in a single-family residence which the person owns. 
Single-family residence means a single-family residence as referred to in this article which includes the following: 
(1)  One-family dwelling (detached): A dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one family and located on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract; 
(2)  One-family dwelling (attached): A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall and which is designed for occupancy by one family and is located on a platted separate lot, delineated by front, side and rear lot lines; 
(3)  Two-family dwelling: A single structure designed and constructed with two dwelling units under a single roof for occupancy by two families, one in each unit; and 
(4)  Condominium: The separate ownership of single dwelling units in a multiple unit structures with common elements and; 
(5)  Multi-family dwelling or apartment: Any building or portion of a building, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more families living in independent dwelling units. 
Short-term rental means any single-family residence as defined in this article leased or rented for a period of 30 consecutive days or less. This term does not include hotels, residence hotels, boarding houses, or rooming houses as defined in chapter 94, section 7.3 of this Code. 
Short-term rental license means the license issued by the building official pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 3575 , § 1, 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 26-501. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to advertise, offer to rent, or rent, lease, sublease, license or sublicense a single-family residence in the city as a short-term rental without a current and valid short-term rental license having been issued for such use. Any nonresident owner leasing or renting more than one single-family residence as a short-term rental within the city shall obtain a short-time rental license for each separate short-term rental. 
(b)  A nonresident owner, or the nonresident owner's authorized agent, of a short-term rental shall file with the building official any and all trade names under which he operates with respect to the leasing or renting of each short-term rental. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or short-term rental licensee to fail to include a written prohibition against the use of a short-term rental for having a party in every advertisement, listing, or other publication offering the premises for rent. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or short-term rental licensee to permit the use of the short term rental for the purpose of: housing sex offenders; operating a structured sober, recovery or other purpose living home or similar enterprise; selling illegal drugs; selling alcohol or another activity that requires a permit or license under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code; or operating as a sexually oriented business. 
( Ord. No. 3575 , § 1, 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 26-502. - License application; place of business; issuance; suspension; renewal and expiration; appeals. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), no owner shall lease or rent a single-family residence as a short-term rental without first obtaining a short-term rental license as required by this article. 
(b)  Owners leasing or renting a single-family residence as a short-tern rental prior to October 1, 2019, shall make an application for a short-term rental license not later than the tenth day after being notified by the building official of the requirement to obtain a short-term rental license or not later than October 31, 2019, whichever occurs first. 
(c)  An applicant for a short-term rental license shall file with the building official either an electronic on-line application or a written application upon a form provided for that purpose which shall possess an electronic signature or be signed by the resident owner, nonresident owner, the nonresident owner's agent, or the property manager or resident manager, if there be such. Should an applicant own more than one single-family residence which is leased or rented as a short-term rental, a separate application shall be filed for each location. The following information shall be required in the application: 
(1)  Name, address, e-mail address, and telephone number of the resident owner, nonresident owner, property manager, resident manager, local emergency contact, and mortgagee, if there is a mortgage against property; 
(2)  Trade name of resident owner or nonresident owner; 
(3)  Names and addresses of all registered agents should the parties named in this subsection be corporations; 
(4)  Zoning classification(s); 
(5)  Floor plan with dimensioned room layout; and 
(6)  Acknowledgement of receipt of a copy of this article and agreement to comply with all provisions of this article as a condition to receiving and maintaining a short-term rental license. 
(d)  All licenses shall expire one year from the date of issuance of the short-term rental license. 
(e)  A short-term renewal license may be renewed for a period of one year commencing on the date after the initial license or the then current renewal license ends. An application for renewal of a short-term rental license shall be submitted by the owner of the short-term rental not later than 30 days prior to the last date of the current short-term rental license. 
(f)  Upon receipt of an application for renewal of a short-term rental license, the building official may deny the renewal request if there is reasonable cause to believe that: 
(1)  The applicant has been charged with violating any ordinance of the city, or any state or federal law on the premises or has permitted such a violation on the premises by any other person; or 
(2)  There are grounds for suspension, revocation, or other sanctions as provided in this article. 
(g)  The building official may, at any time, require additional relevant information of the resident owner, nonresident owner, or property manager to clarify any aspect of the application. 
(h)  All short-term rentals and holders of a short-term rental license shall be listed on a registry created by the city and updated periodically by the city. The city shall publish the registry, and a copy shall be sent electronically to any person upon request. 
(i)  A short-term rental license may be suspended for a period not less than six months and not more one year due to a proven pattern of unacceptable behavior if: 
(1)  As a direct result of the operation of the short-term rental, the short-term rental has been the subject of a violation of any city ordinances at least three times during one calendar year or been the subject of a violation of any other state or federal law; 
(2)  The short-term rental provider is delinquent in the remittance of the required hotel/motel occupancy tax by more than 90 days despite notice from the city; or 
(3)  Violating the standards enacted in this article. 
(j)  The owner of a short-term rental whose license has been suspended or revoked according to section 26-506 can appeal the suspension or revocation to the zoning board of adjustment by filing a written appeal with the city's building official within 30 days of the receipt of notice of the suspension or revocation. All appeals will go to the zoning board of adjustment for a hearing and final decision not later than 20 days after the appeal is filed. 
(1)  Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this article shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing by the zoning board of adjustment and the building official's decision shall be final. 
(2)  Orders of the building official are stayed pending resolution of the appeal by the zoning board of adjustment. 
(3)  Based on the evidence presented, the zoning board of adjustment may uphold, shorten (in the case of a suspension), modify a revocation into a suspension, or reverse the decision of the chief building official to suspend or revoke the license. 
(4)  Decisions of the zoning board of adjustment are final. 
( Ord. No. 3575 , § 1, 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 26-503. - License fees. 
The annual fee for a short-term rental license in the amount of $120.00, including renewals, shall be paid at the time of submission of the application. 
( Ord. No. 3575 , § 1, 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 26-504. - License display, replacement and transferability. 
(a)  A copy of each short-term rental license issued pursuant to this article for a short-term rental shall be conspicuously displayed at the short-term rental for which such license is issued. 
(b)  A replacement short-term rental license may be issued for one lost, destroyed or mutilated upon application on the form provided by the building official. A replacement short-term rental license shall have the word "replacement" applied across its face and shall bear the same license number as the one it replaces. 
(c)  A short-term rental license is not assignable or transferable. 
(d)  The form of the short-term rental license shall be prepared by the building official. 
( Ord. No. 3575 , § 1, 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 26-505. - License standards. 
(a)  Compliance with standards. Continuous compliance with the standards contained in this section are conditions for the retention of a short-term rental license and issuance of a renewal of a short-term rental license. 
(b)  Limitation on number of occupants. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow overcrowding as defined by the minimum housing standards in any short-term rental. 
(c)  Building, electrical, plumbing, etc., standards. The holder of a short-term rental license shall at all times comply with all city building, electrical, plumbing, health, zoning, and other applicable ordinances, including but not limited to the Property Maintenance Code and Minimum Housing Standards, in the operation and maintenance of the short-term rental for which the short-term rental license has been issued. 
(d)  Records; contents. The holder of a short-term rental license shall keep records that reflect the following information in a current manner regarding the rental of the holder's short-term rental: 
(1)  Names, addresses, e-mail addresses, and telephone numbers of all persons financially responsible for renting the short-term rental. 
(2)  The dates and length of each rental period. 
The records shall be available for review by the building official, or his designated representative, during regular working hours and upon receipt of reasonable notice. 
(e)  Minimum rental period. It shall be unlawful for an owner to lease a short-term rental for less than two consecutive nights. 
(f)  Minimum age requirement. It shall be unlawful for a resident owner or nonresident owner to lease a short-term rental to any person under the age of 21. Notwithstanding the foregoing to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for a person who is 20 years of age or younger to occupy a short-term rental provided, the person responsible for renting the short-term rental is 21 years of age or older. 
(g)  Hotel/motel occupancy tax. It shall be unlawful for a resident owner or nonresident owner to operate a short-term rental without paying the required hotel/motel occupancy taxes pursuant to chapter 78, article III of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 3575 , § 1, 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 26-506. - Inspections; re-inspections; suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  Inspections; access. The resident owner, nonresident owner, resident manager and property manager, as a condition to the issuance of a short-term rental license required by this article, shall consent and agree to permit and allow the city's building official to make the following inspections of the short-term rental when and as needed to ensure compliance with this article: 
(1)  Right and access to inspect all portions of the premises and structures located on the premises that are not dwelling units, including, but not limited to, all storage areas, detached garages, and swimming pools, upon reasonable advance notice being given to the resident owner, nonresident owner, property manager or resident manager; 
(2)  Right and access to inspect all unoccupied dwelling units upon giving reasonable notice to resident owner, nonresident owner, resident manager or property manager; 
(3)  Right and access to inspect all occupied dwelling units when, upon receipt of reliable information, the building official has reason to believe that violations of the ordinances of the city or state law exist that involve serious threats to life, safety, health and property; and 
(4)  Before the short-term rental license and any renewal of the short-term rental license is approved, and before the rental of any single-family residence as a short-term rental under this article, the resident owner, nonresident owner, resident manager or property manager shall request an inspection and make the single-family residence available for inspection by the building official. The building official and the resident owner, nonresident owner, resident manager and property manager shall agree on a reasonable date and time for the requested inspection. 
(b)  Admission to premises. The building official and his designee may enforce the provisions of this article upon presentation of proper identification to the occupant in charge of the short-term rental and may enter, with the occupant's permission, any short-term rental between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; provided, however, that in cases of emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist which may involve imminent injury to persons, loss of life, or severe property damage, the building official may enter the short-term rental referenced in subsection (a) of this section at any time and upon presentation of identification and the occupant's permission shall not apply. Whenever the building official is denied admission to inspect any short-term rental under this provision, inspection shall be made only under authority of a warrant issued by a magistrate authorizing the inspection. 
(c)  Reinspection. If any of the inspections authorized by this article require a second reinspection due to noted violations, then a reinspection fee of $50.00 shall be paid prior to the second reinspection. 
(d)  Suspension or revocation of license. Failure of an owner to comply with the provisions of this article after receipt of written notice of the violation from the building official setting out the violations and the time allowed to rectify the violations, the short-term rental license authorized by this article issued to the owner may be suspended or revoked. 
(e)  Reinstatement. Any person requesting a reinstatement or reissuance of a short-term rental license that has been suspended or revoked shall be required to apply for and receive a new short-term rental license issued under this article as a condition precedent to the reissuance or reinstatement of the certificate of occupancy. 
( Ord. No. 3575 , § 1, 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 26-507. - Presumption; presentation of documents or affidavit. 
(a)  Presumption. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that a single-family residence that is occupied by one or more person(s) who are not the owner is being occupied pursuant to an agreement between the owner and the occupant(s) of the single-family residence wherein the occupant(s) have agreed to lease said residence from the owner. 
(b)  Presentation of documents or affidavits. Any resident owner or nonresident owner claiming that the owner is not required to obtain a short-term rental license pursuant to this article shall, not later than five business days following receipt of a written request of the building official or, in the case of an appeal filed pursuant to section 26-507, the city manager, deliver to the building official or city manager a true and correct copy of any agreements, documents of title, letters of administration, letters testamentary, executory contracts for conveyance (also known as "contracts for deed"), affidavits, or other documents that establish to the satisfaction of the building official or the city manager that a landlord/tenant relationship does not exist between the owner and the occupant(s) of the single-family residence. Unless an extension of the time for delivery of such documents or affidavits is granted by the building official or city manager, as the case may be, the failure of the owner to present the requested documents within the time provided by this subsection (b) shall result in the presumption described in subsection (a) above, becoming irrefutable. 
( Ord. No. 3575 , § 1, 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 26-508. - Violation and penalties. 
Any person who shall violate a provision of this article or shall fail to comply with any requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in municipal court, shall be punishable by a fine not more than $2,000.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 3575 , § 1, 8-12-2019)  
Chapter 28 - COURTS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 28-1—28-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD 
 
Sec. 28-21. - Established. 
There is established the municipal court of record no. 1 for the city. The city council, in accordance with the determinations, finds that a municipal court of record is necessary to provide a more efficient disposition of cases arising in the city. The court shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the justice court in any precinct in which the city is located in those criminal cases that arise in the city and that are punishable by fine only. 
(Ord. No. 2498, § 1, 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 28-22. - Provisions governing operation adopted. 
The city municipal court of record no. 1 is established pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 30.00001—30.00027, 30.01591—30.01595, and the provisions of such legislation governing the operation of a municipal court of record are adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2498, § 2, 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 28-23. - Appointment of judge; alternate judges. 
The city council does declare that the judge of the municipal court shall be selected by appointment by the city council. The city council shall establish the compensation for the judge. The city council may, at its discretion, appoint one or more alternate judges and establish their compensation. The judge and the alternate judges shall be appointed for terms of two years. 
(Ord. No. 2498, § 3, 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 28-24. - Municipal court clerk; other personnel. 
The city manager shall appoint a municipal court clerk for the municipal court of record no. 1 who shall be an officer of the city and have supervision and control of the municipal court of record no. 1, subject to the supervision of the city manager, or his designee. The city council shall make an annual appropriation for municipal court functions and personnel, including a court reporter and a bailiff, as deemed necessary for proper operation of the court. All municipal court personnel shall serve under the direction and control of the clerk. The clerk may recommend the hiring or removal of personnel authorized in the city's annual budget. The clerk may recommend the appointment of a court reporter. 
(Ord. No. 2498, § 4, 8-21-2000)  
Sec. 28-25. - Authority. 
The municipal court of record no. 1 is authorized to issue the following: 
(1)  Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and safety or nuisance abatement ordinance violation; and 
(2)  Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or demolishing the offending property and removing the debris from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2641, § 2, 12-3-2001)  
Secs. 28-26—28-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— City judge, § 2.12. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 28-46. - Warrant fee; special expenses prescribed. 
(a)  The city does hereby assess a special expense, not to exceed an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for an offense under V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 38.10, under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 543.009; and the special expenses described in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 17.04 dealing with the requisites of a personal bond and a special expense for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest, after due notice, not to exceed an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code, which shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
(b)  The city council hereby authorizes the municipal court to collect a special expense for services performed in cases in which the laws of this state require that the case be dismissed because of actions by or on behalf of the defendant which were subsequent to the date of the alleged offense. Such actions are limited to compliance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 543.102 to 543.104. Such special expense shall be in an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1469, § 1(17½-4), 10-31-1983; Ord. No. 1718, § 1(17½-4), 8-17-1987) 
State Law reference— Fines and special expenses, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.06; driving safety course fee, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 543.106.  
Sec. 28-47. - Collection fee. 
(a)  An additional collection fee of 30 percent on each of the following items is authorized if the item is more than 60 days past due and has been referred to the attorney or vendor for collection: 
(1)  Debts and accounts receivable such as unpaid fines, fees, court costs, forfeited bonds, and restitution ordered paid by the municipal court for the City of Farmers Branch or a hearing officer serving the City of Farmers Branch under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code Ch. 682; and 
(2)  Amounts in cases in which the accused has failed to appear: 
a.  As promised under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code Ch. 543, subchapter A, or other law; 
b.  In compliance with a lawful written notice to appear issued under article 14.06(b) or other law; 
c.  In compliance with a lawful summons issued under article 15.03(b) or other law; 
d.  In compliance with a lawful order of a court serving the county or municipality; or 
e.  As specified in a citation, summons, or other notice authorized by the V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 682.002 that charges the accused with parking or stopping offense. 
(b)  With respect to cases described by subsection (2), above, the amount to which the 30 percent collection fee applies is: 
(1)  The amount to be paid that is communicated to the accused as acceptable to the court under its standard policy for resolution of the case, if the accused voluntarily agrees to pay that amount; or 
(2)  The amount ordered paid by the court after plea or trial. 
(c)  An item subject to collection services and the collection fee under this section is considered more than 60 days past due under subsection (a) if it remains unpaid on the 61st day after the following appropriate date: 
(1)  With respect to an item described by subsection (a)(1), the date on which the debt, fine, fee, forfeited bond, or court cost must be paid in full as determined by the court or hearing officer; or 
(2)  With respect to an item described by subsection (a)(2), the date by which the accused promised to appear or was notified, summoned, or ordered to appear. 
(d)  A defendant is not liable for the collection fees authorized under this section if the court of original jurisdiction has determined the defendant is indigent, or has insufficient resources or income, or is otherwise unable to pay all or part of the underlying fine or costs. 
(e)  If the City of Farmers Branch has entered into a contract for collection services and a person pays an amount that is less than the aggregate total to be collected under the contract and including the collection fee, then the allocation to the comptroller, the county or municipality, and the private attorney or vendor shall be reduced proportionately. 
(f)  The collection fee does not apply to the collection of commercial bail bonds. 
(g)  Time served. The collection fee may be applied to any balance remaining after a partial credit for time served or community service if the balance is more than 60 days past due. 
(h)  Calculation of collection fee. Unless the contract with the collecting entity provides otherwise, the Farmers Branch Municipal Court shall calculate the amount of any collection fee due to the City of Farmers Branch or to the private attorney or public or private vendor performing the collection services and shall receive all fees, including the collection fee. 
(Ord. No. 2861, § 2, 5-1-2006)  
Secs. 28-48—28-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TECHNOLOGY FUND 
 
Sec. 28-71. - Technology fund; created. 
The municipal court technology fund referred to in this division as the "fund" is hereby created. All monies deposited into the fund shall be expended in accordance with Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. section 102.0172. 
(Ord. No. 2488, § 1(A), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 28-72. - Imposition of technology fee. 
Any defendant convicted in the municipal court of a misdemeanor offense shall pay as a cost of court, in addition to all other costs of court, a $4.00 technology fee. For purposes of this section: 
(1)  A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the defendant; 
b.  The defendant receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of the defendant's case. 
(2)  A trial means the whole or any part of the procedure which the law provides for bringing offenders to justice, including: 
a.  The payment of a fine and the entry of a judgment thereon; and 
b.  The entering of a plea by a defendant and the deferring final disposition of the defendant's case. 
(Ord. No. 2488, § 1(B), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 28-73. - Deposit of fee into the fund; administration; use of fee. 
The fund may be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court, including the following: 
(1)  Computer systems; 
(2)  Computer networks; 
(3)  Computer hardware; 
(4)  Computer software; 
(5)  Imaging systems; 
(6)  Electronic kiosks; 
(7)  Electronic ticket writer; and 
(8)  Docket management systems. 
(Ord. No. 2488, § 1(C), 9-7-1999)  
Secs. 28-74—28-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SECURITY FUND 
 
Sec. 28-101. - Creation. 
The municipal court building security fund (referred to in the section as the "fund") is hereby created. All monies deposited into the fund shall be expended in accordance with Article 102.017 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2219, § 1, 9-21-1998)  
Sec. 28-102. - Imposition of security fee. 
Any defendant convicted in a trial in the municipal court for a misdemeanor offense shall pay as a cost of court, in addition to all other costs of court, a $3.00 security fee. For purposes of the section: 
(1)  A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the defendant; 
b.  The defendant receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of the defendant's case. 
(2)  A "trial" means the whole or any part of the procedure which the law provides for bringing offenders to justice, including: 
a.  The payment of a fine and the entry of a judgment thereon; and 
b.  The entering of a plea by a defendant and the deferring of final disposition of the defendant's case. 
(Ord. No. 2219, § 1, 9-21-1998)  
Sec. 28-103. - Deposit of fee into the fund; fund administration; use of fee. 
The fund may be used only to finance the following items when used for the purpose of providing security for the Farmers Branch Municipal Court building: 
(1)  The purchase of repair of x-ray machines and conveying systems; 
(2)  Hand-held metal detectors; 
(3)  Walk-through metal detectors; 
(4)  Identification cards and systems; 
(5)  Electronic locking and surveillance equipment; 
(6)  Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constable, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services; 
(7)  Signage; 
(8)  confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems; 
(9)  Locks, chains or other security hardware; or 
(10)  Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2219, § 1, 9-21-1998)  
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY SERVICES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3121, § 1, adopted Jan. 18, 2011, repealed § 30-1, which pertained to motor vehicle accident cleanup fees and derived from Ord. No. 3055, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 2009.  
Secs. 30-2—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency means any circumstance that calls for immediate action and in which the element of time in transporting the sick, wounded or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of the person. Such circumstances include, but are not limited to, accidents generally, traffic accidents, and acts of violence resulting in personal injury, and sudden illnesses. 
Emergency medical vehicle means any motor vehicle especially designed, constructed, equipped, and used for transporting the injured or sick in answer to an emergency call. 
Emergency call means any request for ambulance service that is made by telephone or other means of communication in circumstances which are, or have been represented to be, an emergency and requiring immediate ambulance service. 
Fire department means the fire department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1343, § 1, 4-20-1981) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-32. - False statement of emergency. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully inform the fire alarm dispatcher, police dispatcher or other fire or police official that an emergency medical vehicle or more than one emergency medical vehicle is needed at a location or address when such person knows that such statement is false. 
(Ord. No. 1343, § 2, 4-20-1981)  
Sec. 30-33. - Fee for services. 
A fee as listed in appendix A, except as provided below, shall be charged per trip for the transportation by ambulance of a person to a hospital, doctor's office or any other place providing emergency medical aid, in response to a call received by the fire department for emergency medical service. 
(Ord. No. 1343, § 3, 4-20-1981)  
Sec. 30-34. - Responsibility for payment of fee. 
The person receiving emergency medical service and/or any person contracting for the service, or a hospital or medical facility requesting transfer of a patient shall be responsible for payment of the fee. In the case of service received by a minor, the parent or guardian, or initiating hospital or medical facility shall be responsible for payment of the fee. 
(Ord. No. 1343, § 4, 4-20-1981)  
Sec. 30-35. - Periodic reestablishment of fee. 
The fees charged for emergency medical service provided by the city shall be reestablished periodically by city council ordinance. The fees shall be based on the definition of ambulance service as defined by the federal Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA). 
(Ord. No. 1343, § 5, 4-20-1981; Ord. No. 2628, § 1, 9-10-2001)  
Sec. 30-36. - Inter-hospital and medical facility emergency transfers. 
(a)  Generally. A hospital or medical facility requesting inter-hospital or medical facility transfer of a patient must provide a hospital or medical facility staff physician member or registered nurse to accompany their patient during the transfer. The initiating hospital or medical facility will have the patient prepared and ready for transfer including notifying the receiving hospital or medical facility so that no delays will occur. A delay of ten minutes or more will terminate the request. The ambulance will leave and another request will have to be initiated. 
(b)  Definition. Emergency inter-hospital and/or medical facility transfers are hereby defined as those cases where a 15-minute to 20-minute delay in transfer by a private ambulance would be critical, or of great risk to a patient. 
(Ord. No. 1343, §§ 6, 6A, 4-20-1981)  
Sec. 30-37. - Right to refuse service. 
The fire chief or his designated representative retains the right to refuse ambulance transportation to nonemergency hospital or medical facility patients, when conditions are not in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1343, § 7, 4-20-1981)  
Sec. 30-38. - Exemption from fees; interlocal agreements. 
Fees charged for emergency medical service when rendered pursuant to an interlocal governmental agreement between the city and any other municipality or governmental agency are hereby exempt from this article, and all provisions of such an agreement shall govern rather than provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1343, § 8, 4-20-1981)  
Secs. 30-39—30-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3364 , § 1, adopted April 5, 2016, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 30-71—30-87, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; businesses, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Procedures for alarms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 218.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm site means a single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system or systems. 
Alarm system means a device or system that emits, transmits, or relays a signal intended to summon or that would reasonably be expected to summon the city's police department in response to a burglary. The term includes, but is not limited to, local alarms. The term does not include: 
(1)  An alarm installed on a motor vehicle unless such vehicle is permanently located at a site; 
(2)  Any device or system designed solely to alert occupants of a building or residence which will not emit a signal either audible or visible that can be heard or seen outside the building or residence; or 
(3)  An alarm system designed solely to detect or give notice of fire, smoke, or water flow. 
Alarm notification means a communication or notification intended to summon the police, which is initiated or triggered manually or by a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. 
Alarm permit holder means a person who has received an alarm system permit, as required by this chapter. 
Alarm system user means a person who owns or controls the premises upon which an alarm system is located. 
Director means the chief of police of the City of Farmers Branch or his authorized representative. 
False alarm means a notification of criminal activity reported to law enforcement that is: 
(1)  Based solely on electronic information remotely received by an alarm system monitor; 
(2)  Uncorroborated by eyewitness, video, or photographic evidence that an emergency exists; and 
(3)  Verified by the city that no emergency exists after an on-site inspection of the location from which the notification originated. 
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a premises. 
Monitoring system means a device or system that transmits an alarm signal intended to notify only the responsible person of the system or the inhabitants of the structure without the intent of summoning an emergency service of the city. 
Panic/distress alarm means a notification generated by the activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation. 
Robbery alarm notification means a notification of a robbery or an attempted robbery. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-72. - Permit required; application; issuance; transferability; false statements. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without first obtaining an alarm permit from the director. This requirement is applicable to the person in control of the property, which the alarm system is designed to protect. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the complete application form and the alarm permit fee as listed in appendix A, the director shall issue a permit, unless there is cause to believe the equipment responsible for initiating an alarm will not be maintained and operated in accordance with this article; the director has reason to believe the applicant will not comply with each provision of this section; or the applicant has failed to pay a service fee assessed under this chapter or has had an alarm permit for the alarm site revoked, and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected. 
(c)  Each alarm system permit application must contain the name, address, telephone number and any other information required by the director which is necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. The individual or alarm user representative listed on the application will be the permit holder for the alarm system and be responsible for the proper maintenance, operation and payment of fees assessed under this chapter. 
(d)  An alarm permit cannot be transferred; however, the individual designated to respond to an alarm or relay an alarm may be changed. A permit holder shall inform the director of any change that alters information listed on the original permit application within five days. 
(e)  Any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit or renewal, or while making a change thereto, shall be sufficient cause for refusal to grant, or suspension of a permit. 
(f)  The alarm permit fee shall be as listed in appendix A. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-73. - Alarm systems in apartment complexes. 
(a)  The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a master alarm permit from the director upon payment of the alarm permit fee as listed in appendix A if the apartment complex provides alarm systems within the individual apartments located in the apartment complex. 
(b)  A tenant of an apartment complex shall obtain an alarm permit from the director before operating or causing the operation of an alarm system in the tenant's residential unit regardless of whether or not the alarm system is provided by the complex or was installed at the direction of the tenant. 
(c)  For purposes of assessing service fees and enforcing this section against an individual residential unit, the alarm permit of the tenant supersedes the master alarm permit of the apartment complex, and the tenant is responsible for payment of service fees for false alarm notifications emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's residential unit. The master alarm permit holder is responsible for payment of service fees for false alarm notifications emitted from unoccupied residential units. 
(d)  The owner or property manager of an apartment complex that has a master alarm permit shall not be required to obtain an additional permit for common tenant areas, offices, or storage and equipment areas that are equipped with an alarm system in apartment complexes. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-74. - Exemption of certain government buildings. 
Government and school district(s) buildings located within the corporate city limits of the City of Farmers Branch shall comply with the requirements of this chapter; provided however, that they shall be exempt from payment of fees. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-75. - Alarm permit; false alarm fees. 
A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without first obtaining an alarm permit from the director. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-76. - Audible alarm systems. 
(a)  Alarm systems, to include local alarms, which emit an audible signal shall not be heard from a radius that exceeds 200 feet from the exterior of the structure where the alarm system is situated. 
(b)  If innovations in alarm systems or other types of alarm devices adversely affect emergency police services of the city, the director may promulgate rules and regulations in order to protect the city's emergency police services. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-77. - Permit duration; renewal. 
A permit is issued for one year and is automatically renewed each year upon the payment of the alarm permit fee, provided no violations of this article warrant suspension or nonrenewal of the permit. The director has the prerogative of determining the first expiration date; however, this initial period shall be no less than one, or more than two years from the date of issuance of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-78. - Service charge; false alarm notification. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (d), the holder of an alarm permit shall pay a service fee as listed in appendix A for each false alarm notification emitted from an alarm site that is in excess of three false alarms in the preceding 12-month period. 
(b)  A permit holder shall pay a fee as listed in appendix A within 30 days after mailing of notice that fee has been assessed. The director may revoke or refuse to renew a permit for failure to pay the fee assessed. 
(c)  The permit holder will be exempt from any fee charged for a false alarm notification which is later shown to have been justified. 
(d)  If a person notifies the director and applies for an alarm permit before the installation of a new system, no service fee will be assessed during the first 15 days after installation, and false alarm notifications during that period will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-79. - Reporting of alarm signals. 
A permit holder shall not report their alarm signal through a relaying intermediary that does not meet the requirements of this article, and any rules and regulations promulgated by the director, or is not licensed by the state or the appropriate agency, board or department thereof. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-80. - Proper alarm system operation and maintenance. 
(a)  A permit holder shall: 
(1)  Cause an adjustment to be made to the sensory mechanism of the alarm system in order to suppress false indications; and 
(2)  Maintain premises containing an alarm system in a manner that does not inhibit proper operation of the alarm system. 
(b)  No alarm permit holder shall activate the alarm system to send an alarm notification to the police for test purposes, unless the alarm permit holder first notifies the director or his representative, and the alarm company monitoring control center, prior to the testing of the system that the signal is for testing purposes only. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-81. - Reset required. 
A user of an alarm system shall adjust or cause the adjustment of the system so that, upon activation, the system will transmit only one alarm signal and will not transmit another alarm signal without first being reset in such a manner that it will not automatically resound, unless there is an outside stimulus characteristic of an unauthorized intrusion. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-82. - Revocation of permit; offense to operate. 
(a)  The director may revoke an alarm system permit for any violation of this article. 
(b)  The director may revoke an alarm permit if an alarm system generates eight or more false alarm notifications in any 12-month period described in section 30-77 upon 30 days' written notice from the director to the permit holder. 
(c)  A revocation may be lifted upon a sufficient showing that the conditions which caused the action have been corrected and if the director determines that the alarm system is likely to be maintained and operated in a responsible manner in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Should an alarm system user or his agent, after final permit revocation, desire to reapply for a permit, he shall be required to submit a new application, including the required permit fee and pay any other fees associated with this chapter that may be outstanding. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-83. - No permit, no police response. 
Business alarm permits that have a final revocation of their alarm system permit shall not receive a police response upon notification that an alarm has been activated at the alarm site as listed on the revoked permit unless there is independent verification that a crime has occurred or is occurring. Nothing in this section applies to residential alarm systems. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-84. - Appeal from denial or suspension of a permit. 
(a)  If the director refuses to issue or reinstate a permit, or suspends a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder, by certified mail, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the director to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten days after receipt of the notice from the director. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays any action of the director in suspending or denying a permit until the city manager or his designated representative makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within a ten-day period, the action of the director is final. 
(b)  The city manager or his representative shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal hearing and consider evidence by an interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing and the hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer must render a decision within 30 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse or modify the action of the director. The decision of the hearing officer is final. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-85. - Duties of alarm company. 
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city or otherwise sells, leases, installs or distributes alarm systems shall as applicable: 
(1)  Send notifications of an alarm to the city by human operator only after attempting to call the permit holder or person in control of the premises a minimum of two times prior to reporting; 
(2)  Keep his business premises in compliance with state law; 
(3)  Allow an inspection of his business premises by the director or his representative; 
(4)  Report alarms only over a special telephone number, or numbers designated by the director; 
(5)  Send alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by the director; and 
(6)  Notify the municipality in which the alarm system is located of installation or activation of an alarm system not later than the 30th day after the date of the installation or activation. The alarm company shall provide the municipality: 
a.  The alarm system company name; 
b.  The alarm system company license number; 
c.  The name of the occupant of the alarm system location; 
d.  The address of the alarm system location; and 
e.  The date of installation or activation. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-86. - Recorded message alarm notification prohibited. 
No permit will be issued for the use of systems using automatic telephone dialing to report an alarm condition by means of a recorded message. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-87. - Violations, corporations, partnerships and associations. 
(a)  A person, corporation, partnership or other association commits an offense under this section by commission or omission of any provision of this article that imposes upon such person or entity a duty or responsibility. 
(b)  In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct on individuals, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation, partnership or other association criminally responsible for acts or omissions performed by an agent acting in behalf of the corporation, partnership or other association and within the scope of his employment. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-88. - Monitoring systems. 
(a)  A person in control of a monitoring system must: 
(1)  Adjust the mechanism so that any audible signals emitted can be heard only inside the alarmed location. 
(2)  If applicable, notify the alarm systems company not to dispatch police for an alarm signal unless there is an indication of an emergency or criminal offense. 
(b)  If the police department response is requested to a signal from the alarm system in subsection (a) and such alarm signal is a false alarm, a fee shall be imposed on the property owner as listed in appendix A. 
(c)  No permit is required for operating a monitoring system. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Sec. 30-89. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or other association to violate any of the provisions of this article, and any such person, corporation, partnership or other association which violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted, and each offense is punishable as provided in section 1-14 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 3364, § 1, 4-5-2016 )  
Secs. 30-90—30-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE 
 
Sec. 30-121. - Fee imposed. 
There is imposed on each telephone subscriber's local exchange access line, or its equivalent, in the city, a 9-1-1 emergency fee as listed in appendix A for each residential line, for each business line and for each business trunk. Such fees shall be used only to provide for the purchase, installation, operating, maintenance, and upgrading expenses for 9-1-1 emergency service to be furnished pursuant to a written agreement between the carrier and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 1, 8-18-1997)  
Sec. 30-122. - Execution of contracts. 
The city manager is authorized to execute a contract, or contracts on behalf of the city with resell carriers ("The Carrier") pursuant to the provisions of this article to provide for the furnishing of 9-1-1 emergency service for telephone subscribers located within the boundaries of the city, and for the billing and collection of fees imposed by the city pursuant to section 30-121. 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 2, 8-18-1997)  
Sec. 30-123. - Restrictions and limitations. 
The 9-1-1 emergency service fee imposed by this article shall be subject to the following restrictions and limitations: 
(1)  The 9-1-1 emergency service fee may only be imposed upon telephone subscribers, local exchange access lines, or their equivalent, located within the city limits. 
(2)  The 9-1-1 emergency service fee may not be imposed upon more than 100 local exchange access lines per telephone subscriber per location. 
(3)  The 9-1-1 emergency service fee may not be imposed upon any coin-operated or coin/card reader operated telephone equipment. 
(4)  The 9-1-1 emergency service fee shall be separately stated on each subscriber's bill. 
(5)  The 9-1-1 emergency service fee must have uniform application within the municipal boundaries. 
(6)  The carrier will not be obliged to take any legal action to enforce the collection of any billed 9-1-1 emergency service fee. 
(7)  The carrier will not disconnect any subscriber's service for failure to pay the 9-1-1 emergency fee. 
(8)  The carrier will remit the collected 9-1-1 emergency service fees to the city on a periodic basis, not more frequently than monthly, 60 days after the close of the month in which such fees were collected. 
(9)  The carrier will retain, from its remittance to the city, two percent of the collected 9-1-1 emergency service fees as its compensations for performing its obligations under the contract. 
(10)  Should the city decide at some future date to change the amount of the 9-1-1 emergency service fee to be billed to subscribers, the city shall provide the carrier with at least 90 days' written notice prior to the desired implementation date of the change in the fee. 
(11)  The carrier will agree to provide the city with a list of any subscribers who have specifically advised the carrier of their refusal to pay the 9-1-1 emergency service fee. This list shall be provided not more often than once per calendar year. 
(12)  The carrier will retain records of the amount of 9-1-1 emergency service fees collected for a period not to exceed two years from the date of collection. 
(13)  Should the city desire to audit the carrier's records of the collected fees, it may do so at the city's cost and expense not more than once annually. 
(14)  The collected 9-1-1 emergency service fees shall be used only to provide for the purchase, installation, operation, maintenance, and upgrade expenses of the 9-1-1 emergency service. 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 3, 8-18-1997)  
Secs. 30-124—30-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 30-151. - Organization. 
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  The fire chief shall serve as the emergency management coordinator. 
(2)  The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan, [attached to Ordinance No. 2684 on file in the city secretary's office]. 
(Ord. No. 2684, § 2, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 30-152. - Director; powers and duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(2)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives, which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(3)  Authorization of the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions, which may be ordered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(4)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418). 
(Ord. No. 2684, § 3, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 30-153. - City manager; duties and responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the city manager shall include the following: 
(1)  Direction and control of the operations of the Farmers Branch Emergency Management Organization; 
(2)  Supervision of the development of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan; 
(3)  Supervision of the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions, which may be ordered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city; 
(4)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the mayor or city council, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes; and 
(5)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2684, § 4, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 30-154. - Coordinator; duties and responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management coordinator shall include the following: 
(1)  Supervision of the development of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such a plan; 
(2)  Surveying actual or potential hazards, which threaten life and property within the city, and identifying and recommending the implementation of measures, which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur; 
(3)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations; 
(4)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts; 
(5)  Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services, which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein; and 
(6)  Provide the training for emergency management personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2684, § 5, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 30-155. - Plan. 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management of the state of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan [attached to Ordinance No. 2684 on file in the city secretary's office] shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of disaster. Amendments to the plan consistent with this article may be made by the city manager or designee, and said amendment hall become effective upon the signature of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2684, § 6, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 30-156. - Override. 
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2684, § 7, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 30-157. - Liability. 
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 2684, § 8, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 30-158. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city not otherwise budgeted in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise, without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster or unless otherwise authorized. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
(Ord. No. 2684, § 9, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 30-159. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or emergency plan. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2684, § 10, 9-9-2002)  
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 94. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Findings of fact. 
The city in the past has experienced soil erosion and sedimentation problems. Quantities of earth have been displaced by water action on public streets, sidewalks, alleys, easements, storm sewers, parks, ponds and lakes. Erosion is detrimental to water quality and clarity. Sedimentation accumulation restricts the flow of stormwater runoff in easements, storm sewers and gutters; it creates a hazard to pedestrians in sidewalks and streets; and it is a vehicular hazard in streets. These problems result in a serious threat to the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. I, § A, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-32. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety and general welfare by establishing minimum performance standards, requirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated with accelerated soil erosion and resultant sedimentation. Minimizing soil erosion and off-site sedimentation will minimize damage to public and private property, and assist in the attainment and maintenance of water quality standards. Further, it is the purpose of this article to: 
(1)  Protect human life, health and property; 
(2)  Reduce sedimentation in streams, creeks, lakes, waterways, storm drains, etc.; 
(3)  Minimize expenditures of public money for cleaning sediment out of streets, sidewalks, storm drains and watercourses; 
(4)  Preserve the natural beauty and aesthetics of the community; and 
(5)  Provide for restoration of sites to reduce the negative environmental impacts of construction activity. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. I, § B, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-33. - Scope of article. 
The provisions of this article apply to: 
(1)  Any person proposing to develop land or improve property within the city. 
(2)  Any person currently developing land or improving property within the city. 
(3)  Any person who owns, possesses, is in custody of or exercises control of property within the city. 
Such persons are collectively referred to as "owner." This article applies to building structures, subdivisions, excavations and fill operations, all development and all other similar development activities. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. I, § C, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-34. - Conflicting ordinances. 
Besides this article, the city has other ordinances, regulations and specifications possibly affecting erosion and sedimentation control. In the event of a conflict between this article and any other ordinances of the city, the most restrictive ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. I, § D, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-35. - Property to which this article's provisions apply. 
All property within the city is subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. II, § A, 12-7-1987)  
Secs. 34-36—34-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 34-56. - Failing to prevent a public erosion nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to prevent a public erosion nuisance from occurring on such property. A public erosion nuisance is defined as a situation in which erosion of, or sediment from, one location is causing damage to a public right-of-way. Damage to the public right-of-way includes silt, mud or similar debris originating from one property but being deposited onto a second, off-site property, which is public property or a public right-of-way. The city may have to remove or clean up the deposit due to liability, statutory, aesthetic, drainage or property damage concerns. This article applies only to erosion and sedimentation that occurs upon public property and not private property. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. II, § B, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-57. - Variances. 
The city council may grant a written variance from the requirements of the standards and specifications of this article if strict adherence to its requirements will result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. The owner shall submit a written request for a variance to the city. The request shall state the specific variances sought and reasons for requesting the variances. The city shall not grant a variance unless and until sufficient specific reasons justifying the variance are provided by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. II, § C, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-58. - Notice. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city engineer or his designee to give 48 hours' notice, in writing, to the owner or agent in charge of any premises believed to be in violation of this article, to correct the public erosion nuisance and to clean up and remove the offending and burdensome sedimentation. 
(b)  If the city engineer decides, in his judgment, that the situation believed to be in violation of this article poses a substantial and immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare of the city, the city engineer may give such notice as he deems is necessary and appropriate given the existing circumstances and conditions, even though such notice is given in less than 48 hours. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. II, § D, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-59. - Duties of city officials. 
The city engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement this article. The duties of the city engineer or his designee shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Inspecting sites to determine compliance with this article; 
(2)  Determining if sureties shall be exercised. If so, the city engineer shall arrange for the work to be done, and if not, the city engineer shall return the sureties to the applicant; and 
(3)  Determining if a stop work order shall be issued and, if so, when the stop work order shall be removed from the project or construction, and work allowed to commence or recommence. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. IV, § A, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-60. - Responsibilities of owners. 
The owner, builder, developer, tenant or any other person who owns, possesses, is in custody of or exercises control of property shall be responsible for any silt, mud or sands transported from the property by drainage. The intent of this article is that owners, builders and developers make provisions for preventing erosion and sedimentation problems at such time as their property is proposed for development, use or modification, and to continue such preventive measures during the actual construction and development of the property. Additionally, all persons who, after construction and development, own, possess, are in custody of or exercise control of the property are responsible for preventing the erosion and sedimentation problems addressed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. IV, § B, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-61. - Failure to comply with article; notice; abatement by city; assessment of costs; lien; interest; recovery of costs suit. 
If the owner of land situated within the corporate limits of the city shall fail to comply with this article, then the city engineer, or his designee, shall notify such owner by letter addressed to him at the address shown on the last approved tax rolls of the city, at any residence or business structure located on the subject property, or at the last known address. The mailing of notice in accordance with any of these premises shall satisfy this section. In the alternative, the city may notify the owner by publication in the city's official newspaper on one occasion. At the expiration of ten days after notification or publication, the city may enter upon such premises and may do such work as is necessary, or cause the work to be done, in order that the premises may comply with the requirements set forth within this article. A statement of the cost incurred by the city to abate such condition shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, which statement shall be paid within 30 days of the date of the mailing. If the statement has not been paid within such period, the city manager may file a statement with the county clerk of the expenses incurred to abate such condition on such premises, and the city shall have a privileged lien on any lot, tract or parcel of land upon which such expense is incurred, together with ten percent on the delinquent amount from the date such payment is due. For any such expenditure and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had in the name of the city and the statement so made, or a copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work performed by the city. The city manager or his designee shall file a statement of expenses incurred, giving the amount of such expenses, the date on which the work was done, or the improvements made, with the county clerk. The city shall have a privileged lien on such lots or real estate upon which such work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq., which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. Such amount shall bear ten percent interest from the date the statement was filed. Further, for any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of expenses so made, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. III, § G, 12-7-1987)  
Secs. 34-62—34-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONTROL MEASURES 
 
Sec. 34-81. - Applicability of this article to creeks. 
The applicability of this article to Cooks Creek, Rawhide Creek and Farmers Branch Creek is limited to the implementation of erosion control and/or sedimentation control methods for new development and redevelopment. As a requirement for platting or replatting of land along or contiguous to such creeks, all applicants shall submit to the city engineer for approval an erosion and sedimentation control plan prior to commencement of construction. The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be included in the engineering construction plans. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. V, § A, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-82. - Erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
The objective of the erosion and sedimentation control plan is to prevent public erosion nuisances. The prevention of public erosion nuisances can be promoted, in part, by the following goals: 
(1)  Reduce sedimentation in streams, creeks, lakes, waterways, storm drains, etc. 
(2)  Protect the quality of the water in the city. 
(3)  Provide, protect and preserve wildlife habitats. 
(4)  Provide for restoration of sites to reduce the negative environmental impacts of construction activity. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. V, § B, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-83. - Methods of reducing erosion and sedimentation. 
(a)  Required design considerations. In order to implement the objectives stated in section 32-82, the following design considerations are necessary: 
(1)  Limit the size of disturbed areas to the greatest extent possible. 
(2)  Stabilize any disturbed area as soon as possible. 
(3)  For construction activities in waterways, the following additional requirements must be met: 
a.  At the end of each working day, the contractor shall remove all loose excavated material from the channel. 
b.  No construction or fill materials can be stored within the limits of the channel. All equipment and materials storage and staging areas must have erosion controls. 
c.  Rock berms or sand bag berms shall be used to entrap sediment. 
d.  Flooding potential should be considered when locating the control measures. 
(4)  Require controls to intercept silt from all disturbed areas. 
(5)  Keep the velocities of stormwater runoff below the erosive level. 
(6)  Protect street areas and areas disturbed by development activity from upstream runoff. 
(7)  Capture and filter/drain stormwater runoff. 
(8)  Minimize the extent of sediment leaving the project site. 
(9)  Reduce flooding hazards and silt removal cost associated with excessive sediment accumulation in storm drains and waterways. 
(10)  Reduce the concentration of stormwater runoff and promote street flow to the greatest extent possible. 
(11)  Revegetate all disturbed areas with a rapid, vigorous growth of longterm vegetation composed of a mixture of grasses, ferns and woody plants. 
(12)  Provide sedimentation and/or filtration pond to maintain and improve water quality. 
(13)  Erosion control plans should be phased to accommodate for changes in drainage patterns that occur during development. 
(14)  Reduce the silt leaving a construction site on the wheels of construction vehicles by providing vehicle washing areas and/or established construction entrances and exits. 
(15)  Preserve and protect existing vegetation to the greatest extent possible. 
(16)  Planning should consider the natural topography and soil condition in an attempt to limit the erosion potential. 
(17)  Design erosion and sedimentation controls to harmonize with the natural character of the land. 
(18)  When storm drain inlets must be protected, a perimeter filtration dike shall be used (triangular filtration dike or hay bale dike). 
(b)  Considerations of subsection (a) of this section illustrative, not exhaustive. The considerations listed in subsection (a) of this section are illustrative only, and are not to be considered an exhaustive list of criteria an effective erosion and sedimentation plan should address in order to prevent a public erosion nuisance. 
(c)  Applicant responsibility to prepare and submit plan. It shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant to prepare and submit an erosion and sedimentation control plan which meets the requirements of the city and this article. 
(d)  Other plan inclusions. The plan shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the effected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed grading on water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of measures proposed to minimize soil erosion and off-site sedimentation. The applicant shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, construction and development shall be conducted in strict accordance with the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. V, § C, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-84. - Effect of plan approval. 
(a)  It is to be understood that the approval of an erosion and sedimentation control plan by the department of engineering does not constitute a recognition by the city that the erosion and sedimentation control plan will prevent any or all public erosion nuisances. By approval of the erosion and sedimentation control plan, the city does not warrant that the erosion and sedimentation control plan will be sufficient to prevent a public erosion nuisance, and the city waives no rights to pursue any legal remedies, both under this article, and all other applicable ordinances and laws. 
(b)  If for any reason, after an erosion and sedimentation control plan is approved by the department of engineering, a public erosion nuisance occurs on property addressed by the erosion and sedimentation control plan, the approval of the erosion and sedimentation control plan shall not be a defense or bar to prosecution under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. V, § D, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-85. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The planning considerations given in this article for erosion controls rely on a degree of erosion and sedimentation control and flood protection that is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and that is based on scientific, engineering and economic considerations. This article does not imply that erosion and sedimentation controls will survive inundation by runoff from storms or that land below such controls will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any officer or employee of the city, for any flood damages, or erosion or sedimentation damages, whether to persons or property, that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. V, § E, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-86. - Surety for permanent erosion controls in new subdivisions. 
(a)  The applicant shall provide a surety in the form of cash, certificate of deposit, surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the city to ensure that vegetative cover and other permanent erosion control measures are installed, maintained and functioning properly at the end of a two-year period from the date of final acceptance of the dedicated streets and/or utilities by the city. This surety shall be given to the city before the final acceptance of the streets and/or utilities. This surety shall be in the amount estimated by the developer, which is 100 percent of the cost of constructing and maintaining the permanent erosion controls for a two-year period. However, such estimate is subject to review by the city engineer and may be rejected, and the surety not accepted, if the city engineer deems the estimate not to be a reasonable approximation of the costs of constructing and maintaining the erosion controls. 
(b)  Should the vegetative cover die or become sparse or the erosion controls fail to be maintained or are not functioning during this two-year period, the city may notify the applicant in writing. The applicant has ten days after being notified to begin correcting the problems. If no corrections are started, the city may make the necessary repairs by exercising the surety or billing the applicant. If at the end of the two-year period the vegetative cover is still not established or is sparse, or the erosion controls are not functioning, the city may exercise the surety and have the erosion controls installed and established. 
(c)  The procedures in subsections (a) and (b) of this section for ensuring that vegetation is established shall apply to all projects, whether or not the vegetation is the longterm maintenance responsibility of the city. Any vegetative cover which is planted and is a permanent part of the improvement project will not be accepted by the city until the growth has been established and maintained by the developer for a two-year period from the date of final acceptance of the subdivision. 
(d)  After the two-year period has elapsed, the owner of the property shall be responsible for maintaining the erosion controls in good working order. If any future owner modifies or disturbs the erosion controls for the area, that owner must restore or replace the permanent erosion controls at the conclusion of the disturbing activity. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. V, § F, 12-7-1987)  
Sec. 34-87. - Stop work orders. 
All development, improvement and construction on any land which is in violation of the provisions of this article may be halted and stopped by order of the city engineer. No stop work order may be issued until the notice provisions of this article are fully complied with by the city and the owner or agent of the premises is given a reasonable time period to correct the public erosion nuisance and to clean up and remove the offending and burdensome sedimentation. 
(Ord. No. 1740, art. V, § G, 12-7-1987)  
Secs. 34-88—34-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AIR POLLUTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 34-121—34-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SMOKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3564 , § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 2019, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 34-141—34-147, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1679, §§ 1—8, 2-2-1987; Ord. No. 3551, §§ 1(A), 1(B), 1-8-2019. 
 
Sec. 34-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bar or tavern means an establishment that derives 75 percent or more of the establishment's gross revenue from the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Cigar bar means a bar that derives 15 percent or more of its gross revenue from the sale or rental of tobacco, tobacco products, smoking implements, or smoking accessories for on-premises consumption. 
E-cigarette means an electronic cigarette or any other device that simulates smoking by using a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit to deliver nicotine or other substances to the individual inhaling from the device. The term does not include a prescription medical device unrelated to the cessation of smoking. The term includes: 
(1)  A device described by this definition regardless of whether the device is manufactured, distributed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, or e-pipe or under another product name or description; and 
(2)  A component, part, or accessory for the device, regardless of whether the component, part, or accessory is sold separately from the device. 
Person means any individual. 
Public building means any building other than a building used as a private residence. If portions of a building are used as a private residence and another portion of the building is used for business purposes or commercial activities, then "public building" as used herein shall apply to the portions of the building used for business purposes or commercial purposes, but not the portion used solely as a residence. A private residence operated as a licensed, registered, or listed day care facility (as defined by state law) shall be considered a "public building" during the hours in which care is provided in the residence to children younger than 18 years of age who are not related to the owner or tenant of the residence. The term "public building" includes, but is not limited to, restaurants, bars and taverns. 
Restaurant means an establishment that primarily serves food prepared in the kitchen of the same establishment for patrons and may serve alcohol with a valid Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission license as long as the establishment derives less than 50 percent of its gross revenues from alcohol sales and includes all indoor and outdoor seating areas, kitchen, bar areas, restrooms and lobbies. 
Smoke or smoking means inhaling, exhaling, or burning a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or form; or inhaling or exhaling from an e-cigarette. 
Tobacco shop means a retail or service establishment that derives 90 percent or more of its gross revenue from the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or smoking implements. 
( Ord. No. 3564 , § 1, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 34-142. - Smoking prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform the following acts in any public building in the city or within 20 feet of any entrance, exit, open window, or ventilation intake to any public building: 
(1)  Smoke; 
(2)  Carry a lighted cigarette, cigar, or tobacco-containing pipe, or an operating e-cigarette; or 
(3)  Light a cigarette, cigar or tobacco-containing pipe or operate an e-cigarette. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a public building to fail to place at least one sign at each entrance to the public building in a location clearly visible to a person entering the establishment containing the following text and/or symbols: 
(1)  A "No Smoking Within this Building" sign; or 
(2)  The international "No Smoking" symbol depicting a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it along with the words "within this building". 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) herein, each entrance of a public building at which a sign required by this subsection (b) is not located shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any public building to place or allow to be placed any of the following items in any public building or within 20 feet from an entrance or exit to any public building: 
(1)  Ashtrays; 
(2)  Smoking paraphernalia; or 
(3)  Signs that indicate that smoking is permitted. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any public building to allow smoking in such public building in violation of the provisions of this division. 
(f)  It is a defense to prosecution of a violation of subsection (a) of this section if the person was, at the time of the violation: 
(1)  On a golf course, provided that the person was between the tee box of the first hole and the end of the green of the 18th hole of the golf course; 
(2)  In a cigar bar that: 
(i)  Was lawfully operating as a cigar bar on April 2, 2019 (except that this defense does not apply if the cigar bar is expanded, is relocated, or changes majority ownership after April 2, 2019); 
(ii)  Does not open into any other indoor or enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited under this section; 
(iii)  Is not generally accessible by a minor; and 
(iv)  Keeps all windows and doors closed at all times except as reasonably necessary for the expeditious entering and exiting of the cigar bar; 
(3)  In a tobacco shop that: 
(i)  Does not open into any other indoor or enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited under this section; and 
(ii)  Keeps all windows and doors closed at all times except as reasonably necessary for the expeditious entering and exiting of the tobacco shop. 
( Ord. No. 3564 , § 1, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 34-143. - City parks. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to smoke on any property owned, leased, or otherwise operated by a governmental entity as a public park or recreational facility. 
(b)  It is not a defense to a violation of this section that the person was on the exterior of any building when the person was smoking. 
(c)  It is a defense to a violation of this section if the person was smoking: 
(1)  In an area designated by the director of parks and recreation as a smoking area by the placement of signs designating the smoking area; or 
(2)  In a motor vehicle parked within a parking area of the public park or recreational facility with the doors and windows of the vehicle closed so that smoke or vapor cannot emanate from the vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 3564 , § 1, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 34-144. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, business, legal entity, association, partnership or corporation that violates any provision of this division shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor violation and subject to a fine of not less than $1.00 and not more than $500.00. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The culpable mental state required by chapter 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended is specifically negated and dispensed with for any offense brought under this section, and any said offense shall be a strict liability offense. 
( Ord. No. 3564 , § 1, 4-2-2019)  
Secs. 34-145—34-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED, WRECKED, AND ABANDONED PROPERTY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 34-181—34-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Minimum housing standards, § 22-306 et seq.; property maintenance standards, § 56-1 et seq.; businesses, ch. 26; solid waste, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle means one which: 
(1)  Is inoperable and more than five years old and left unattended on public property for a period of more than 48 hours; 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours; 
(3)  Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours; or 
(4)  Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated city, county, state or federal highway within this city for more than 48 hours or more than 24 hours on a turnpike or a controlled access highway, as defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.302, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways. 
Antique auto means a passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years old. 
Collector means the owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of such vehicles for personal use in order to restore, preserve and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Garagekeeper means an owner or operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair or maintenance of a motor vehicle. 
Inoperable motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired license plate or a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, or a vehicle that is not in operating condition because it is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or has one or more flat tires. 
Junked vehicle shall have the same meaning as provided by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071, and any amendments thereto and as currently defined as: 
A "junked vehicle" means a vehicle that is self-propelled and does not have lawfully attached to it: 
(1)  An unexpired license plate; or 
(2)  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(3)  Is: 
a.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
b.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
1.  Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
2.  Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 501.002, and additionally includes a motorboat, outboard motor, or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31 and also additionally including airplanes. 
Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists. 
Storage facility means a garage, parking lot, or any type of facility or establishment for the servicing, repairing, storing or parking of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1969, § 17-42; Ord. No. 2209, § 2(17-25), 10-9-1995; Ord. No. 2677, § 1, 7-22-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.001, 683.002.  
Sec. 34-202. - Enforcement of division. 
A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures authorized by this division may enter private property for the purposes specified in the procedures to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance. The municipal court of the city may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2209, § 3, 10-9-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.073(c), 683.074(e).  
Sec. 34-203. - Penalty for violation of division. 
A person who violates a provision of section 34-209 is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 2209, § 6, 10-9-1995) 
State Law reference— Penalty for junked vehicle nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.073(b).  
Sec. 34-204. - Abandoned motor vehicles—Authority to take possession. 
A member of the police department may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle found on public or private property. The police department may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or hire persons, equipment and facilities to remove, preserve and store an abandoned motor vehicle it takes into custody. The city shall have the authority to immediately remove any vehicle which is on a public property and causes an immediate threat to human safety, health, welfare or any governmental function, or creates a public disturbance. 
(Code 1969, § 17-28; Ord. No. 2209, § 2(17-26), 10-9-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.011.  
Sec. 34-205. - Same—Notification of owner and lienholders. 
(a)  Contents of notice; method of service. The police department shall notify by certified mail the last known registered owner and all lienholders of record pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 501.001 et seq., not later than the tenth day after taking the motor vehicle into custody that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle identification number of the abandoned motor vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held, inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle not later than the 20th day after the date of the notice, on payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody, or the garagekeeper's charge. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided constitutes a waiver by the owner and lienholders of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. 
(b)  Newspaper notice. If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, if the registration contains no address for the owner, or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all lienholders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the city is sufficient notice. The notice by publication may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles, shall be published within the time requirements prescribed for notice by certified mail, and shall have the same contents required for a notice by certified mail. 
(c)  Consequences and effect of failure to reclaim. The consequences and effect of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor vehicle are set forth in a valid notice given in this division. 
(d)  Storage fees. The city is entitled to reasonable storage fees for: 
(1)  A period of not more than ten days beginning on the day the police department takes custody and continuing through the day the police department mails notice as provided by this division; and 
(2)  A period beginning on the day after the day the police department mails the notice and continuing through the day any accrued charges are paid and the vehicle is removed. 
(Code 1969, § 17-30; Ord. No. 2209, § 2(17-27), 10-9-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.012.  
Sec. 34-206. - Same—Use by police department. 
(a)  If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided by section 34-205, the police department may use that vehicle for police department purposes as provided by this section. 
(b)  The police department may use the abandoned motor vehicle for police department purposes as long as the police department considers it cost effective. If the police department discontinues use of the abandoned motor vehicle, the police department shall auction the vehicle as provided by section 34-207. 
(c)  This section does not apply to an abandoned motor vehicle with a garagekeeper's lien. 
(Ord. No. 2209, § 2(17-28), 10-9-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.016.  
Sec. 34-207. - Same—Auction. 
If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided by section 34-205, the police department shall sell the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. Proper notice of the public auction shall be given, and in case of a garagekeeper's lien, the garagekeeper shall be notified of the time and place of the auction. The purchaser of the motor vehicle takes title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership, shall receive a sales receipt from the police department, and is entitled to register the purchased vehicle and receive a certificate of title. From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the police department shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction; the costs of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle that resulted from placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody; and all notice and publication costs incurred. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in a special fund that shall remain available for the payment of auction, towing, preserving, storage and all notice and publication costs that result from placing another abandoned vehicle in custody, if the proceeds from a sale of another abandoned motor vehicle are insufficient to meet these expenses and costs. The city may transfer the amount in the special fund that exceeds $1,000.00 from the special fund to the general revenue account to be used by the police department. 
(Code 1969, § 17-29; Ord. No. 2209, § 2(17-29), 10-9-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.014.  
Sec. 34-208. - Same—In storage facilities. 
(a)  Time limit; notice to owner. A motor vehicle left for more than ten days in a storage facility operated for commercial purposes after notice is given by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner and to any lienholder of record under the Certificate of Title Act, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 501.001 et seq., to pick up the vehicle, or for more than ten days after a period when under a contract the vehicle was to remain on the premises of the storage facility or a motor vehicle left for more than ten days in a storage facility by someone other than the registered owner, or by a person authorized to have possession of the motor vehicle under a contract of use, service, storage or repair, is considered an abandoned vehicle, and shall be reported by the garagekeeper to the police department. If the notice to the owner or a lienholder is returned by the post office unclaimed, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the city is sufficient notice. 
(b)  Storage fees; report by garagekeeper. If a garagekeeper or storage facility acquires possession of a motor vehicle for a purpose other than repair, the garagekeeper or storage facility is entitled to towing, preservation and notification charges and to reasonable storage fees, in addition to storage fees earned pursuant to contract, for a maximum of seven days only until notification is mailed to the last known registered owner and all lienholders of record as provided by subsection (a) of this section. After such notice is mailed, storage fees may continue to accrue until the vehicle is removed and all accrued charges are paid. A garagekeeper who fails to report the possession of an abandoned vehicle to the police department within seven days after it becomes abandoned may no longer claim reimbursement for storage of the vehicle. 
(c)  Fee for notification costs. The police department, upon receipt of a report from a garagekeeper of the possession of a vehicle considered abandoned under the provisions of this section, shall follow the notification procedures provided by section 34-205, except that custody of the vehicle shall remain with the garagekeeper until after compliance with the notification requirements. A fee in an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code shall accompany the report of the garagekeeper to the police department. The fee shall be retained by the police department and used to defray the cost of notification or other cost incurred in the disposition of an abandoned motor vehicle. 
(d)  Vehicle taken into custody by police; disposition of sale proceeds. An abandoned vehicle left in a storage facility and not reclaimed after notice is sent in the manner provided by section 34-205 shall be taken into custody by the police department and used for police department purposes as provided by section 34-206 or sold in the manner provided by section 34-207. The proceeds of a sale under this section shall first be applied to the garagekeeper's charges for servicing, storage and repair, but as compensation for the expenses incurred by the police department in placing the vehicle in custody and the expense of auction, the police department shall retain two percent of the gross proceeds of the sale of each vehicle auctioned, unless the gross proceeds are less than $10.00. If the gross proceeds are less than $10.00, the police department shall retain the proceeds less than $10.00 to defray expenses of custody and auction. Surplus proceeds remaining from an auction shall be distributed in accordance with section 34-207. 
(e)  Impairment of garagekeeper's lien. Except for the termination or limitation of claim for storage for failure to report an abandoned motor vehicle, nothing in this section may be construed to impair any lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of this state. 
(f)  Penalty for improper charging of fees. A person charging fees under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.032, commits an offense if the person charges a storage fee for a period of time not authorized by such subsection. An offense under such subsection is punishable by a fine of not less than $200.00, nor more than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2209, § 2(17-30), 10-9-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.031—683.033.  
Sec. 34-209. - Junked vehicles—Public nuisance. 
(a)  Declared public nuisance. A junked vehicle that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city and is a public nuisance. 
(b)  Maintenance. A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance as determined under this division. 
(c)  Penalty for violation of section. A person who commits an offense under this section is, upon conviction, subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00. Upon conviction, the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance. 
(Code 1969, § 17-41; Ord. No. 2209, § 2(17-31), 10-9-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.072.  
Sec. 34-210. - Same—Procedures for abating. 
(a)  Generally. The procedures for abatement and removal of a junked vehicle or a part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance from private property, public property or a public right-of-way shall be in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Private property; notice and service. Any removal of a junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle on private property requires not less than ten days' notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property, that it must be removed and abated within ten days, and that request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lienholder of record and the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists. If any notice is returned undeliverable by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days after the date of the return. 
(c)  Public property; notice and service. For a nuisance on public property, a notice of not less than ten days, stating the nature of the public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way, stating that the nuisance must be removed and abated within ten days, and that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lienholder of record, and the owner or occupant of the public premises or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days after the date of the return. 
(d)  Reconstruction or making operable of junked vehicles. In addition, a vehicle that is declared a junked vehicle is prohibited from being reconstructed or made operable after it has been removed by the city. 
(e)  Hearing; order for removal. A public hearing shall be conducted before the removal of the junked vehicle which public hearings shall be before the city's chief building official or his designee. If a hearing is requested by the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupancy of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the junked vehicle is located, it shall be held within ten days after service of notice to abate the nuisance. At the hearing, it is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, that the vehicle is inoperable. An order requiring the removal of the junked vehicle shall include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if the information is available at the site. 
(f)  Notice to state department of highways and public transportation. Notice shall be given to the state department of highways and public transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. The notice shall identify the vehicle or vehicle part. 
(g)  Exceptions. The procedures of this section shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; a vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; or an unlicensed, operable, or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by a collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means. 
(h)  Enforcing persons. All actions taken in regard to junked vehicles will be taken by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part from property may be by any duly authorized person. 
(Code 1969, §§ 17-43—17-48; Ord. No. 2209, § 2(17-32), 10-9-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.074, 683.075.  
Sec. 34-211. - Inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  Declared nuisance. An inoperable vehicle that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place, adjoining private property or a public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city and is a public nuisance. 
(b)  Maintenance of nuisance. A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance as determined under this division. 
(c)  Penalty for violation of section. A person who commits an offense under this section is, upon conviction, subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(d)  Abatement and removal. An inoperable vehicle that is not abated or removed within a 45-day time period beginning from the date of the first notice of the public nuisance will be declared a junked vehicle. The procedures for abatement and removal of the junked vehicle shall be as stated in section 34-210. 
(Code 1969, § 17-41; Ord. No. 2209, § 2(17-41), 10-9-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074.  
Sec. 34-212. - Unattended vehicles. 
(a)  Obstructing traffic. It shall be unlawful to leave a vehicle unattended within a public right-of-way or on public property that obstructs traffic. 
(b)  Removal. Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this division, any unattended vehicle that obstructs traffic within a public right-of-way or on public property may be immediately removed by the police department. 
(c)  Authority of city to remove. The city shall have the authority to immediately remove any vehicle which is on public property and causes an immediate threat to human safety, health, welfare, or any governmental function, or creates a public disturbance. 
(Code 1969, § 17-27; Ord. No. 2209, § 2(17-44), 10-9-1995) 
State Law reference— Vehicles obstructing traffic, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 545.302, 684.011.  
Secs. 34-213—34-245. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NOISE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; businesses, ch. 26; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to correct or remove conditions described in this article, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34-246. - Prohibited noises—Generally. 
No person shall make or cause to be made any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the city which is offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of the inhabitants of the city, which noise renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and comfort, nor shall any person make or cause to be made any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the city. 
(Code 1969, § 17-82)  
Sec. 34-247. - Same—Specific. 
The acts set forth in this article, among others, are declared to create loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and shall be deemed a violation of this article. The enumeration in this article of prohibited noises shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(Code 1969, § 17-83)  
Sec. 34-248. - Construction. 
The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a residential district, or within 500 feet of any residence, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, and between the hours of 11:59 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Sundays, is prohibited, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety, for which a permit shall be obtained from the city manager, or such other person as may be designated by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 17-84) 
Cross reference— Construction standards, § 22-86 et seq.  
Sec. 34-249. - Quiet zones. 
The creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise on any street adjacent to any school, hospital or clinic, when conspicuous signs are located at such streets indicating that schools, clinics or hospitals are adjacent thereto, is prohibited. 
(Code 1969, § 17-85) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70.  
Sec. 34-250. - Loading vehicles. 
The creation of unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle before the hours of 7:00 a.m. and after 9:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and before 9:00 a.m. and after 9:30 p.m. on Sunday, on any premises in a residential district, or within a 500-foot radius from any residence, is prohibited. 
(Code 1969, § 17-86) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82.  
Sec. 34-251. - Shouting of wares. 
The shouting and crying of peddlers and hawking which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood is prohibited. 
(Code 1969, § 17-87) 
Cross reference— Peddlers and solicitors, ch. 54.  
Sec. 34-252. - Loudspeakers, sound trucks and drums. 
(a)  The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device, for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise so as to attract customers to any place of business, is prohibited. 
(b)  The use of mechanical devices or loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving vehicles, for the purpose of advertising any show, sale or display of merchandise, is prohibited. 
(c)  The uses and acts set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section may be permitted by the city council or such person as it may designate, upon the issuance of a license therefor under such conditions as the granting authority may require. Any person desiring such a license shall make application therefor to the proper authority. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount as established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code, which shall not be returned to the applicant. 
(Code 1969, § 17-88) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82.  
Sec. 34-253. - Lawn and garden maintenance equipment. 
(a)  Restricted hours. It shall be unlawful and it is hereby found and declared to be a public nuisance for any person to operate or to permit the operation of any powered lawn and garden equipment such as, but not limited to, lawn mowers, edgers, clippers, blowers and garden tillers before the hours of 7:00 a.m. and after 9:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and before 9:00 a.m. and after 9:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(b)  Exceptions. Noise created by power equipment being operated by city employees during normal performance of duties and utility company employees during an emergency or under special conditions are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Defense to prosecution. It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the powered equipment is being operated at least 100 feet or greater from all residences other than the residence on the property where the equipment is being operated. 
(Ord. No. 2156, § 1(17-89), 12-5-1994) 
Cross reference— Property maintenance, § 56-1 et seq.; businesses, ch. 26.  
Secs. 34-254—34-283. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NUISANCES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Minimum housing standards, § 22-306 et seq.; property maintenance standards, § 56-1 et seq.; dangerous buildings, § 22-571 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34-284. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal or animals other than dogs means any animal, other than a dog, which creates a health hazard or definite danger to the surrounding neighborhood. 
Brush means scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth. 
Carrion means the dead and putrefying flesh of an animal, fowl or fish. 
Filth means any matter in a putrescent state. 
Impure or unwholesome matter means any putrescible or nonputrescible condition, object or matter which tends, may or could produce injury, death or disease to human beings. 
Matter means that of which any physical object is composed. 
Nuisance means stagnant or unwholesome water; sinks; privies; filth; carrion; weeds; rubbish; brush and refuse; impure or unwholesome matter of any kind; objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature; litter; or animals other than dogs. 
Objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter means any matter, condition, or object which is or should be objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary to a person of ordinary sensitivities. 
Refuse means heterogenous accumulation of wornout, used up, broken, rejected or worthless materials. 
Rubbish means trash, debris, rubble, stone, useless fragments of building materials and other miscellaneous useless waste or rejected matter. 
Water buffer means a vegetated area next to a water resource that protects the water resource from nonpoint source pollution or provides bank stabilization. 
Weeds means vegetation, including grass, that because of its height is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary, but excluding: 
(1)  Shrubs, bushes, and trees; 
(2)  Cultivated flowers; 
(3)  Water buffers; and 
(4)  Pollinator or wildflower areas designated by city signs. 
(b)  Any words not defined in this section shall be construed in the context used and by ordinary interpretation and not as a word of art. 
(Code 1969, § 17-99; Ord. No. 3603 , § 1(A), (B), 10-22-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-285. - Zoning. 
In areas zoned light industrial (L-I) and heavy industrial (H-I) under the zoning ordinance of the city, the requirements in sections 34-284, 34-287 and 34-288 shall be applicable to areas within 200 feet from buildings and areas within 200 feet of property lines adjacent to buildings on adjoining property owned by other persons, and within 200 feet of property zoned other than light industrial or heavy industrial under the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 17-102)  
Sec. 34-286. - Railroad rights-of-way. 
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all railroad rights-of-way, regardless of the zoning classification of such railroad rights-of-way, because of the potential fire hazards existing within such railroad rights-of-way. 
(Code 1969, § 17-103)  
Sec. 34-287. - Unsightly weeds and vegetation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, to permit grass, weeds or brush to grow to a greater height than 12 inches upon any such real property, or allow any objectionable or unsightly matter to remain upon such property. 
(b)  All vegetation not regularly cultivated and which exceeds 12 inches in height shall be presumed to be objectionable and unsightly, except that regularly cultivated crops will not be allowed to grow within the right-of-way of any public street or easement but shall be kept mowed the same as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 17-100)  
Sec. 34-288. - Duty to remove unsightly matter. 
It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property to cut and remove all such weeds, brush and other objectionable or unsightly matter as often as may be necessary to comply with this article. It shall be the duty of each person to keep the area from the line of his property to the curbline next adjacent to it, if there is a curbline, and if not, then within ten feet outside that property line, free and clear of weeds, brush and objectionable matter. 
(Code 1969, § 17-101)  
Sec. 34-289. - Accumulations of lumber, boxes and other materials. 
It is unlawful and declared a nuisance for any owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any premises, improved or unimproved, on which evidence of rat infestation is found, or on any lots or alleys adjacent to such property, to permit accumulation of any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones or any other character of materials that may be used as a harborage for rats, rodents or other vermin, unless such materials shall be placed on open racks and elevated not less than 18 inches above the ground, with a clear intervening space underneath. 
(Code 1969, § 17-103.1) 
Cross reference— Construction standards, § 22-86 et seq.; minimum housing standards, § 22-306 et seq.; property maintenance standards, § 56-1 et seq.  
Sec. 34-290. - Acts adversely affecting water quality. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, tenant or employee, firm or corporation, to commit or permit the following acts listed in this section that will adversely affect the quality of water in the storm drainage system and watercourses within the city: 
(1)  Maintain grease and sand traps in any automotive center, service station, vehicle maintenance center or vehicle wash operation which is not connected to the sanitary sewer. 
(2)  Permit wastewater from cleaning or the maintenance of buses, trucks, aircraft or other vehicles, by businesses which operate more than two vehicles, to drain to the storm system or watercourses. 
(3)  Permit crankcase drainings, drainage from engine oil filters, vehicle engine wash or other oils or oily substances, greases or like material to go to any area that may drain to the storm system or watercourses. 
(4)  Permit waste oil storage drums or any other containers which are filled or partially filled with oil, solvents or chemicals to remain in the open or under the eave of a building or structure in such a manner as may cause the storage vessels to overflow as the result of precipitation or in any other way. 
(5)  Permit old motors, transmissions, automobile parts or any other machinery parts which are coated or partially coated with grease, oil or solvents to remain uncovered in the open where portions of the coating materials may be washed to the storm sewers or watercourses as the result of precipitation. 
(6)  Deposit liquid waste, semiliquid waste or chemical waste in any area that may drain to the storm system or watercourses, unless the waste will not adversely affect the water at any location in the storm system and unless specifically approved by the director of public works or his designated representative. 
(7)  Deposit grass clippings, leaves, brush or any rubbish or debris in the street gutter, storm inlet, storm drain or watercourse. 
(8)  Permit cooling tower, compressor or boiler blowdown water, with the exception of clean untreated water, to flow to the storm system or watercourses. 
(9)  Permit wastewater resulting from floor cleaning, rug and carpet cleaning and laundering processes to flow to streets or alleys or into any storm drain or watercourse. 
(10)  Permit filter backwash from swimming pools and fountains to drain to any area other than the sanitary sewer unless specifically approved by the director of public works or his designated representative. 
(11)  Permit liquid wastes from animal pens used for kennels, animal hospitals, meat packing plants and food processing plants to flow to any area other than the sanitary sewer unless specifically approved by the director of public works or his designated representative. 
(12)  Permit excess water from nurseries watering plants or excess water from any other business or private residence to flow to the streets and alleys to the extent that a nuisance is created by standing water, or damage results to streets or alleys, or the free passage of foot traffic is affected. 
(13)  Permit unused materials from ready-mix concrete, mortar and asphalt base plants or delivery trucks to be dumped, spilled or placed in any area that may drain to streams or watercourses. 
(14)  Permit sewage wastes, whether domestic or industrial, to flow or be deposited in any area other than a sanitary sewer or approved septic tank. 
(15)  Permit any substance or obstacle that will damage or clog the storm sewers of the city from being discharged or dumped into the storm drainage system or watercourses. 
(Code 1969, § 15-4)  
Sec. 34-291. - Notice of violation; city authorized to abate nuisance. 
(a)  Easements. If a nuisance is found to exist upon any easement within the city, or any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any easement within the city limits, fails to comply with the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the city manager or his duly appointed representative to give ten days' official notice in writing to such person which is creating such nuisance or is violating the terms of this article. If such person fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of sections 34-284, 34-287 and 34-288 within the ten days following notification, they shall be considered to be in violation and subject to fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  Other properties. The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall apply to all other real properties occupied or unoccupied, except that the requirement of a ten-day official notification is met and fulfilled when the city manager or his duly appointed representative has given a ten-day notice in writing at least one time in any calendar year to such person which is creating such nuisance by a letter addressed to such person at his post office address, or by publication two times within ten consecutive days in the city's official newspaper. 
(c)  Authority of city to abate nuisance. The city shall be further entitled to go upon such properties and do or cause to be done the work necessary to abate the nuisance if such person fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of sections 34-284, 34-287 and 34-288 within the ten days following official notification. 
(Code 1969, § 17-104)  
Sec. 34-292. - Duties of abutting property owners and occupants. 
Property owners and occupants shall be jointly responsible for nuisances and abatement under this article to the centerline of the street and alley rights-of-way abutting property they own or occupy, provided that such responsibility shall be deemed assumed by the city for the purposes of this article only for those portions of such rights-of-way which are paved, if any, and only if all paving assessment liens against the abutting property have been discharged by payment or law. 
(Code 1969, § 17-104.1)  
Sec. 34-293. - Expenses; lien; recovery of costs. 
An administrative fee as established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code shall be assessed in addition to the actual paid expenses of a city-performed nuisance abatement, for the securing of a structure, or for a similar health or safety measure performed by the city. This fee is intended to cover the costs of administration of the contracted work, billing for the performed work, receipt of payment, and the filing of liens. Any additional work performed by the city employees not covered under this administrative fee may be billed at a rate as established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code per hour. If the owner fails or refuses to pay such expense within 30 days after the first day of the month following the month in which the work was done, the city shall file with the county clerk a statement of the expenses incurred in correcting the condition of the property. When such statement is filed, the city shall have a privileged lien on such property, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, to secure the payment of the amount so expended. Such amount shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date the city incurs the expense. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had by the city. The statement of expense filed with the county clerk or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in such work, improvement or correction of the property, all as more particularly specified in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq., which is hereby adopted. 
(Code 1969, § 17-105; Ord. No. 2069, § 16, 9-9-1993; Ord. No. 2522, § 10, 3-6-2000)  
Secs. 34-294—34-325. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - LITTERING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 90. 
 
Sec. 34-326. - Littering—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person while driving or a passenger in a vehicle to throw or deposit trash or rubbish of any kind upon any street, street right-of-way or other public place within the city, or upon private property. Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street any trash, rubbish or injurious metal material shall immediately remove the litter or cause it to be removed. 
(Code 1969, § 17-117)  
Sec. 34-327. - Same—Motor vehicle load. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city, unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded so as to prevent any load contents, trash or refuse from being blown or deposited upon any street, street right-of-way, alley or any other public place. 
(Code 1969, § 17-118) 
State Law reference— Spilling materials from vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 725.003, 725.022.  
Secs. 34-328—34-350. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SWIMMING POOLS 
 
Sec. 34-351. - Regulations adopted. 
There is adopted by the city, this article which shall be known as the swimming pool ordinance for the purpose of providing safety and protection of health of the swimmers and bathers by establishing rules and regulations for public pools and semipublic pools. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 1, 5-7-1979)  
Sec. 34-352. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official means the building official of the city or his authorized representative. 
City sanitarian means the sanitarian of the city or his authorized representative. 
Confined space entry means a space that is not designed for continuous occupancy, has limited and restricted means for entry and exit. These spaces can present physical and atmospheric hazards to people as well as pose an increased risk of corrosion and accelerated degradation of metal based equipment because of the increase in moisture and humidity that frequently accumulates in confined spaces. 
Free chlorine residual means the chlorine concentration, in milligrams per liter (mg/l) units of water, available for rapid and effective biocidal action. This is the chlorine which remains uncombined with nitrogenous compounds after the initial chlorine demand of the water has been satisfied. 
Lifeguard means an individual schooled and certified in an advanced course of instructions in lifesaving and water safety equivalent to that offered by the American Red Cross. 
Operator means the person ultimately responsible for the safe, sanitary maintenance of a public pool or semipublic pool. 
Private pool means any pool located on private property under the control of the homeowner, the use of which is limited to members of his family or their invited guests. 
Public pool means any pool or spa, other than a residential pool, which is intended to be used for swimming, bathing or other related purposes and is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for use. 
Semipublic pool means any pool or spa located on the premises of a hotel, motel, trailer court, apartment house, private club, townhouse complex or other similar establishment where use of the pool is limited to members or residents and their guests. 
Swimming pool and pool mean any structure, basin, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving or recreational bathing. 
Spa includes, but is not limited to, the terms "therapeutic pool," "hydrotherapy pool," "whirlpool," "hot spa," etc., which may not be drained, cleaned or refilled for each individual. It may include, but not be limited to, hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water mineral baths, air induction bubbles or any combination thereof. 
Underground vault means space, chamber, or passage enclosed by a vault or vault-like structure, that is located underground. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 2, 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 3424, § 1, 2-21-2017 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-353. - Building permit required. 
(a)  No person may construct, modify or repair a swimming pool in the city without obtaining a permit. The application for a permit must be on a form provided by the building official and must be accompanied by the required fee and a specified number of copies of the plans of which the applicant seeks approval. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed swimming pool will conform in all respects to the requirements of the law, a permit shall be issued by the building official to the applicant. 
(b)  A plan review that meets The Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 265, and Subchapters (L) Standards for Public Pools and Spas, and (M) Interactive Water Features and Fountains is required for new construction, remodeling, or renovation and shall be submitted to and approved by the building official and the city sanitarian. Before any construction, can occur after the approved plan review, any changes, modifications, or additions of the original design plans must be approved by the building official and city sanitarian. 
(c)  In addition, to the above requirements for obtaining a building permit, all swimming pool and spa pump rooms that are constructed for the purpose of housing swimming pool and or spa operating equipment such as pool plumbing lines, pumps, motors, electrical panels, measuring devices such as gauges and flow meters, and or other design equipment, and also includes pool water chemicals must be located in an above ground structure. Swimming pool and or spa operating equipment cannot be housed in a confined space or underground vault structure. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 3, 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 3424, § 2, 2-21-2017 )  
Sec. 34-354. - Operational permit required. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a public or semipublic pool without an operational permit. To obtain a permit an applicant must complete a form provided by the city sanitarian. An applicant must designate a manager of operations of each pool for which a permit is sought, and the person designated as manager of operations of a pool must be employed on the premises where the pool is located. 
(b)  The city sanitarian shall issue an operational permit to an applicant if a manager of operations has been designated and the proper application fee has been paid. The amount of the fee for each pool owned by an applicant is established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(c)  Operational permits shall expire on March 31 of each year, unless suspended for cause before the expiration date and must be renewed each year as described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  The public pool owned and operated by the city must obtain an operational permit, but the city shall be exempted from the application fee. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 4, 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 2069, § 22, 9-9-1993)  
Sec. 34-355. - Inspections. 
The city sanitarian is authorized to conduct such inspections as he deems necessary to ensure compliance with all provisions of this article. He shall have the right of entry at any reasonable hour upon the premises where a swimming pool is located. He shall have authority to collect water samples from the pool. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 5, 5-7-1979)  
Sec. 34-356. - Maintenance and operation. 
(a)  Every public and semipublic pool shall be under the supervision of a capable individual who shall assume the responsibility for compliance with all parts of this article relating to pool operation and maintenance and safety of bathers. 
(b)  All pumps, filters, disinfectant and chemical feeders, drains, ladders, lighting, ropes and other appurtenant equipment used in the operation of all pools shall be maintained in good working condition. 
(c)  All public and semipublic pools shall be treated and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Every pool shall maintain a minimum disinfection concentration equivalent to a free chlorine residual of 1.0 mg/l and a maximum disinfectant concentration equivalent to 8.0 mg/l. Every spa shall maintain a minimum disinfection concentration equivalent to a free chlorine residual of 2.0 mg/l and a maximum disinfection concentration equivalent to 8.0 mg/l. 
(2)  Every pool shall have water with a pH of not less than 7.2 and not more than 8.2. A pH test kit, accurate to the nearest 0.2 pH units, shall be provided at each pool. The total alkalinity of the water shall be at least 50 ppm. 
(3)  The presence of organisms of the coliform group, or a standard plate count of more than 200 bacteria per milliliter, or both, in two consecutive samples or in more than ten percent of the samples in a series shall be deemed unacceptable water quality. 
(4)  Every pool shall have clarity sufficient for the main drain, or a six-inch-diameter turbidity test disk placed at the deepest part of the pool, to be readily visible; failure to meet this requirement shall constitute grounds for immediate closing of the pool. 
(5)  Every pool shall be free of scum and foreign floating matter, sediment, dirt, slime, algae, and all other foreign matter that might be conducive to the transmission of disease. 
(d)  The recirculation system of a public pool or semipublic pool must be in operation and properly maintained at all times. 
(e)  Areas surrounding a public pool or semipublic pool, including bathhouses, dressing rooms, toilets, shower stalls and lounging areas, shall be kept clean and in a state of proper repair at all times. 
(f)  Backwash water from a filter and drainage water from all pools must go to the sanitary sewer system. It may go to an approved septic tank system if a sanitary sewer is not available. 
(g)  An air gap or antisiphon device must be installed on any pipe or hose bibb leading to the pool. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 6, 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 3424, § 3, 2-21-2017 )  
Sec. 34-357. - Safety provisions. 
(a)  The following safety equipment must be readily available anytime a public pool or semipublic pool is open for use: 
(1)  A life pole or shepard's crook pole capable of reaching every part of the pool. 
(2)  A guard line rope separating the shallow portion of the pool from the deep portion of the pool at the break point depth. 
(b)  All public pools shall conform to the safety requirements set forth in the current Design Standards of the state board of health for public swimming pool construction. 
(c)  All public pools shall be attended by at least one lifeguard during all hours of operation. Semipublic pools, where no lifeguard service is provided, must post in plain view a warning sign which states "Warning—No Lifeguard On Duty" with clear legible letters at least four inches in height. 
(d)  A placard listing pool rules shall be provided and placed in distinct view of swimmers at all public pools and semipublic pools. In addition, this list shall include emergency phone numbers of the police department and emergency medical service. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 7, 5-7-1979)  
Sec. 34-358. - Regulations in pool area. 
A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Allows an animal under his control to enter or remain within the pool area or pool enclosure of a public pool or semipublic pool; 
(2)  Has skin abrasions, open sores, skin disease, eye disease, nasal or ear discharge, or a communicable disease and swims in a public pool or semipublic pool; 
(3)  Works at a public pool or semipublic pool while suffering from a communicable disease; 
(4)  Alters or removes safety equipment from a public pool or semipublic pool except in a bona fide emergency; or 
(5)  Carries glass within a public pool or semipublic pool area or enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 8, 5-7-1979)  
Sec. 34-359. - Notification of operation. 
The operator of any public pool or semipublic pool shall notify the city sanitarian of the date intended for the initial opening of the pool for the season. An inspection will be made at that time to determine compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 9, 5-7-1979)  
Sec. 34-360. - Failure to comply. 
Failure to comply with sections 34-354—34-359 for public pools and semipublic pools, spas included, may result in the immediate closure of the pool and/or the initiation of legal action. Upon determination that the pool does not comply with the provisions of this article, an authorized representative shall notify the operator of the existing violations. If conditions warrant closure of such pool, a reinspection of the pool will be conducted during regular working hours of the public works department at the request of the pool operator. If compliance has been achieved, the operator shall be notified that the pool may be opened. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 10, 5-7-1979)  
Sec. 34-361. - Suspension of operational permit. 
(a)  The city sanitarian shall suspend a permit to operate a public pool or semipublic pool if: 
(1)  The annual permit fee is not paid; 
(2)  An owner fails to designate and retain a manager of operations as specified in this article; 
(3)  The condition of a pool is hazardous to the health or safety of swimmers or the general public; or 
(4)  The owner fails to keep all pool equipment and devices working properly. 
(b)  The suspension shall continue until the cause of suspension is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 11, 5-7-1979)  
Sec. 34-362. - Appeal. 
If the city sanitarian denies the issuance of a permit or suspends a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the city sanitarian to the building official by filing with the building official a written request for a hearing within ten days after receipt of the notice from the city sanitarian. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day limit, the action of the city sanitarian is final. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 12, 5-7-1979)  
Sec. 34-363. - Enforcement responsibility. 
The city sanitarian or his authorized representative will have enforcement responsibility for this article. 
(Ord. No. 1246, § 13, 5-7-1979)  
Secs. 34-364—34-399. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - GAS WELLS 
 
Sec. 34-400. - Seismic survey permit requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. A permit shall be required for all seismic surveys performed on any property, public or private, within the City of Farmers Branch. No seismic survey permit shall be granted unless the applicant shows proof of ownership or lease of minerals on the property to be surveyed. For seismic surveys involving public right-of-way, which shall include easements for public utilities and other city properties, proof of ownership or lease of minerals on property within 200 feet of the right-of way shall be required. 
For the purposes of this article seismic surveying shall be defined as the noncombustible or nonexplosive geologic or geophysical activities necessary to determine the potential location of subterranean mineral deposits within the City of Farmers Branch. Under no circumstances shall explosive charges, including, but not limited to, the use of dynamite, be used in any way related to the preparation and/or operation of a seismic survey. 
(b)  Requirements. All seismic survey permit applications shall be submitted to the city engineer or his designee for approval. The seismic survey shall not begin prior to the issuance of a seismic survey permit from the city. A seismic survey permit shall include, but is not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Operator/applicant name, phone number, fax number, physical address, and, if possible, email address; if the operator is a corporation, the state of the incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners shall be provided. The operator/applicant shall provide proof of ownership or lease of minerals on the property being surveyed. 
(2)  Detailed mapping of the location of the proposed seismic testing and the total area of requested seismic survey. Plans and specifications shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this article and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The city reserves the right to establish criteria and require said plans to contain sufficient detail as to protect surrounding city facilities, to preserve and protect water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and other drainage structures, streets, bridges, and traffic signals/appurtenances or protect public health, safety, and welfare. It is the sole responsibility of the operator/applicant to contact the city and obtain the location of all city facilities. 
(3)  Detailed explanation of the seismic survey method to be used on-site. 
(4)  Date and time the seismic survey will be conducted and completed. Seismic surveying operations in the public right-of-way shall be limited between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. No thoroughfare lanes shall be blocked from 6:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or 3:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. Requests for exception to these requirements must be submitted not less than five business days prior to the desired date and time of the proposed work to the city engineer. 
(5)  If the seismic survey is conducted in any public right-of-way then the operator/applicant must agree to reimburse all costs to the city for any damages associated with the seismic survey. Any infrastructure damaged shall be restored in accordance with restoration requirements as set forth within the city's right-of-way ordinance (Ordinance No. 2625). 
(6)  The fee for a seismic survey permit within the city shall be in accordance with the fee schedule as provided for in the appendix A. 
(7)  For all seismic testing to be conducted within the public right-of-way, the operator/applicant must submit a traffic control plan as required by the city engineer. Traffic control and barricading must conform to the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. A traffic barricade plan may be required by the city prior to starting work. No more than one lane of a two-lane street may be closed at one time unless authorized by the city. For streets with four or more lanes, no more than one lane in either travel direction can be closed at one time. 
(8)  Under no circumstances shall explosive charges, including, but not limited to, the use of dynamite, be used in any way related to the preparation and/or operation of a seismic survey. 
(9)  The seismic survey permit shall be approved for no more than a 90-day period of time. If work is not started within 30 days of the permit release date, the seismic survey permit shall be void. In addition, the applicant must inform the city engineer at least two business days prior to beginning the approved seismic survey. 
(10)  The operator/applicant shall execute a hold harmless and indemnity agreement, subject to review and approval by the city, prior to issuance of the seismic survey permit. 
(11)  The operator/applicant shall submit a certificate of insurance with the city engineer. This certificate should provide general liability for at least $10,000,000, and $1,000,000 for each occurrence. All insurance companies shall be rated A+VI or better by A.M. Best or A or better by Standard and Poor's. The insurance shall be issued in the standard form approved by the Texas State Board of insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2917, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 34-401. - Construction obligations. 
(a)  Location of city facilities. Prior to any seismic testing, the city's water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, traffic signal conduits, and irrigation lines shall be located in the field by the appropriate city personnel. It is the sole responsibility of the operator/applicant to contact the city and obtain a location of city facilities within the study area. The city shall not be liable for any damage to its facilities and the operator/applicant shall be liable for all damages as provided in this article. 
The city reserves the right to prohibit seismic testing in close proximity of existing city infrastructure (water lines, etc) when it is determined by the city engineer that the proposed testing poses a risk to that infrastructure. 
(b)  Inspections. The operator/applicant shall make the work site available for inspection at all times during the performance of and upon completion of the work. The city may issue a stop-work order to the operator/applicant for any work that violates the terms of the permit, other applicable standards, conditions, codes, or poses a threat to the life, health, safety, or well being of the public. The order shall state that failure to correct the non-conformance will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within 72 hours after issuance of the stop-work order, the operator/applicant shall present proof to the city that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the city may revoke the permit pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Landscaping. Any disturbed landscaped areas within the public right-of-way shall to be restored using appropriate methods and quality workmanship with materials of like kind and quality material to that which was existing prior to construction. The city may consider exceptions or reasonable alternatives to this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2917, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 34-402. - Damage to facilities. 
(a)  City facilities. Should the operator/applicant damage city facilities the operator/applicant shall cease construction and notify the city engineer immediately. The operator/applicant may continue only after a determination by the city engineer. Should the city deem repairs necessary, such repairs shall be remedied at the expense of the operator/applicant. Continuance of the construction shall not commence again until authorized by the city engineer. 
(b)  Non-city owned facilities. Should non-city owned facilities be damaged, the operator/applicant shall notify the owner of such facilities and the city engineer immediately of such damage. It shall be the sole responsibility of the operator/applicant to notify the owner of the damaged property or facility. The city may require cessation of work. Cessation of work will be dependent on the extent and nature of the damage. If the damage warrants cessation of work, the operator/applicant may continue construction only after authorization by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2917, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 34-403. - Repairs by city. 
Notwithstanding emergencies, as provided in this article, after written notification by the city, and the operator/applicant fails to perform any repairs or replacement work in a reasonable amount of time in a timeframe prescribed by the city, taking into account the nature and extent of the repairs or replacement work, the city may immediately repair such portion of the public right-of-way as may have been disturbed by the operator/applicant, its contractors, or agents. Upon failure of the operator/applicant to perform any such repair or replacement work and upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the operator/applicant will reimburse the city for all costs so incurred within 45 days from the date of the city invoice. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, administrative costs, cost of having city personnel present, equipment rental, repair and replacement costs, and the cost of contractors, if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2917, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 34-404. - Violation of article. 
This article may be enforced by civil court action in accordance with state or federal law, in addition to any other remedies, civil or criminal, the city has for violation of this article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day or portion thereof that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2917, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 34-405. - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to, and accumulation of all penalties, the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any and all violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2917, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 34-406. - Governing law. 
This article shall be construed in accordance with the city code(s) and ordinance(s) in effect on the date of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived to the extent that such code(s) and ordinance(s) are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas, subject to the city's ongoing authority to adopt reasonable regulations to manage its public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2917, 5-21-2007)  
Secs. 34-407—34-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - NATURAL GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 34-501. - Purpose. 
The exploration, development and production of gas in the city are activities which necessitate reasonable regulation to ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to enjoy their property in a manner where the health, safety and welfare of the public is protected. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of these provisions to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and regulations for operations related to the exploring, drilling, developing, producing, transporting and storing of gas and other substances produced in association with gas production within the city to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public, minimize the potential impact to property and mineral rights owners, protect the quality of the environment and encourage the orderly production of available mineral and gas resources. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-502. - Definitions. 
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of gas wells not specifically defined in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them by the Texas Railroad Commission ("TRC") or the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality ("TCEQ"). Any other technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of gas wells not specifically defined in this section, by the TRC or by the TCEQ shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent and reasonable gas industry operators. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Abandonment. Means "abandonment" as defined by the Texas Railroad Commission and includes the plugging of the well and the restoration of any well site as required by this article. 
All-Weather Hard Surface. Means a permanent surface that, as a minimum, is a base course constructed in accordance with the general design standards for residential roadways, such that it meets the requirements of the International Fire Code, be at least 24 feet wide, have an overhead clearance of 14 feet, drains appropriately, remains water resistant, is free of litter, debris, weeds, grass or other objectionable materials or objects and is visibly dust free. Crushed rock or gravel compacted to withstand vehicles of 80,000 pounds may be acceptable with city approval. 
Ambient Noise Level. Means the all encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources at the location, constituting the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location. 
Base Flood. Means the flood having a one percent chance or being equaled or exceeded in any given year that is determined based upon the City of Farmers Branch Master Drainage Study. 
Blowout Preventer. Means a mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other device or combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can be closed around the drill pipe, or other tubular goods which completely close the top of the casing and are designed for preventing blowouts. 
Building. Means any structure for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind. 
Cathodic Protection. Means an electrochemical corrosion control technique accomplished by applying a direct current to the structure that causes the structure potential to change from the corrosion potential to a protective potential in the immunity region. The required cathodic protection is supplied by sacrificial anode materials or by an impressed current system. 
City. Means the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
City Attorney. Means the city attorney of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
City Code. Means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
City Council. Means the governing or legislative authority of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
City Manager. Means the city manager of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
Closed Mud or Loop System. Means a series of tanks including filters separators and shakers on the discharge side of the drilling process that contains by-products of drilling such as cuttings and earthen materials to contain the byproducts and recycle useable materials for reuse in the drilling process. Steel bins are used to collect all drilling waste. All wells in city must use this drilling system. 
Commission. Means the Texas Railroad Commission. 
Completion of drilling, re-drilling and re-working. Means the date the well is capable of producing. 
Day. Means a calendar day. 
Daytime. Means the period from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
Derrick. Means any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure which is required or used in connection with drilling, working, re-drilling or re-working a well for the production of gas. 
Development Review Committee (DRC). Is an internal staff review committee that includes, but is not limited to, representatives of the departments of environmental services, public works, community services, fire, engineering, parks and recreation. 
Drill Site. Means the premises used during the drilling, working, re-drilling or re-working of a well or wells located there and subsequent life of a well or wells or any associated operation. 
Drilling. Means the digging or boring of a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing gas or other hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth. 
Drilling Equipment. Means the derrick, together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, every piece of apparatus, machinery or equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling. Includes all peripheral equipment related to the exploration and distribution of natural gas, including natural gas compressor stations. 
Emergency Response Plan. Means a plan put in place to deal with emergency situations that may occur at the site during all stages of the drilling and production process. 
Exploration. Means geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for gas or other subsurface hydrocarbons. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency ("FEMA"). Means the federal agency which administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Fire Department. Means the fire department of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
Floodplain. Means the land within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year (100-hundred year flood level). 
Fracturing, Fracing or Frac. Means the process of fracture stimulating a rock feature through the injection of a fluid into a well causing a pressure increase that expands existing fractures in the rock formation. 
Gas. Means any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas. 
Gas Compressor. Means any machinery or equipment needed to adjust the pressure of gas being extracted from the earth or transported through a pipeline. All gas compressor stations shall be completely enclosed and substantially soundproofed. 
Gas Well. Means any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of natural gas. 
Nighttime. Means the period between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
Operation Site. Means the area used for development and production and all operational activities associated with gas after drilling activities are complete. 
Operator. Means, for each gas well, the person listed on the Texas Railroad Commission's Form W-1 of Form P-4 for a gas well that is, or will be actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well, including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as herein defined, is not the lessee under a gas lease of any premises affected by the provisions of this article, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is no gas lease relating to any premises affected by this article, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator. 
Permit. Means any written license granted by the city for the exploration, development and production of gas wells issued pursuant to the rules and regulations of this article. 
Person. Means both the singular and the plural and means a natural person, a corporation, association, guardian, partnership, receiver, trustee, administrator, executor, and fiduciary or representative of any kind. 
Planning and Zoning Commission. Means the planning and zoning commission of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
Planning Division. Means the planning division of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
Production. Means the period between completion of drilling and the abandonment of the well. 
Property Owner. Means the owner of the surface property. 
Protected Use. Means a residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, school or public park. 
Public Building. Means any building which is owned, leased, primarily used and/or primarily occupied by a school district or municipal, county, state or federal government, or any subdivision or agency of the school district or municipal, county, state or federal government. 
Public Park. Means any park, playground, recreation center, or other similar recreation or park facility owned by a school district or municipal, county, state or federal government. 
Public Works. Means the department of public works for the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
Re-Drill. Means the re-completion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than 150 feet from the existing well bore. 
Religious Institution. Means any church, mosque, synagogue or temple as defined in the City of Farmers Branch, Texas, Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. 
Residence. Means any building, or portion thereof, which is designed for use for residential purposes. 
Re-Working. Means re-completion or re-entry of an existing well within the existing bore hole or by deepening or sidetrack operations which do not extend more than 150 feet from the existing well bore, or replacement of well liners or casings. 
Right-of-Way. Means any area of land within the city that is acquired by, dedicated to, or claimed by the city in fee simple, by prescriptive right or other interest and that is expressly or impliedly accepted or used in fact or by operation of law as public roadway, sidewalk, alley, utility, drainage, or public access easement or used for the provision of governmental services or functions. The term includes the area on, below, and above the surface of the public right-of-way. The term applies regardless of whether the public right-of-way is paved or unpaved. 
Right-of-Way Maintenance and Repair Agreement. Means a written agreement obligating the operator to repair damage, excluding ordinary wear and tear, if any, including but not limited to public streets, sidewalks, pathways, trails and bridges, caused by the operator or its employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors, or representatives in the performance of drilling or production of gas wells authorized by the city. 
School. Means a public, private or denominational school as defined in the City of Farmers Branch, Texas, Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. 
Street. Means any public thoroughfare dedicated to the public and not designated as an alley. 
Tank. Means a container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of gas or other hydrocarbons for holding of storing fluids. 
Technical Advisor. Means such person(s) familiar with the gas industry or the law as it relates to gas matters who may be retained from time to time by the city. 
Thoroughfare Plan. Means the plan adopted by the city council that provides the general location and designation for the street system in Farmers Branch. 
Well. Means any single hole or bore to any horizon, formation, or strata, for the purpose of producing gas, liquid hydrocarbon, brine water or sulphur water, of for use as an injection well for secondary recover, disposal or production of gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-503. - City oversight. 
(A)  Authority. The city manager, or his designee, shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by these provisions to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the city or state. Failure of any person to permit access to the city manager, or his designee, shall constitute a violation of this article. Additionally, the city manager, or his designee, and other city officials shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry the intent and purpose of this article and its provisions. The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to request and receive copies of any records, including any records sent to the Texas Railroad Commission, copies of logs, reports and the like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well necessary to establish and determine compliance with the applicable permit. Failure to provide copies of any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(B)  Right of Entry. The city manager, Texas Railroad Commission, TCEQ, EPA, or their designated representative(s), shall have the right to enter the premises of any property to determine whether the owner or operator is complying with all requirements of local, state, and federal regulation. The owner or operator shall provide timely access, within 30 minutes of verbal request in cases of an emergency and within two hours in all other cases, provided that the city manager, Texas Railroad Commission, TCEQ, EPA, or their designated representative(s) comply with all safety requirements imposed on the operator and or its agents by any and all state and/or federal authorities, to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. The City of Farmers Branch shall indemnify and hold owner and operator harmless from any cause of action resulting from the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the city manager or their designated representative(s) and/or accidental damage caused due to the actions of the city manager or their designated representative(s). Failure to provide timely access shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-504. - Operator's agent. 
Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the State of Texas, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by U.S. mail. Every operator designating such agent shall within ten days notify the city in writing of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the city are discontinued. Failure to do so shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Secs. 34-505—34-509. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS 
 
Sec. 34-510. - Seismic surveys. 
(A)  A city permit shall be required for seismic surveys. The requirements for seismic surveys within the city limits of Farmers Branch are specified in Ordinance No. 2917 and outlined in more detail in section 34-400. 
(B)  Under no circumstances may explosive charges, including, but not limited to, the use of dynamite, be used in any way related to the preparation and/or operation of conducting a seismic survey. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-511. - Gas well permit requirements. 
Obtaining a gas well permit is a two-step process. The first step is the submittal and approval of a specific use permit (SUP) only within the designated zoning districts identified in the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. The second step is the submittal and approval of a gas well permit as outlined the following subsections: 
(A)  A person wanting to engage in and/or operate in gas production activities shall apply for and obtain a gas well permit under this article. It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as an agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any person to drill any well, assist in any way with the site preparation, re-working, fracturing or operation of any such well or to conduct an activity related to the production of gas without first obtaining a gas well permit issued by the city in accordance with this article. Such activities include, but are not limited to, drilling, working, re-drilling, re-working, initial site preparation, operation, construction of rigs or tank batteries, fracturing and pressurizing. 
(B)  The operator must apply for and obtain a gas well permit for the drilling, re-drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating or converting of each well. The operator may apply for a "blanket" permit for more than one well if multiple wells are located on the same tract of land, however a separate gas well permit fee for each well will be required with the submittal of the blanket permit request. Each new well established at the ground surface will be considered a new gas well location. 
An existing gas well permit shall not constitute authority for the re-entering and drilling of an abandoned well. An operator shall obtain a new well permit in accordance with the provisions of this article if the operator is re-entering and drilling an abandoned well. 
(C)  When a gas well permit has been issued to the operator for the drilling, re-entering, activating or converting of a well, such gas well permit shall constitute sufficient authority for drilling operation, production gathering or production maintenance, repair, re-working, testing, plugging and abandonment of the well and/or any other activity associated with mineral exploration at the site of such well. An amended gas well permit shall be obtained before such well may be modified for purposes of re-drilling, deepening or converting such well to a depth or use other than that set forth in the then current permit for such well. 
(D)  Any person who intends to re-work a permitted well using a drilling rig, or to fracture stimulate a permitted well after initial completion, shall give written notice to the city manager or his designee no less than ten days before the activities begin. The notice must identify where the activities will be conducted and must describe the activities in detail, including, but not limited to, whether explosive charges will be used, the duration of the activities and the time the activities will be conducted. The notice must also provide the address and 24-hour telephone number of the person conducting the activities. The person conducting the activities shall post a sign on the property giving the public notice ten days in advance of the fracturing activities. The sign shall comply with the requirements of the City of Farmers Branch. 
The gas well permits required by this article are in addition to and are not in lieu of any permit which may be required by any other provision of the City Code or by any other governmental agency. A building permit will be required for any and all structures located or constructed the site. 
(E)  No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within a public park or other city owned land without the prior consent of the city council by resolution. In some cases, a public referendum may be required before allowing drilling activity on public parkland. The city council shall review the insurance and security requirements on an individual basis prior to issuing the permit. 
(F)  Locations and Setbacks for Gas Well Permits. 
(1)  Gas well drilling and production, including the location of a gas compressor station shall only be considered upon the approval of a specific use permit on property where such uses are permitted by the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. 
It shall be unlawful to drill, re-drill, deepen, re-enter, activate or convert any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located: 
a.  Within 600 feet from any existing playgrounds, athletic fields, swimming pools, water slides and playgrounds, concession stands, pavilions or picnic areas within a public park, or any other park facilities or similar improvements as determined by the city manager or his designee. 
b.  Within 600 feet from any existing residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or school or for which a building permit has been issued prior to the date of the application for a gas well permit is filed with the city. 
c.  Within 300 feet from any existing retail or commercial building (including parking structures) or for which a building permit has been issued prior to the date of the application for a gas well permit is filed with the city. 
d.  Within 200 feet from any existing commercial or industrial building not intended for human occupancy (such as a pumphouse or switching station) or for which a building permit has been issued prior to the date of the application for a gas well permit is filed with the city. 
e.  Within 300 feet of any existing active water well. 
f.  Within 100 feet of any property line or right-of-way. Replatting may be necessary to meet this requirement. 
g.  Within 200 feet from any river, creek, stream or existing body of water. 
h.  The measurement of all distances shall be calculated from the proposed well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest point of the object listed in subsections a. through d. above. The above calculations shall be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor. 
(2)  Tank batteries, separators, and gas lift compressors shall be located at least 300 feet from any playground, athletic field, picnic area within a public park, or from any residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or school, or any other building used, or designed for and intended to be used, for human occupancy, for which a building permit has been issued on the date of the application for a gas well permit is filed. The distance shall be calculated from the closest tank batteries, separators or compressors, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest part of the playground, athletic field, picnic area, residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or school, or any other building used or designed and intended to be used to human occupancy. 
(3)  Gas compressors, other than gas lift compressors, shall be fully enclosed. All gas compressors, including gas lift compressors, shall be designed and/or installed with sufficient soundproofing such that the gas compressor shall at no time produce a sound level greater than five dB(a) when measured at a distance of 300 feet from the compressor. Enclosed gas compressors shall be located not less than: 
a.  Six hundred feet from playground, athletic field, picnic area within a park, or from a residence, religious institution, public building, hospital or school; 
b.  Two hundred feet from any nonresidential structure intended for human occupancy; 
c.  One hundred feet from any nonresidential structure not intended for human occupancy (such as a pump house or switching station). 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, wells or compressor stations may be located no closer than 300 feet from all existing residences that are owned by persons who, in writing (notarized), consent to the request to drill the well if approved by a majority vote of the city council. Said written consent is required from all property owners within 600 feet of a proposed well bore prior to an application, and shall be included in the application for specific use permit as submitted to the planning division. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, wells or compressor stations may be located no closer than 200 feet from all existing retail or commercial structures that are owned by persons who, in writing (notarized), consent to the request to drill the well if approved by a majority vote of the city council. Said written consent is required from all property owners within 300 feet of a proposed well bore prior to an application, and shall be included in the application for specific use permit as submitted to the planning division. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, new residences may be built no closer than 600 feet from an existing well or fully enclosed compressor station. 
(7)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, new nonresidential buildings intended for human occupancy may be built no closer than 200 feet from an existing well or existing fully enclosed compressor station. 
(8)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, new nonresidential buildings not intended for human occupancy may be built no closer than 100 feet from an existing well or existing fully enclosed compressor station. 
(G)  A gas well permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended, if drilling is not commenced within 180 days from the date of the issuance of the permit. A well permit may be extended by the city manager or his designee for an additional 90 days upon written request by the operator and proof that the regulatory standards of the requested permit for such location have not changed. 
(H)  Gas well operation sites proposed in or partially within the 100-year floodplain must conform to the city floodplain regulations. 
(I)  All construction associated with the city's infrastructure, including streets, signage, signals, drainage systems, water systems, sanitary sewer system, lights, landscape and irrigation and sidewalks, must conform to the Public Works Construction Standards published by the North Central Texas Council of Government (NCTCOG) Standard unless superceded by specifications designated in approved permit and associated plans approved by the city. 
(J)  By acceptance of any permit issued pursuant to this article, the operator expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this article. The terms of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated in any permit issued pursuant to this article with the same force and effect as if this article was set forth verbatim in such permit. 
(K)  All construction and development within gas well site shall comply with all city codes and ordinances, as well as all state and federal regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008; Ord. No. 3041, § 1, 9-1-2009)  
Sec. 34-512. - Gas well permit application and filing fees. 
(A)  Every application for a gas well permit issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing signed by the operator, or some person duly authorized to sign on his behalf, and filed with the community services department. 
(B)  Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule (see City Code of Ordinances, Appendix A Fee Schedule, Chapter 34) and the standard application fee for a specific use permit as listed on the planning division fee schedule. The application shall include the following minimum information: 
(1)  The date of the application. 
(2)  An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for the operation site, the parcel and the production unit and name of the geologic formation as used by the Texas Railroad Commission. Property recorded by plat shall reference subdivision, block and lot numbers. 
(3)  Map showing proposed transportation route and road(s) for equipment, chemicals or waste products used or produced by the gas operation. All vehicles shall be operated on state arterials whenever capable of being used. Such vehicles shall be operated only on City of Farmers Branch arterials, collectors and local commercial only when it is not possible to use a state arterial to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. 
(4)  All existing transportation routes within the site shall be constructed following the requirements outlined by the city engineering and fire department. 
(5)  Proposed well name and well depth. 
(6)  Surface owner(s), telephone number(s), fax number(s), physical address(es), and e-mail address(es) of the lease property. Mineral lessee name and address. 
(7)  Operator/applicant name, telephone number, fax number, physical address and e-mail address and if the operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners. 
(8)  Name, telephone number, fax number, physical address and e-mail address of the individual designated to receive notice. 
(9)  Name and address of representatives or operator's agent with supervisory authority over all gas operation site activities and a 24-hour telephone number. 
(10)  Location and description of all improvements and structures within 600 feet of the well. Such locations and descriptions shall be prepared by a registered professional surveyor. 
(11)  A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of all improvements and equipment, including the location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities including, but not limited to, tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators and storage tanks or storage sheds. All site plans must include the following criteria: 
a.  Site plans shall be submitted on a sheet size of 24" × 36". 
b.  Property boundaries with dimensions and setback lines. 
c.  Location of proposed buildings and structures indicating sizes in square feet. 
d.  The location and intensity of exterior lighting fixtures. 
e.  The location of mechanical equipment. 
f.  The location of outside storage areas. 
g.  Location and dimensions of points of ingress and egress to public streets. 
h.  Location of designated parking, loading, and maneuvering areas. 
i.  A separate landscape plan sheet showing the location, materials and dimensions of all screening improvements as required by section 34-521. 
j.  On-site waste disposal locations. 
k.  Location of all adjacent property lines, streets, easements on-site or immediately adjacent to the site. 
l.  Names of the owners of property immediately adjacent to the operation site. 
m.  City boundaries where applicable. 
n.  Date the drawing was prepared with name, address, and phone number of preparer. 
o.  Location, width and purpose of all existing easements. 
p.  North arrow, at a maximum scale of 1:50 immediately adjacent to the operation site. 
q.  All existing street names immediately adjacent to the operation site, with the proper hundred block designation shown. 
r.  Dimensions of all adjacent existing rights-of-way. 
s.  Title block identifying the gas well site location. 
t.  Vicinity location map at 1" = 2000'. 
u.  Zoning classifications or all properties shown on the site plan. 
v.  Location of the 100-year flood limits where applicable. 
w.  The X, Y, and Z (elevation) coordinates (NAD 83 Texas State Plane Coordinate System, North Central Texas FIPS 4202 (feet)) must be labeled for at least two of the perimeter corners. 
x.  A drainage plan prepared in conformance to city criteria. 
y.  Topographic information including contours of at least a two-foot interval or better. 
z.  Any information the city may deem appropriate to permit the request. 
(12)  Copies of all reports required by the Texas Railroad Commission, specifically including a copy of the approved Texas Railroad Commission Form W-1 and/or P-4. 
(13)  A signed right-of-way maintenance and repair agreement supplied by the city that provides that the operator shall repair, at his own expense, any damage caused by any activity associated with the preparation, drilling, production and operation of well. 
(14)  A description and location of all existing and future public utilities required during the drilling and site operations. An electricity usage plan showing the equipment to be powered, the amount of electricity needed, the sources of power (whether generator on-site or purchased from a retail electric provider), as well as the approximate location of lines, poles, generators, fuel tanks, and other apparatus necessary for electric power. 
(15)  A description of the water source to be used during the drilling. All water used on the site must be purchased from the City of Farmers Branch at a rate not to exceed the posted city commercial rate or a local water source approved by the city. All gas wells within the city shall use a "closed mud or loop" system. No water wells on-site shall be allowed to be drilled or existing well used for gas well site use without approval by the city. The gas well operator/owner must provide the city public works department notice of at least two business days for any large water request for drilling or fracing. All used fracing water must be contained in closed tanks and removed from the city to an appropriate disposal site meeting all state and federal requirements. 
(16)  A copy of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) as required by the Texas Railroad Commission, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and/or the city. A copy of the TCEQ Notice of Intent (NOI) shall be submitted to the community services department at least three days prior to the commencement of any onsite activity. 
(17)  A copy of the determination by the TCEQ of the depth of useable quality ground water. (A copy of the TCEQ Surface Casing Determination Letter will meet this requirement). 
(18)  Evidence of insurance and security requirements as described in section 34-517. 
(19)  A statement, under oath, signed by the operator or designated representative that the information submitted with the application is, to the best of his knowledge and belief of the operator or designated representative, true and correct. 
(20)  All required application and permit fees. 
(21)  A tree survey and preservation plan shall identify all trees that are six inches in caliper or larger on the site. 
(22)  A copy of a hazardous materials management plan and additionally, all material safety data sheets (MSDS) for all hazardous materials that will be located, stored, transported and/or temporarily used on the drilling site shall be provided to the city manager or his designee and the fire department. 
(23)  A copy of a spill prevention, control, and countermeasure plan; (SPCC) for the well site as required by 40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 112 that details the equipment, workforce, procedures, and steps to prevent, control, and provide adequate countermeasures to a discharge. 
(24)  A copy of the operator's emergency response plan. 
(25)  A copy of the specific use permit (SUP) allowing gas wells or a gas compressor station at this site. 
(C)  Building permit required. After obtaining both a specific use permit (SUP) and a gas well permit, the owner/operator of the site is eligible to begin development of the gas well site provided all appropriate building, plumbing, and electrical permits have been also approved. 
(1)  No building or structure regulated by the current code adopted by the city shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or structure has first been obtained from the building inspections department. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of any person, firm or corporation, upon submittal of an application for a building permit for work regulated by the current code adopted by the city, to register as a general contractor with the city. Work regulated includes, but is not limited to, construction of gates, fencing, plumbing, irrigation, electricity, roadways, entrances, compressors, flow lines, pipelines, gathering lines, tank batteries and buildings. Such registration shall be upon forms supplied by the building inspections department and shall become null and void on December 31 of each year. An appropriate fee for registration shall be assessed in accordance with the city fee schedule. 
(3)  A subdivision plat may be required. Any subdivision of land must adhere to the general rules and regulations governing platting and subdivision within the jurisdiction of the City of Farmers Branch. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-513. - Permitting process. 
(A)  Gas drilling operation, production, and gas compressor stations shall be authorized only upon the approval of a specific use permit and gas well permit. the specific use permit shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city council. Gas well permits shall be approved administratively by city staff provided, however that no such action may be taken until: 
(1)  Application for a specific use permit (SUP) shall be submitted and duly filed by the property owner or authorized agent upon the forms prescribed by the city, and the filing fee as prescribed from time to time by the city council shall be paid in full; and 
(2)  The SUP proposal or application has been referred to the planning and zoning commission for regular notice and public hearing, and its recommendation made to the city council; and 
(3)  Notice for the SUP has been given and a public hearing has been held in accordance with the standards outlined in the comprehensive zoning ordinance and in relation to such proposal before the city council, at which time parties in interest and citizens have had an opportunity to be heard. 
(B)  The approval of the SUP for gas drilling operation and production shall be in accordance with all other applicable rules, regulations and requirements of the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-514. - Amended gas well permits. 
(A)  An amended permit may be issued for, but not limited to, the following changes in drill and/or operational site activities: 
(1)  Re-drilling. 
(2)  Deepening beyond 150 feet of the permitted depth. 
(3)  Site access. 
(4)  Locations and/or quantities of equipment as determined by the city manager or his designee. 
(5)  Locations and/or number of drilling fluid or other types of pits. 
(6)  Locations and/or number of buildings and structures. 
(B)  Applications for amended permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the operator, and shall include the following: 
(1)  A gas well permit fee in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule (see Chapter 34 of the City Code of Ordinances—Appendix A Fee Schedule). 
(2)  A description of the amendments. 
(3)  Any changes to the information submitted with the application for existing permit (if such information has not previously been provided to the city). 
(4)  Such additional information as is reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance with the applicable permit. 
(5)  Such additional information as is reasonably necessary to prevent imminent destruction of property or injury to persons. 
(6)  An amended site plan. 
(C)  All applications for amended gas well permits shall be filed with the community services department in the manner prescribed in section 34-512. 
(D)  All applications for amended gas well permits shall be approved in the manner prescribed in section 34-513. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-515. - Suspension or revocation of gas well permits. 
(A)  If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors or representatives) fails to comply with any requirement of a permit (including any requirements incorporated by reference as part of the permit), the city shall give written notice to the operator specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the potential impact on the health, safety and welfare of the community. The City of Farmers Branch shall determine the reasonable period of time for correcting or curing the problem or failure. 
(B)  If the operator fails to correct the noncompliance within the specified time designated by the city, the city may suspend or revoke the permit pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(C)  No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of the permit issued under this article during any period of any permit suspension or revocation or pending a review of the decision or order of the city in suspending or revoking the permit. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the necessary, diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or revocation of the permit was ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the Texas Railroad Commission. 
(D)  If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the city, upon written notice to the operator, may notify the commission and request that the Texas Railroad Commission take any appropriate action. 
An operator, within ten days of the date of the decision of the city in writing to suspend or revoke a permit, may file an appeal to the board of adjustment under the provisions outlined in this article pursuant to section 34-531. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-516. - Periodic reports. 
(A)  The operator shall notify the city manager or his designee of any changes to the following information within ten days after the change occurs: 
(1)  The name, physical address, telephone number, and fax number, of the operator. 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person designated to receive notices from the city (which person must be a resident of Texas that can be served in person or by registered or certified mail). 
(3)  The operator's emergency action response plan (including "drive-to-maps" from public rights-of-way to each drill site). 
(B)  The operator shall notify in writing the city manager or his designee of any change to the name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the person(s) with supervisory authority over drilling or operations activities within one business day. 
(C)  The operator shall provide a copy of any "incident reports" or written complaints submitted to the Texas Railroad Commission and a copy to the city within 30 days after the operator has notice of the existence of such reports or complaints. 
(D)  Beginning on December 31 after each well is completed, and continuing on each December 31 thereafter until the operator notifies the city manager or his designee that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall submit a written report to the building inspector identifying any changes to the information that was included in the application for the applicable permit that have not been previously reported to the city. 
(E)  Each year an annual gas well inspection fee shall be paid by the owner/operator for monitoring and inspection visits by the city. This fee shall be in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule (see Chapter 34 of the City Code of Ordinances, Appendix A Fee Schedule). 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-517. - Bond, letter of credit, indemnity and insurance. 
General Requirements 
(A)  The operator shall be required to: 
(1)  Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the permit issued hereunder. 
(2)  Promptly clear drill and operation sites of all litter, trash, waste and other substances used, allowed or occurring in the operations, and after abandonment or completion grade, level and restore such property to the same surface conditions as nearly as possible as existed before operations as determined by the city manager or his designee. 
(3)  Promptly pay all fines, fees, penalties and other assessments imposed due to breach of any terms of the permit. 
(4)  Promptly restore to its former condition any public property damaged by the gas operation. 
Indemnification and Express 
Negligence Provisions 
(B)  Operators shall sign each permit and the city shall retain a signed original. Each such permit issued by the city shall include the following language: 
The operator hereby agrees to protect, indemnify and hold harmless the city, their officers, agents and employees (hereinafter individually and collectively referred to as "indemnitees"), from and against suits, actions, claims, losses, liability or damage of any character, and from and against costs and expenses, including, in part, attorney fees incidental to the defense of such suits, actions, claims, losses damages or liability on account of injury, disease, sickness, including death, to any person or damage to property including, in part, the loss of use resulting therefrom, arising from any negligent act, error or omission of the operator, its officers, employees, servants, agents, contactors or subcontractors, or anyone else under the operator's direction and control, and arising out of, resulting from, or caused by the performance or failure of performance of any work or services called for by this permit, or from conditions created by the performance or non-performance of said work or services performed by the operator under the permit. In the event one or more of the indemnitees is determined by a court of law to be jointly or derivatively negligent or liable for such damage or injury, the operator shall be obligated to indemnify indemnitee(s) as provided herein on a proportionate basis in accordance with the final judgment, after all appeals are exhausted, determining such joint or derivative negligence or liability. 
(C)  Acceptance and approval of the final plans by the city shall not constitute nor be deemed a release of this responsibility and liability of the operator, its employees, contractors, subcontractors, associates, agents and consultants for the accuracy or competency of their designs, working drawings and specifications, or other documents and work; nor shall such approval be deemed to be an assumption of such responsibility by the city for any defect in the designs, working drawings and specifications, or other documents prepared by the operator, its employees, contractors, subcontractors, associates, agents and consultants. 
Bond, Irrevocable Letter of Credit 
(D)  Prior to the issuance of a gas well permit the operator shall provide the city manager or his designee with a security instrument in the form of a bond or irrevocable letter of credit as follows: 
(1)  Bond. A bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution authorized to do business in Texas, acceptable to the city. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the gas well permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of 150 days after the expiration of the permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored, whichever occurs last. The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the city, as obligee, and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and regulations of this article and the city. The original bond shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee with a copy of the same provided to the city secretary. 
(2)  Letter of Credit. A demand letter of credit shall be issued by a reliable bank authorized to do business in Texas and shall become effective on or before the date the permit is issued. The letter of credit shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six months after the expiration of the permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored, whichever occurs last. The city shall be authorized to draw upon such letter of credit to recover any fines, penalties or costs assessed under this article. Evidence of the execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted to the city by submitting an original signed letter of credit from the banking institution with a copy of the same provided to the city secretary. 
(F)  The principal amount of any security instrument shall be $50,000.00 for any single well or $50,000.00 blanket for more than one well, but subject to minimum of $15,000.00 for each well drilled and/or placed into production. After three wells have been drilled, each additional drilled well will require an incremental bond of $15,000.00 per well in addition to the original $50,000.00 blanket bond. The aggregate amount of an operator's bond and/or letter of credit for all wells operated by that operator shall not be required to exceed $150,000.00. Provided, however, if at any time after no less than a 15-day written notice to the operator and a public hearing, the city council shall deem any operator's bond or letter of credit to be insufficient, it may require the operator to increase the amount of the bond or letter of credit up to a maximum of $250,000.00 per well. 
(G)  Whenever the city manager or his designee finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement or condition imposed by this article, a written notice shall be given to the operator. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost and the period of time deemed by the city manager or his designee to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the operator shall within the time therein specified, either cause or require the work to be performed, or failing to do so, shall pay over to the city 125 percent of the estimated cost of doing work as set forth in the notice. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than 30 days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article. The city shall be authorized to draw against any irrevocable letter of credit or bond to recover such amount due to the operator. Upon receipt of such monies, the city shall proceed by such mode as deemed convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the Texas Railroad Commission, such additional money may be demanded from the operator as is necessary to properly plug and abandoned the well and restore the drill site in conformity with the regulations of this article. 
In the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or refuses to pay over to the city the estimated cost of the work to be done as set forth in the notice, or the issuer of the security instrument refuses to honor any draft by the city against the applicable irrevocable letter of credit or bond the city may proceed to obtain compliance and abate the default by way of civil action against the operator, or by criminal action against the operator, or by both such methods. 
(H)  When the well or wells covered by said irrevocable letter of credit or bond have been properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this article, and in conformity with all regulations of the Texas Railroad Commission and notice to that effect has been received by the city, of upon receipt of a satisfactory substitute, the irrevocable letter of credit or bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and cancelled. 
Insurance 
(I)  In addition to the bond or letter of credit required pursuant to this article, the operator shall carry a policy or policies of insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in Texas. In the event such insurance policy or policies are cancelled, the permit shall be suspended on such date of cancellation and the operator's right to operate under such permit shall immediately cease until the operator files additional insurance as provided herein. 
(J)  General requirements applicable to all policies: 
(1)  The city, it officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an "additional insured" to all policies except employer's liability coverage under the operator's workers compensation policy. 
(2)  All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for environmental pollution liability (seepage and pollution coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be on a claims-made basis. 
(3)  All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-: VIII or better rating by the most current version of the A.M. Best Key Rating Guide or with such other financially sound insurance carriers acceptable to the city. 
(4)  No deductibles will apply to city as additional insured. 
(5)  Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the City Secretary, City of Farmers Branch, 13000 Wm. Dodson Parkway, Farmers Branch, Texas 75381-9010, evidencing all the required coverage's, including endorsements, prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(6)  All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery in favor of the city. 
(7)  Any failure on part of the city to request required insurance documentation shall not constitute a waiver of the insurance requirement specified herein. 
(8)  Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum of 30 days notice of cancellation, non-renewal, and/or material change in policy terms or coverage. 
(9)  During the term of the permit, the operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the city any known loss occurrence which could give rise to a liability claim or lawsuit or which could result in a property loss. 
(10)  Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the city. 
(K)  Standard Commercial General Liability Policy. This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed operation, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket contractual liability, underground resources damage, broad form property damage, independent contractors protective liability and personal injury. This coverage shall be a minimum combined limit of $1,000,000,00 per occurrence location for bodily injury and property damage. 
(L)  Excess or Umbrella Liability. Ten million dollars coverage in excess of the operator's environmental pollution liability (EPL) policy. Coverage must include an endorsement for sudden or accidental pollution. If seepage and pollution coverage is written on a "claims made" basis, the operator must maintain continuous coverage and purchase extended period insurance when necessary. 
(M)  Environmental Pollution Liability Coverage. Operator shall purchase and maintain in force for the duration of the permit, insurance for environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury, property damage, including loss of use or damaged property or of property that has not been physically injured or destroyed; cleanup costs; and defense, including costs and expenses incurred in the investigation, defense or settlement of claims; all in connection with any loss arising from the insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least $1,000,000.00 per loss, with an annual aggregate of at least $1,000,000.00. 
Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants. 
The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that they retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit by the city. 
(N)  Control of Well. The policy should cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, re-drilling or restoration expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator and related expenses, including, but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and evacuation of residents. Five million dollars per occurrence/no aggregate, if available, otherwise an aggregate of $10,000,000.00. Five hundred thousand dollars sub-limit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the operator has care, custody and control. 
(O)  Workers Compensation and Employers Liability Insurance. Workers compensation benefits shall be Texas statutory limits. Employers' liability shall be a minimum of $500,000.00 per accident. Such coverage shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city and provide coverage in accordance with applicable state and federal laws. 
(P)  Automobile Liability Coverage. Combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. Coverage must include all owned, hired and not-owned automobiles. 
(Q)  Certificates of Insurance. The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the State of Texas, unless the coverage is written by a Surplus Lines insurer. The insurance set forth by the insurance company must be underwritten on forms that have been approved by the Texas State Board of Insurance or Insurance Services Office (ISO), or an equivalent policy form acceptable to the city, with the exception of environmental pollution liability and control of well coverage. Sets forth all endorsements and insurance coverage according to requirements and instructions contained herein. Shall specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination, or change in coverage provisions to the city. All policies shall be endorsed to read, "This policy will not be cancelled or non-renewed without 30 days' advance written notice to the owner and the city except when this policy is being cancelled for non-payment of premium, in which case ten days' advance written notice is required." Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this article shall be furnished with the certificates of insurance. 
(R)  Notice. The individual designated to receive notice shall be a resident of Texas upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator within ten days notify the city manager or his designee in writing of any change in such agent or mailing address unless operations in the city are discontinued and abandonment is completed. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Secs. 34-518—34-519. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TECHNICAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 34-520. - On-site technical regulations. 
(A)  Abandoned Wells - All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the Texas Railroad Commission; however, all well casings shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least ten feet below the surface unless the surface owner submits a written agreement otherwise. No structures shall be built over an abandoned well. A well marker, with well number displayed on it must be welded to the top of the well pipe cap. 
(B)  Blowout Prevention - In all cases, blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled, worked-over or in which tubing is being changed. Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during gas operations as required by and in conformance with the requirements of the Texas Railroad Commission and the recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute (API). The operator must equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventers, flow lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures involved as required by the Texas Railroad Commission. The ram-type blowout preventers, valves and manifolds shall be pressure tested as follows: 1) at the time of installation; 2) whenever any seal subject to test pressure is broken; 3) following related repairs and 4) at 30-day intervals thereafter. 
(C)  Chemical and Materials Storage - All chemicals and/or hazardous materials shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent, contain, and facilitate rapid remediation and cleanup of any accidental spill, leak, or discharge of a hazardous material. Operator shall have all material safety data sheets (MSDS) for all hazardous materials on-site. All applicable federal and state regulatory requirements for the proper labeling and storage of such containers shall be followed. Appropriate pollution prevention actions shall be required and include, but are not limited to, chemical and materials raised from the ground (e.g. wooden pallets), bulk storage, installation and maintenance of secondary containment systems, and protection from stormwater and weather elements. 
(D)  Compliance - Operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city requirements. 
(E)  Discharge - No person shall place, deposit, discharge, any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse including wastewater or brine from any gas operation or the contents of any container used in connection with any gas operation in, into, or upon any public rights-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drain, ditch, sewer, sanitary drain or any body of water or any private or public property in the city. 
(F)  Drill Stem Testing - All open hole formation or drill stem testing shall be done during daylight hours. Drill stem tests may be conducted only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate gas separator to storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. 
(G)  Drilling Fluids - Low toxicity glycols, synthetic hydrocarbons, polymers and esters shall be substituted for conventional oil-based drilling fluids. 
(H)  Drilling Notice - The operator shall provide 48-hour notice to the city manager or his designee before the start of drilling operations. 
(I)  Drip Pans and Other Containment Devices - Drip pans and other containment devices shall be placed or installed underneath all tanks, containers, pumps, lubricating oil systems, engines, fuel and chemical storage tanks, system valves, connections, and any other areas or structures that could potentially leak, discharge, or spill hazardous liquids, semi-liquids or solid waste materials. 
(J)  Dust, Vibration and Odors - All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, so far as practicable, dust, vibration or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of gas and other hydrocarbon substances. All equipment used shall be so constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances or effects will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or from anything incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity; nor shall the site or structures thereon be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements as identified by the city manager or his designee in industry standards of drilling and production in this area may be adopted as they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor. 
(K)  Electric Lines - All electric lines shall be located in a manner compatible to those already installed in the surrounding area or subdivision. 
(L)  Electric Motors - Only electric prime motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells. No electric power shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to the city's ordinances and the appropriate national codes. 
(M)  Emergency Response Plan - At the time of application of the specific use permit, the operator shall submit to the city manager or his designee, and the fire department, an emergency response plan establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or production of gas wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the Texas Railroad Commission, TCEQ, Texas Department of Transportation and/or the USEPA. Plan should also include designated fire or emergency lanes throughout the entire well site. The emergency response plan shall be kept current with any additions, modifications, and/or amendments concerning all construction related activities, natural gas operations and/or natural gas production. Updated plans shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee, and the fire department, within two weeks of any proposed modification of this plan. A copy of the emergency response plan shall be kept on-site. 
(N)  Equipment Painted - All production equipment on the site shall be painted and maintained at all times, including pump units, storage tanks, buildings and structures. 
(O)  Explosives - Under no circumstances shall explosives of any type be used during any phase of drilling, re-drilling, working, re-working, deepening, re-entering, activating, converting, fracturing or completing the gas well without the prior consent of the fire department. The operator shall provide a notice to the city manager or his designee and the fire department prior to such activities. Use of explosives within the city shall require an operational permit in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule (see City Code of Ordinances, Appendix A Fee Schedule, Chapter 38) issued by the fire department. The operational permit shall be limited to a single period of time, individual locations and use of jet perforation of wells or other technical applications such as pipe recovery. Explosives must be approved by the fire department prior to use. The notice shall identify the date that the explosive charges will be used, the date and means of transporting the explosive charges and the transportation route to and from the drill and/or operation site that will be used for the delivery of the explosive charges. 
(P)  Fire Notice - In the event of a fire or discovery of a fire, smoke or unauthorized release of flammable or hazardous materials on any property, the operator shall immediately report such condition to the fire department in accordance with the city fire code. The reporting limits for hazardous materials release shall conform to the requirements of the Texas Railroad Commission and not exceed any state or federal permitting limit. A copy of the hazardous materials release records required by the TCEQ shall be forwarded to the fire department on an annual basis. 
(Q)  Fire Prevention; Sources of Ignition - Fire fighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire department and required by any applicable federal, state or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the operator's cost, and shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure. All well heads shall contain an emergency shut off valve to the well distribution line. Lightning protection equipment shall be installed as required at every site in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association Standard 780. Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with remote foam line and lightning arrestor system. 
(R)  Fracturing or Fracing Operations - All formation fracture stimulation operations shall be conducted during daylight hours unless the operator has notified and obtained permission from the city manager or his designee for operations during nighttime hours. 
The following requirements shall apply to all fracture stimulation operations performed on a well: 
(1)  At least ten days before operations are commenced, the operator shall notify the city manager and also post a sign, which complies with subsection (KK) of this section, at the entrance of the well site advising the public of the date the operations will commence and an anticipated completion date. Signs notifying the public shall also be placed on-site at least ten days before beginning fracing operations. 
(2)  A watchperson shall be required at all times during such operations. 
(3)  At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to the atmosphere without first directing the flow through separation equipment or into a portable tank. 
(4)  All used fracing water shall be contained in enclosed tanks and shall be removed from the city to an appropriate disposal site following all state and federal regulations. 
(S)  Fresh Water Wells - It shall be unlawful to drill any gas well located within 300 feet to any existing active fresh or salt water well. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest well bore to the fresh water well bore. 
(1)  The operator of a gas well shall provide the city manager or his designee with a "pre-drilling" and "post-drilling" water analysis and flow rate from any existing fresh water well on-site. The operator of a gas well shall also provide the city manager or his designee with a "pre-drilling" and a "post-drilling" water analysis from the fresh water well if the well is transferred to private or public use. 
(2)  A copy of the Texas Water Development Board permit shall be provided to the city manager or his designee along with the geographic coordinates of every water well within 700 feet of the well bore. 
(3)  A copy of all plugging and abandonment reports filed with the state and/or transfer of ownership notice shall be provided to the city manager or his designee and the department of public works. 
(T)  Gas Emission or Burning Restricted - No person shall allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the atmosphere or to be burned by open flame except as provided by law or as permitted by the Texas Railroad Commission. If the venting of gases into the atmosphere or the burning of gases by open flame as provided by law or as permitted by the Texas Railroad Commission, then such vent or open flame shall not be located closer than the setbacks established in the site plan of the approved specific use permit from any building not used in operations on the drilling site and such vent of open flame shall be screened in such a way as to minimize detrimental effects to adjacent property owners. 
(U)  Gas Lift Compressor - Any onsite compressor used to "lift gas" shall be designed to comply with the noise requirements of this article. 
(V)  Gas Compressor Station- Any compressor system needed onsite shall comply with the setback and noise requirements established in this article. 
(W)  Gas Processing Onsite - Except for a conventional gas separator or line heater, no refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the premises without appropriate city permits and a certificate of occupancy. 
(X)  Grass, Weeds and Trash - All drill and operation sites shall be kept clear of high grass weeds, and combustible trash. 
(Y)  Hazardous Plan - Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and all Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for all hazardous materials that will be located, stored, transported and/or temporarily used on the operations site shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee, and the fire department. 
(Z)  Installation of Pipelines On, Under or Across Public Property - The operator shall apply to the city for a right-of-way use agreement on, over, under, along or across the city streets, sidewalks, alleys an other city property for the purpose of constructing, laying, maintaining, operating, repairing, replacing and removing pipelines. The operator shall: 
(1)  Not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer or gas lines or the facilities of public utilities located on, under or across the course of such rights-of-way. 
(2)  Furnish the department of community services a site plan showing the location of such pipelines. 
(3)  Construct such lines out of pipe in accordance with the city codes and general design standards. 
(4)  Grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly as practicable, as existed prior to the laying of the pipeline. 
(AA)  Lights - No person shall permit any lights located on any drill or operation site to be directed in such a manner so that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the operation site. To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be directed downward and shielded so as to both prevent direct illumination of and minimize glare on public roads and adjacent dwellings and buildings within 600 feet of the well location. 
(BB)  Muffling Exhaust - Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot. 
(CC)  Noise Restrictions for Gas Well Permits. 
(1)  During the drilling, re-drilling, working or re-working, no on-site activity shall produce a sound level greater than 78 dB(a) when measure at a distance of 300 feet from the drilling equipment in question. 
(2)  During fracturing, no on-site activity shall produce a sound level greater than 85 dB(a) when measured at a distance of 300 feet from the drilling equipment in question. 
(3)  During production, including gas compressor locations, no on-site activity shall produce a sound level greater than 50 dB(a) when measured at a distance of 100 feet from an on-site equipment in question. 
(4)  Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter conforming, as a minimum, to the requirements of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(5)  If sound levels exceed the dB(a) levels references in the subsection, the city manager or his designee may require additional sound reducing techniques and devices including, but limited to, sound reducing mufflers. 
(DD)  Organic Solvents - Organic solvents, such as trichloroethylene and carbon tetrachloride, shall not be used for cleaning any element, structure or component of the drilling rig, platform, and/or associated equipment, tools or pipes. To the maximum extent practicable, high flash point Varsol shall be used. 
(EE)  Pipe Dope - Lead-free, biodegradable pipe dope shall be substituted for API specified pipe dope. 
(FF)  Pipelines - All pipelines transporting gas throughout the city shall meet or exceed API standards, Texas Railroad Commission Standards, and city requirements. 
(GG)  Pits or ponds- All reserve pits, completion/workover pits, drilling fluid disposal pits, fresh makeup water pits, gas plant evaporation/retention pits, mud circulation pits or water condensation pits shall be lined with plastic or stored above ground in tanks. The water surface elevation of the pit may not exceed 12 inches above the existing ground elevation prior to any on-site construction of the pit. Two feet of freeboard is required between the surface elevation and on top of berm. Such pits and contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within 40 days after completion of the well, unless otherwise authorized by the city manager or his designee. No washout pits shall be located with the city, unless all fluid, sludge, solid waste materials, drilling fluids, waste oil, spent completion fluids, all other liquids, semi-liquids, mud, including hazardous inseparable by simple mechanical removal processes, and is made up primarily of natural material is immediately captured within a fully enclosed, above ground containment tank. 
(HH)  Private Roads and Drill Sites - Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site and the operation site itself shall be at least 24 feet wide, have an overhead clearance of 14 feet, and shall be an all-weather hard surface (including crushed rock or gravel compacted to withstand vehicles of 80,000 pounds) and maintained to prevent dust, mud and rutting. In particular cases these requirements governing the surfacing of private roads may be altered at the discretion of the city (public works, engineering, fire departments) after consideration of all circumstances including, but not limited to, the following: distances from public streets and highways, distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operation, the purpose for which the property of such owners is or may be used, topographical features, nature of the soil and exposure to wind. 
(II)  Public Streets - No permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any of the streets or alleys of the city, and/or projected streets or alleys shown by the current thoroughfare plan of the city, and no street or alley shall be blocked, encumbered or closed due to any exploration, drilling or production operations unless prior consent is obtained from the department of public works. Any consent from the department of public works shall be temporary in nature and state the number of hours and/or days that any street or alley may be blocked, encumbered or closed. The site must not conflict with the city's thoroughfare plan. 
(JJ)  Salt Water Wells - No salt water disposal well shall be located within the city. 
(KK)  Signs - A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at the gate on the temporary and permanent site fencing erected pursuant to this section. Such sign shall be durable material, maintained in good condition and, unless otherwise required by the commission, shall have a surface area of not less than 16 square feet with contrasting lettering not less than four inches tall and shall be lettered with the following: 
(1)  Well name and number and site address. 
(2)  Name of operator. 
(3)  The emergency 911 number. 
(4)  Twenty-four-hour telephone numbers of the operator responsible for the well who may be contacted in case of emergency. 
(5)  Permanent weatherproof signs reading "DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED," in both English and Spanish shall be posted immediately upon completion of the well site fencing at the entrance of each well site and tank battery or in any other location approved or designated by the fire department of the city. Sign lettering shall be four inches in height and shall be red on a white background or white on a red background. Each sign shall include the emergency notification numbers of the fire department and the operator, well and lease designations required by the Texas Railroad Commission. 
a.  Storage of Equipment - On-site equipment storage is prohibited on the operation site. No equipment shall be stored on the drilling or production site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber, pipes, tubing and casing shall not be left on the operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations are being conducted on the site. No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street, right-of-way or in any driveway, alley or upon any operation site which constitutes a fire hazard or an obstruction to or interference with fighting or controlling fires except that equipment on the site. The fire department shall be the entity that determines whether equipment on the site shall constitute a fire hazard. No refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the premises. This shall include a conventional gas separator or dehydrator. 
b.  Storage Tanks - All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the API specifications unless other or additional specifications are approved by the fire department. All storage tanks shall be equipped with a secondary containment system including lining with an impervious material. The secondary containment system shall be a minimum of three feet in height and one and one-half (1.5) times the contents of the largest tank in accordance with the fire code, and buried at least one foot below the surface. Drip pots shall be provided at the pump out connection to contain the liquids from the storage tank. All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the Texas Railroad Commission and the National Fire Protection Association. Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control device that will automatically activate a valve to close the well in the event of excess liquid accumulation in the tank. All meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, or other aboveground facilities proposed in the floodplain shall be outside of the floodway and shall comply with the requirements for development in the stormwater and flood protection ordinance. 
c.  Surface Casing - Surface casing shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Texas Railroad Commission. 
(LL)  Tank Battery Facilities - Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam line and a lightning arrestor system. 
(MM)  Tank Specifications for Gas Well Permit - All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the API specifications unless other specifications are approved by the fire department. The top of the tanks shall be no higher than 12 feet above the terrain surrounding the tanks. 
(NN)  Valves - Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production. The fire department shall have access to the well site to enable it to close the shut-off valve in an emergency. 
(OO)  Vehicle Routes for Gas Well Permits - Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three tons shall be restricted to state arterials, and where local access is required, to those arterials, collectors and/or commercial routes designated on the city's thoroughfare plan. 
(PP)  Waste Disposal - Unless otherwise directed by the Texas Railroad Commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to the following: The operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons. Tanks must meet the API standards. All tanks must have a vent line, flame arrester and pressure relief valve. All tanks must be enclosed by a fence. Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting from or connected with the drilling, re-drilling, working, re-working or deepening of any well shall be discharged into an above-ground, self-contained tank. Without the express consent of the city, all disposals must be located outside the city limits of Farmers Branch and in accordance with rules of the Texas Railroad Commission and any other appropriate local, state or federal agency. Unless otherwise directed by the Texas Railroad Commission and approved by the city manager or his designee, waste materials shall be removed from the site and transported to an off-site disposal facility not less often than every 30 days. Water stored in on-site tanks shall be removed as necessary. All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water pollution control regulations of the state, this article and any other applicable ordinance of the city. Location of the waste disposal site for all waste material (including water) shall be submitted to the city prior to transport of the material offsite. 
(QQ)  Watchman - The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel on the site during the drilling or re-working of a well when other workmen are not on the premises. 
(RR)  Wellhead Status After Fracing - All wellheads waiting on completion, for a period greater than ten days, shall be: 
(1)  Completed through the production casing flange with a metal plate or blind flange bolted across the head; and 
(2)  Surrounded with an eight-foot tall chain link fence having a gate and lock; and 
(3)  The cellar shall be filled or closed; and 
(4)  The Bradenhead shall be piped to the surface and open to the atmosphere or have an observable and adequate pressure gauge with operable test valve. 
(SS)  Work Hours - Site development, other than drilling and fracturing, shall be conducted only between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on the well site shall be limited to between the above same work hour restrictions except in case of fires, blowouts, explosions, and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent the cessation of drilling and production. The operator may request an exception from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-521. - Screening. 
(A)  Throughout the entire exploration, drilling and production process there shall be screening improvements required during each phase of the process. 
(B)  Exploration to Commencement of Commercial Production (Drilling Phase) - An eight-foot (total height—including barb or razor wire) chain link fence (minimum 11 gauge). A secured entrance gate shall be required. All gates are to be kept locked when the operator or his employees are not within the enclosure. A Knox Padlock or Knox Box with a key shall be provided to access the well site to be used only in case of an emergency. 
(C)  All gas compressors shall be totally enclosed. Sufficient soundproofing shall be installed such that no gas compressor shall produce a sound level greater than five dB(a) when measured at a distance of 300 feet from the compressor city council may waive the masonry requirement for these sound proof compressor enclosures. 
(D)  Commencement of Commercial Production through Abandonment (Production Phase) - An eight-foot (total height) chain link fence (minimum 11 gauge) with all weather screening fabric or with slat inserts, and landscaping shall be required to enclose and visually screen the well and all associated equipment. The city may require an 8 foot (maximum height) masonry wall or other types of screening to be installed. Appropriate berming around the site is strongly encouraged. The landscaping shall be in compliance with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  One, three-inch caliper shade tree, ten to 12 feet in height at the time of planting, for each 50 feet of the operation site's perimeter; and 
(2)  Three ornamental trees, six to eight feet in height at the time of planting, for each 100 feet of the operation site's perimeter. 
(3)  Such trees are encouraged to be placed in natural groupings where possible, and in a layout to best screen visual corridors to the operation site. City staff shall approve the species and placement of trees before installation. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-522. - Cleanup and maintenance. 
(A)  Blowouts - In the event of the loss of control of any well, the operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify the city manager or his designee and the fire department as soon as is practicable. The city manager or his designee shall certify in writing, briefly describing the same, to the city manager. If the city manager, in his opinion, believes that danger to persons and property exists because of such loss of well control and that the operator is not taking or is unable to take all reasonable and necessary steps to regain control of such well, the city may then employ any well control expert or experts or other contactors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and material which the city deems necessary to regain control of such well. The city shall then have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners to secure payment of any expenditure made by the city pursuant to such action of the city manager or his designee in gaining control of said well. 
(B)  Cleanup After Spills, Leaks and Malfunctions - After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause to be removed to the satisfaction of the fire department and the city manager or his designee all waste materials from any public or private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. Cleanup operations must begin immediately. If the owner fails to begin site cleanup within 24 hours, the city shall have the right to contact the Texas Railroad Commission in order to facilitate the removal of all waste materials from the property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. 
(C)  Cleanup After Well Servicing - After the well has been completed or plugged and abandoned, the operator shall clean the drill site or operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property cause by such operations within 60 days. 
(D)  Free of Debris - The entire site shall be kept free of debris, pools of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash, or other waste material. 
(E)  Painting - All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping units, tanks, and buildings or structures. When requiring maintain of such facilities, the city manager or his designee shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray and unobtrusive shades of green, blue and brown, or other neutral colors approved by the urban development department. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-523. - Plugged and abandoned wells. 
(A)  Abandonment shall be approved by the city manager or his designee after restoration of the drill and/or operation site has been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements at the discretion of the engineering and fire department: 
(1)  The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from the site. 
(2)  All tanks, towers and other surface installations shall be removed from the site. 
(3)  All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials regardless of depth, except surface casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise directed by the Texas Railroad Commission. 
(4)  If any soil was contaminated, it shall be removed from the site in accordance with city, state and federal regulations. 
(5)  All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil. 
(6)  All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the site. 
(7)  During abandonment, operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this article. 
(B)  The operator can only abandon a well if the city manager or his designee has reviewed and approved the abandonment. 
(C)  Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned wells. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of the Texas Railroad Commission and the city, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the well site to its original condition as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this article. 
(D)  Abandoned well requirement. The operator shall furnish the following to the city manager or his designee: 
(1)  A copy of the approval of the Texas Railroad Commission confirming compliance with all abandonment proceedings under state law; and 
(2)  A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the dates so stated. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Secs. 34-524—34-529. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 34-530. - Technical advisor. 
The city may from time to time employ a technical advisor or advisors who are experienced and educated in the gas industry or the law as it pertains to gas matters. The function of such advisor(s) shall be to advise, counsel or represent the city on such matters relating to gas operations within the city as the city may want or require and the effect thereof, both present and future, on the health, welfare, comfort and safety of the citizens of the city. In the event such technical advisor(s) is (are) employed for the purpose of advising, counseling or representing the city relative to an operator's unique purpose or circumstances, case or request relative to this article, then the cost for such services of such technical advisor(s) shall be assessed against and paid for by such operator in addition to any fees or charges assessed pursuant to this article. Prior to the employment of a technical advisor, the city shall inform the operator of the intended scope of work and the estimated costs and expenses. The employment of a technical advisor shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-531. - Appeals. 
All appeals regarding specific use permits and gas well permits shall be decided by the City of Farmers Branch Zoning Board of Adjustment. All further appeals shall be to the appropriate circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 34-532. - Penalty clause. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following: 
(1)  Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of a gas well permit issued under this article; or 
(2)  Fail to comply with any condition set forth in a gas well permit issued under this article; or 
(3)  Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article. 
(B)  Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation per day, subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(C)  The penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law, including but not limited to, the recovery of civil penalties under Subchapter B, Chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code. The city may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violation of this article. The power of injunction may be exercised in enforcing this article whether or not there has been a criminal complaint filed. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2008)  
Secs. 34-533—34-599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - STORMWATER DISCHARGE FROM CONSTRUCTION SITES 
 
Sec. 34-600. - State permit rules adopted. 
The rules and regulations set forth in Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) General Permit No. TXR150000 relating to construction sites that discharge storm water associated with construction activity located in the State of Texas and adopted by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and effective March 5, 2008, are hereby adopted by the city and incorporated herein as if set forth in full, and shall govern and regulate storm water discharges associated with construction activity within the city. 
(Ord. No. 3034, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Sec. 34-601. - Definitions. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, words and phrases contained in this article shall be as set forth in TPDES General Permit No. TXR150000. In addition, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings as used in this article: 
TCEQ shall mean the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, including all of its departments and divisions, or its successor agency. 
TPDES General Permit No. TXR150000 shall mean that general permit to discharge wastes under the provisions of Section 402 of the Clean Water Act and V.T.C.A., Water Code chapter 26, TCEQ Docket No. 2007-1588-WQ, Issued February 15, 2008, and effective March 5, 2008. 
(Ord. No. 3034, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Sec. 34-602. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan required. 
No person shall commence construction activities on land located within the City that may result in disturbing an area equal to or greater than one acre or less than one acre as part of a larger common plan of development of land prior to preparing and obtaining approval of a storm water prevention plan in compliance with Part III of TPDES General Permit No. TXR150000 or obtaining a waiver of such requirement from TCEQ. 
(Ord. No. 3034, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Sec. 34-603. - Post-construction stormwater management requirements. 
(a)  New development and redevelopment projects that disturb greater than or equal to one acre of land, including projects less than one acre that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale, and discharge storm water into the city's Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4), shall implement structural and/or non-structural Best Management Practices ("BMP's") to minimize impacts to water quality. 
(b)  BMP's published in the latest edition of the North Central Texas Council of Government's Integrated Storm Water Management ("ISWM") Manual or by Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) guidance documents may be utilized to comply with this section. 
(c)  The owner of the construction site described in subsection (a) of this section shall submit a post-construction storm water management plan that incorporates the BMP's to minimize water quality impacts prior to issuance of any permits. 
(d)  All BMP's shall be submitted to the city manager or duly authorized representative designated by the city manager for review and approval of the BMP's on property located within the jurisdiction of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas prior to the utilization of the proposed BMP's. 
(Ord. No. 3034, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Sec. 34-604. - Operation and maintenance of post-construction best management practices. 
(a)  The owner of the construction site described in subsection 34-603(a) shall operate and maintain, and shall be solely responsible for the operation and maintenance, of the structural and/or non-structural BMP's on the owner's construction site as the BMP's were designed and approved. 
(b)  The city manager or such other city employee designated by the city manager shall have the authority to require the issuance of a performance bond, payable to the City of Farmers Branch, if it is deemed necessary to achieve compliance with this article. 
(c)  The city manager or such other city employee designated by the city manager shall have the authority to require the owner or operator of a construction site, development, or redevelopment, to provide proof that the owner has obtained financial assurances sufficient to operate and maintain the structural and/or non-structural BMP's previously approved by the city manager for the length of time that the structural and/or non-structural BMP's will be utilized at the construction site. 
(Ord. No. 3034, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Sec. 34-605. - Notification of violation. 
(a)  The city manager or such other city employee designated by the city manager shall have the authority to serve a written notice of violation upon any person who is found to have violated, or who continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder. 
(b)  Not later than seven days after the issuance of a notice of violation served pursuant to subsection 34-605(a), the person served with the notice of violation shall submit to the city authority issuing the notice of violation an explanation of the circumstances that resulted in the described violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrence of the described violation, which explanation shall include specific actions to be taken by the alleged violator. 
(c)  If the recipient of a notice of violation denies that any violation of this article has occurred or contends that no corrective action is necessary, such person shall submit to the city authority that issued the notice of violation a written explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention not later than seven days following issuance of the notice of violation. 
(d)  Submission of a written plan or explanation as provided in subsection 34-605(b) or (c) shall not be a defense to any alleged liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, prior to issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 3034, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Sec. 34-606. - Stop work order. 
(a)  The city manager and/or such other city employee designated by the city manager shall have the authority to issue a stop work order to the owner and/or operator of a construction site upon finding that the owner or operator has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, which order shall be posted at the construction site. 
(b)  Unless written exception is made by the city manager, a stop work order issued pursuant to subsection 34-606(a) shall prohibit any further construction activity and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city associated with a building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat approval, site development plan approval, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the construction site, new development, or redevelopment. 
(c)  The issuance of a stop work order pursuant to this section shall not preclude nor serve as a prerequisite for taking any other action against the recipient of the stop work order. 
(d)  A stop work order issued pursuant to this section may be rescinded only by the city manager and/or such other city employee designated by the city manager, provided that the owner or operator of the construction site to which the order applies has: 
(1)  Paid a re-inspection fee to the city in accordance with the current fee schedule in appendix A of this Code; 
(2)  Provided written documentation indicating that all violations set forth in the stop work order have been corrected; and 
(3)  Received from the city, following reinspection, written acknowledgement that all violations have in fact been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 3034, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Sec. 34-607. - Penalty clause. 
(a)  That any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00 for each offense; and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The city may institute any appropriate actions or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violation of this article. Nothing in this article shall preclude the city from seeking any and all injunctive or other relief allowed by state law even if a criminal complaint has been filed based on the same incident or event. 
(Ord. No. 3034, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Sec. 34-608. - Applicability of stricter regulations. 
In the event stricter rules or regulations are set forth elsewhere in this Code or are otherwise promulgated by the TCEQ or the United States Environmental Protection Agency regarding the same subject matter affected by this article, then the more stringent regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 3034, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Sec. 34-609. - Priority of conflicting regulations. 
In the event any other provision of this Code relating to storm water pollution or discharge from a construction site irreconcilably conflicts with the provisions of this article, the provisions of this article shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 3034, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
ARTICLE XII. - MUNICIPAL SETTING DESIGNATION (MSD) 
 
Sec. 34-610. - Findings. 
The city council of the City of Farmers Branch makes the following findings: 
(1)  Due to limited quantity and low quality, there are some areas within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction where groundwater is not valuable as a source for potable water; 
(2)  There may exist properties in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction are underlain with unused and unusable groundwater that have become contaminated by historical on-site or off-site sources; 
(3)  The city does not utilize groundwater as a source for public drinking water; 
(4)  Municipal setting designation ordinances enable a corrective process for groundwater that protects human health and the environment balanced with the economic welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(5)  Where public drinking water is available, the use of groundwater as a potable water source in designated areas should be prohibited to protect public health and welfare when the quality of the groundwater presents an actual or potential threat to human health; 
(6)  Municipal setting designation ordinances should be considered only after a process that allows for public notice and input; and 
(7)  The use of municipal setting designation ordinances within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction will encourage the economic development of properties that have contaminated groundwater. 
( Ord. No. 3372, § 3, 5-17-2016 )  
Sec. 34-611. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
Affected community means those persons entitled to notice as defined in section 34-612(b)(6). 
Applicant means the owner of the land seeking an MSD. 
Application means the application submitted to the city for a municipal setting designation ordinance. 
Authorized representative means, for purposes of signing an application, if the applicant is a corporation, the president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; if the applicant is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively; and if the applicant is a local government, the chief executive officer or the authorized designee. 
Chemical or contaminant of concern means any contaminant that has the potential to adversely affect ecological or human receptors due to its concentration, distribution, and mode of toxicity. 
Critical protective concentration level means the lowest protective concentration level for a contaminant of concern within a source medium determined from all applicable human exposure pathways. 
Designated groundwater means groundwater that will be or is prohibited from use as potable water, or for all uses, by a municipal setting designation ordinance. 
Designated property means the property that will be or is subject to a municipal setting designation ordinance. The designated property may cover several platted lots or tracts of land. 
Environmental health manager means the environmental health manager for the city or the authorized representative. 
Environmental risk assessment means the qualitative and quantitative evaluation performed in an effort to define the risk posed to human health and/or the environment by the presence or potential presence and/or use of pollutants. 
Groundwater means water below the surface of the earth. 
Ingestion protective concentration level means the protective concentration level for human ingestion of contaminants of concern established by the TCEQ under the Texas Risk Reduction Program, determined as if there was no municipal setting designation. 
Ingestion protective concentration level zone means the area where concentrations of contaminants of concern from sources on or migrating through the designated property are greater than the ingestion protection concentration level, determined as if there was no municipal setting designation. 
Municipal setting designation (MSD) means a designation as provided by Chapter 361, Subchapter W, of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, which authorizes the executive director of the TCEQ to certify municipal setting designations in order to limit the scope of, or eliminate the need for, investigations or response actions addressing contaminant impacts to groundwater which has been restricted from use by ordinance or restrictive covenant. 
Municipal setting designation ordinance means an ordinance adopted pursuant to this article. 
Non-ingestion protective concentration level means the protective concentration level for dermal contact or inhalation for contaminants of concern established by the TCEQ under the Texas Risk Reduction Program. 
Non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedance zone means the area where concentrations of contaminants of concern from sources on or migrating from or through the designated property are greater than non-ingestion protection concentration levels in groundwater. 
Potable water means water that is used for irrigating crops intended for human consumption, as well as water that is used for drinking, showering, bathing, or cooking purposes. 
Protective concentration level means the non-site specific concentration of concern that TCEQ has determined can remain within the source medium and not result in a level that exceed the applicable human health risk-based exposure limit or ecological protective concentration level at the point of exposure for an exposure pathway. 
Response action means the control, decontamination, or removal from the environment of a contaminant or hazardous substance pursuant to Subchapter W, "Municipal Setting Designation," of Chapter 361, "Solid Waste Disposal Act" of the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
TCEQ application means the application submitted to the TCEQ for certification of a municipal setting designation. 
To the extent known means information known by an applicant or applicant's agent after review of all public and private records and other information sources available in the exercise of due diligence. 
( Ord. No. 3372, § 3, 5-17-2016 )  
Sec. 34-612. - Use of groundwater in MSD areas prohibited; offenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or with criminal negligence uses groundwater in designated property as a potable water source. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or with criminal negligence uses groundwater in designated property for any purpose prohibited in the municipal setting designation ordinance. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person fails to provide the environmental health manager with a copy of the municipal setting designation certificate issued by TCEQ pursuant to section 361.807 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if the person with a copy of the certificate of completion or other documentation issued by TCEQ showing that any site investigations and response actions required pursuant to section 361.808 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, have been completed to the satisfaction of the TCEQ within the time period required. 
( Ord. No. 3372, § 3, 5-17-2016 )  
Sec. 34-613. - Application for approval of MSD. 
(a)  A person seeking a municipal setting designation ordinance shall apply in writing to the environmental health manager with the number and format of copies, as determined by the environmental health manager. 
(b)  An application shall contain: 
(1)  The applicant's name and address, and the name, address, daytime telephone number, and email address of both the applicant's contact person and the licensed professional who prepared the application; 
(2)  The location and legal description of the proposed outer boundaries of the MSD area for which designation is sought; 
(3)  A copy of the application submitted to the executive director of TCEQ for a MSD for the subject area; 
(4)  A statement as to whether a public drinking water supply system exists that satisfies the requirements of Texas Health and Safety Code Chapter 341 and that supplies or is capable of supplying drinking water to the area for which the MSD is sought, and property within one-half mile of the area for which the MSD is sought; 
(5)  A description of the groundwater sought to be restricted, including the identified chemicals of concern therein and the levels of contamination known to the applicant, and the identified vertical and horizontal extent of the contamination. If the applicant has not documented groundwater contamination offsite that originates from the area for which an MSD is sought, the application shall include a statement as to whether contamination more likely than not exceeds residential assessment levels offsite and the basis for that statement; 
(6)  Identification of the point(s) of origin of the contamination, and identification of the person(s) responsible for the contamination, to the extent known; 
(7)  A listing of: 
a.  All state-registered private water wells within five miles from the boundary of the area for which the designation is sought, including a notation of those wells that are used for potable water purposes (if known), a statement as to whether the applicant has provided the owners with notice as provided in Texas Health and Safety Code section 361.805; 
b.  Each retail public utility, as that term is defined in the Texas Water Code, that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five miles from the area for which the MSD is sought, and a statement as to whether the applicant has provided the retail public utilities with notice as provided in Texas Health and Safety Code section 361.805; 
c.  Each municipality, other than the city, with a boundary located not more than one-half mile from the area for which the MSD is sought; or that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five miles from the area for which the MSD is sought, and a statement as to whether the applicant has provided the retail public utilities with notice as provided in Texas Health and Safety Code section 361.805; and 
d.  All owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the subject property, as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. 
(8)  A site map, drawn to scale, including a metes and bounds description of the proposed designated property, the boundary of the proposed MSD area, the location of groundwater on the proposed MSD area, and the extent of groundwater contamination to the limits that it has been defined. The map shall include a statement by a professional land surveyor registered by the Texas Board of Professional Surveying attesting to the accuracy of the metes and bounds description; 
(9)  The location of all soil sampling points and groundwater monitoring wells; 
(10)  For each contaminant of concern found at the site, to the extent known, provide a table displaying the following information: 
a.  The level of contamination, the ingestion protective concentration level and non-ingestion protective concentration levels, all expressed as mg/L or mg/kg, depending on sampling medium; 
b.  The critical protective concentration level as defined without the municipal setting designation, highlighting any exceedances; 
c.  The critical protective concentration level as defined with the municipal setting designation, highlighting any exceedances; and 
d.  A digital file, in a format acceptable to the environmental health manager, which summarizes this information. 
(11)  A statement as to whether contamination on and off the designated property will exceed a residential assessment level as defined in the Texas Risk Reduction Program, if known, and the basis for that statement; 
(12)  A description of any environmental regulatory actions that have been taken within the last five years in conjunction with the designated property, to the extent known; 
(13)  A listing of all existing TCEQ and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency registrations, permits, and identification numbers that apply to the designated property; 
(14)  A summary of any environmental site assessment reports filed with the TCEQ regarding any site investigation or response actions that are planned, ongoing, or completed related to this designated property; 
(15)  A statement as to whether the designated property has been submitted to the Texas Voluntary Cleanup Program (section 361.601 of the Texas Health and Safety Code) or similar state or federal program, and a description of the designated property's status in the program; 
(16)  Any other information that the environmental health manager deems pertinent. 
(c)  The application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the applicant and shall contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in a manner designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(d)  An application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  An electronic file of the names and addresses of persons listed in subsection (b)(6) above, in a format acceptable to the environmental health manager and compatible with city information systems; 
(2)  A set of printed mailing labels with the names and addresses of persons listed in subsection (b)(7) above, and the necessary postage or cost thereof; 
(3)  A nonrefundable application fee of $2,000.00. 
(e)  An applicant may withdraw its application only in writing by letter sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the environmental health manager, and shall forfeit the application fee. If the environmental health manager has not issued public notice prior to the receipt of the withdrawal letter, the applicant may reapply at any time. If public notice has issued, a new application is subject to the limitations of article. 
( Ord. No. 3372, § 3, 5-17-2016 ; Ord. No. 3416, § 1, 1-10-2017 )  
Sec. 34-614. - Staff review. 
(a)  For purposes of the times stated in this article, an application is deemed to have been received on the date that the application was actually received by the environmental health manager, as indicated by the file date stamped on the application by the environmental health department. 
(b)  The application for a MSD shall be forwarded to the city departments whose property or operations may be affected by the application for review and comment. The purpose of the review is to determine whether the application is complete, and whether any current or future city property or other interests have the potential to be impacted by the proposed designation. City staff shall not conduct an environmental risk assessment of the application. 
(c)  If the environmental health manager determines that it is likely that a source of a contaminant of concern originated on the designated property, and that the ingestion or non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedance zone for that contaminant of concern extends to the public right-of-way adjacent to the designated property, the environmental health manager may recommend that the municipal setting designation ordinance include a condition that the public right-of-way adjacent to the property be included, at no additional cost to the city, in the TCEQ application for the MSD. 
(d)  If the environmental health manager determines that the application is incomplete or insufficient, the application will be returned to the applicant, noting the deficiencies in writing. The applicant shall have 30 days from the date of the deficiency letter to correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application. If the applicant fails to submit a corrected application within the allotted time, the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn and the application fee forfeited. 
(e)  If the environmental health manager determines that the application is complete, a public meeting and a public hearing will be scheduled. The public meeting must be held prior to the public hearing. 
(1)  A public meeting will be scheduled approximately 90 days following the day the application was received; and 
(2)  A public hearing of the city council will be scheduled approximately 30 days following the public meeting. 
( Ord. No. 3372, § 3, 5-17-2016 ; Ord. No. 3416, § 2, 1-10-2017 )  
Sec. 34-615. - Notice of public meeting. 
(a)  Notice of the public meeting for an MSD application must include the date, time and location of the public meeting, the identity of the applicant, the location and legal description of the designated property, the purpose of the MSD, the type of contamination identified in the groundwater of the area for which the MSD is sought, and a statement that a copy of the application is available for public viewing at the city secretary's office. Notice will be made as follows: 
(1)  The environmental health manager will publish notice of a public meeting for a proposed MSD in the official newspaper of the city, or in a newspaper of general circulation, not less than 15 days before the public meeting; 
(2)  The environmental health manager will provide written notice of a public meeting for a proposed MSD, not less than 15 days before the date of the public meeting by properly addressed and regular postage paid, in the United States mail. Notice will be mailed to: 
a.  The applicant; and 
b.  Those on the list provided by the applicant pursuant to section 34-613(b)(7). 
(b)  The applicant is required to post at least one sign upon the area for which a MSD has been requested. Posting shall be in the same manner as zoning amendments. The sign(s) must state that a MSD has been requested for the area and that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the number listed thereon or visiting the web site address listed thereon. The erection and/or the continued maintenance of any such sign shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public meeting or public hearing or to any official action concerning the MSD application. 
( Ord. No. 3372, § 3, 5-17-2016 ; Ord. No. 3416, § 3, 1-10-2017 )  
Sec. 34-616. - Public meeting. 
(a)  The purpose of a public meeting is for the applicant to present information to the affected community about the MSD process in general, the application specific to the property for which the MSD is being sought, and to obtain input from the affected community prior to a formal action by the city council. 
(b)  The applicant or its representative must appear at the public meeting. If the applicant fails to appear at the public meeting either in person or by representative, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and the application fee forfeited. 
(c)  The environmental health manager will conduct the meeting, giving the applicant or its representative the opportunity to present its reasons for requesting a MSD, and giving members of the affected community the opportunity to ask the applicant questions or make oral comments on the application. 
( Ord. No. 3372, § 3, 5-17-2016 )  
Sec. 34-617. - City council public hearing. 
(a)  Prior to the public hearing, the environmental health manager will provide the city council a copy of the application, and a written report summarizing the request for the MSD approval, any staff comments of concerns, and minutes of the public meeting. 
(b)  The applicant or its representative must appear at the public hearing and present the request for a MSD approval. If the applicant fails to appear at the public hearing, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and the application fee forfeited. 
(c)  Persons wishing to speak either in favor of or against the application will be provided the opportunity in accordance with city council guidelines for public hearings. 
(d)  Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may approve, conditionally approve, disapprove, or postpone action on the application to a future date. 
(e)  If approving an application, the city council shall: 
(1)  Approve a municipal setting designation ordinance prohibiting the use of designated groundwater from beneath the designated property and supporting the application to the TCEQ. The ordinance must include a metes and bounds description of the MSD area to which the ordinance applies; a listing of the contaminants; and a statement that the ordinance is necessary because the contaminant concentrations exceed TCEQ potable water standards. 
(2)  Include in the ordinance other reasonable restrictions on the use of designated groundwater and including, but not limited to, specification of underground construction materials to be used in the MSD area. 
(f)  City council approval of an application shall not be deemed to waive the city's right to comment on a MSD application that has been filed with the executive director of the TCEQ. 
( Ord. No. 3372, § 3, 5-17-2016 )  
Sec. 34-618. - Limitation on reapplication. 
If after public hearing the city council disapproves an application, or if the applicant has withdrawn its application after public notice has been issued, no new MSD applications for the proposed designated property shall be accepted by the city or scheduled for a public hearing by the city council within a period of 12 months of the date of disapproval or withdrawal. 
( Ord. No. 3372, § 3, 5-17-2016 )  
Sec. 34-619. - Additional provisions, enforcement, and penalties. 
(a)  Within 30 days after adoption, the environmental health manager shall send a certified copy of the municipal setting designation ordinance to the applicant and the TCEQ. 
(b)  The applicant shall provide the environmental health manager with a copy of the municipal setting designation certificate issued by the TCEQ pursuant to section 361.807 of the Texas Health and Safety Code (with a copy of the certificate of completion or other documentation issued for the MSD area, showing that response actions, if required, have been completed) within 30 days after issuance of the certificate. 
(c)  Within 30 days after receipt of the copy of the municipal setting designation certificate issued by the TCEQ pursuant to section 361.807 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and the necessary filing fee from the applicant, the director shall file a certified copy of the municipal setting designation ordinance in the deed records of the county where the designated property is located. 
( Ord. No. 3372, § 3, 5-17-2016 )  
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical standards, § 22-121 et seq.; alarm systems, § 30-71 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Arson reward. 
The city offers a reward of $250.00 for the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the corporate limits. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 12-1) 
State Law reference— Arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 28.01, 28.02.  
Sec. 38-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of the fire code shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalty in section 1-14. 
(Code 1969, § 12-3)  
Secs. 38-3—38-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 
 
Sec. 38-36. - Adoption of International Fire Code; purpose. 
There is hereby adopted by the City of Farmers Branch, Texas for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, quality of materials, erection, construction, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, conversion, addition to, moving, removal, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all building or structures, the 2018 International Fire Code, published by the International Code Council; with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended by this article, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein, the same as if entirely set out at length herein, and from the date of which this article shall take effect, the provisions hereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. This Code shall be known as the "Fire Code" or the "Farmers Branch Fire Code." 
(Code 1969, §§ 12-14, 12-15; Ord. No. 1166, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1167, §§ 1—20, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1441, §§ 1—31, 5-2-1983; Ord. No. 1563, § 1, 6-24-1985; Ord. No. 2013, §§ 1—25, 1-4-1993; Ord. No. 2269, § 1, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 2530, § 1, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 2652, § 2, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2841, § 2, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2968, § 2, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3266, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3414 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3607 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Sec. 38-37. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings wherever they appear in the Fire Code: 
Building official means the Building Official of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
Bureau of fire prevention means the Fire Department of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
Chief of the bureau of fire prevention or the word chief means the Fire Chief of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas or the chiefs authorized representative. 
City means the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
Corporate counsel means the city attorney and any assistance city attorney for the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
Fleet vehicle means a motor vehicle which is one of a group of motor vehicles, owned or operated as a unit and used in the ongoing course of business. 
Jurisdiction means the corporate limits of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
Police chief means the Chief of Police of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
(Code 1969, §§ 12-14, 12-15; Ord. No. 1166, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1167, §§ 1—20, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1441, §§ 1—31, 5-2-1983; Ord. No. 1563, § 1, 6-24-1985; Ord. No. 2013, §§ 1—25, 1-4-1993; Ord. No. 2269, § 2, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 2530, § 2, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 2652, § 2, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2841, § 3, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2968, § 3, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3266, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3414 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3607 , § 1, 11-12-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-38. - Local amendments adopted. 
For purposes of enforcement of the provisions of the Fire Code within the incorporated limits of the city, the following sections, paragraphs, and sentences of the 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code are hereby amended as follows: 
Section 102.1 is amended by amending numbered paragraph 3 to read as follows: 
3.  Existing structures, facilities and conditions when required in Chapter 11 or in specific sections of this code. 
Section 105.6 is amended to read as follows: 
105.6 Required operational permits. The fire code official is authorized to issue operational permits for the operations set forth in sections 105.6.1 through 105.6.50. Operational permit fees are referenced in Appendix A-Fee Schedule, City of Farmers Branch Code of Ordinances. 
Section 105.7 is amended to read as follows: 
105.7 Required construction permits. The fire code official is authorized to issue construction permits for work as set forth in sections 105.7.1 through 105.7.25. Construction permit fees are referenced in Appendix A-Fee Schedule, City of Farmers Branch Code of Ordinances. 
Section 105.7 is amended by adding Section 105.7.26 to read as follows: 
105.7.26 Electronic access control systems. Construction permits are required for the installation or modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in Chapter 10. A separate construction permit is required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm system that may be connected to the access control system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit. 
Section 109, including all of its subsections, is deleted. 
Section 110.3.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 110.3.1 Service. A notice of violation issued pursuant to this code shall be served upon the owner, the owner's authorized agent, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service, electronic mail, mail or by delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises ... {Remaining text unchanged} 
Section 202 is amended by adding definitions for the phrases "DEFENDING IN PLACE," "SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY, "STANDYBY PERSONNEL," and "UPGRADED OR REPLACED FIRE ALARM SYSTEM" to read as follows: 
DEFEND IN PLACE. A method of emergency response that engages building components and trained staff to provide occupant safety during an emergency. Emergency response involves remaining in place, relocating within the building, or both, without evacuating the building. 
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service basis. 
STANDBY PERSONNEL. Qualified fire service personnel, approved by the fire code official. When utilized, the number required shall be as directed by the fire code official. Charges for utilization shall be normally calculated by the jurisdiction. 
UPGRADED OR REPLACED FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A fire alarm system that is upgraded or replaced includes, but is not limited to the following: 
1.  Replacing a single board or fire alarm control unit component with a newer model. 
2.  Installing a new fire alarm control unit in addition to or in place of an existing one. 
3.  Conversion from a horn/strobe system to an emergency voice/alarm communication system. 
4.  Conversion from a conventional system to one that utilizes addressable or analog devices. 
The following are not considered an upgrade or replacement: 
1.  Firmware updates. 
2.  Software updates. 
3.  Replacing boards of the same model with chips utilizing the same or newer firmware. 
Section 202 is amended by amending the definitions of "AMBULATORY HEALTH CARE FACILITY," "ATRIUM," "FIRE WATCH," "FIREWORKS," "HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE," "HIGH RISE BUILDING," AND "REPAIR GARAGE" to read as follows: 
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to persons who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group shall include but not be limited to the following: 
- Dialysis center 
- Procedures involving sedation 
- Sedation dentistry 
- Surgery centers 
- Colonic centers 
- Psychiatric centers 
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories.... {remaining text unchanged} 
FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when required by the fire code official, for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department. 
FIREWORKS. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, detonation, and/or activated by ignition with a match or other heat producing device that meets the definition of 1.4G fireworks or 1.3G fireworks as set forth herein.... {remainder of text unchanged}. 
HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE. Storage of combustible materials in closely packed piles or combustible materials on pallets, in racks or on shelves where the top of storage is greater than 12 feet in height. Where required by the fire code official, high-piled combustible storage also includes certain high-hazard commodities, such as rubber tires, Group A plastics, flammable liquids, idle pallets and similar commodities, where the top of storage is greater than 6 feet in height. Any building classified as a group S Occupancy or Speculative Building exceeding 6,000 sq. ft. that has a clear height in excess of 14 feet, making it possible to be used for storage in excess of 12 feet, shall be considered to be high-piled storage. When a specific product cannot be identified, a fire protection system and life safety features shall be installed as for Class IV commodities, to the maximum pile height 
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs. 
Section 307.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke emissions, or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited. 
Exception: {No Change.} 
Section 307.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or open burning. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. 
Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Texas Commission on Environmental Quality guidelines and/or restrictions. 
2.  State, County or local temporary or permanent bans on open burning. 
3.  Local written policies as established by the fire code official. 
Section 307.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.3 Extinguishment authority. The fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible or the fire department of open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. 
Section 307.4 is amended to read as follows: 
307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 300 feet (91,440 mm) from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 300 feet (91,440 mm) of any structure. 
{Exceptions unchanged} 
Section 307.4.3 is amended by adding a new paragraph 2 under "Exceptions" to read as follows: 
2.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
Section 307.4 is amended by adding Section 307.4.4 and Section 307.4.5 to read as follows: 
307.4.4 Permanent outdoor fire pit. Permanently installed outdoor fire pits for recreational fire purposes shall not be installed within 10 feet of a structure or combustible material. 
Exception: Permanently installed outdoor fireplaces constructed in accordance with the International Building Code. 
307.4.5 Trench Burns. Trench burns shall be conducted in air curtain trenches and in accordance with Section 307.2. 
307.5 is amended to read as follows: 
307.5 Attendance. Open burning, trench burns, bonfires, recreational fires and use of portable outdoor fire places shall be constantly attended until the .... {Remainder of the section unchanged}. 
Section 308.1.4 is amended to read as follows: 
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Open-flame cooking devices, charcoal grills, and other similar devices used for cooking, shall not be located or used on combustible balconies, decks, or within 10 feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two-family dwelling, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity] with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 100 lbs. (5 containers). 
2.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity], with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 40 lbs. (2 containers). 
3.  LP-gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with a water capacity not greater than 2½ pounds [nominal 1 pound (0.454 kg) LP-gas capacity]. 
Section 308.1.6.2 is amended by amending Exception number 3 to read as follows: 
3.  Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with Section 308.1.3. 
Section 308.1.6.3 is amended to read as follows: 
308.1.6.3 Sky Lanterns. A person shall not release or cause to be released an unmanned free-floating devices containing an open flame or other heat source, such as but not limited to a sky lantern. 
Section 311.5 is amended to read as follows: 
311.5 Placards. The fire code official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandoned buildings or structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to Section 110 of this code relating to structural or interior hazards, as required by Section 311.5.1 through 311.5.5. 
Section 403.5 is amended to read as follows: 
403.5 Group E occupancies. An approved fire safety and evacuation plan in accordance with Section 404 shall be prepared and maintained for Group E occupancies and for buildings containing both a Group E occupancy and an atrium. A diagram depicting two evacuation routes shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each classroom. Group E occupancies shall also comply with sections 403.5.1 through 403.5.3. 
Section 404.2.2 by adding number 4.10 to read as follows: 
4.10 Fire extinguishing system controls. 
Section 405.4 is amended to read as follows: 
405.4 Time. The fire code official may require an evacuation drill at any time. Drills shall be held at unexpected times and under varying conditions to simulate the unusual conditions that occur in case of fire. 
Section 501.4 is amended to read as follows: 
501.4 Timing of installation. When fire apparatus access roads or a water supply for fire protection is required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be installed, tested, and approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure. 
Section 503.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
503.1.1 Buildings and facilities. Approved fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for every facility, building or portion of a building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements of this section and shall extend to within 150 feet (45,720 mm) of all portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of the building as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the building or facility. Except for one- or two-family dwellings, the path of measurement shall be along a minimum of a ten foot (10') wide unobstructed pathway around the external walls of the structure. 
Exception: {unchanged} 
Section 503.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet (7315 mm), exclusive of shoulders, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet (4267 mm). 
Section 503.2.2 is amended to read as follows: 
503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to require an increase in the minimum access widths and vertical clearances where they are inadequate for fire or rescue operations. 
Section 503.2.3 is amended to read as follows: 
503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of 80,000 lbs. for fire apparatus and shall be surfaced so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities. 
Section 503.2.7 is amended to read as follows: 
503.2.7 Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 6 percent in grade. 
Section 503.3 is amended to read as follows: 
503.3 Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings, when approved by the fire code official, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. 
(1)  Striping - Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at 15 feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. A 12-inch spacing is required between "FIRE LANE" and "NO PARKING". Where a curb is available, the stripping shall be on the vertical face of the curb. 
(2)  Signs - Signs shall read "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" and shall be 12" wide and 18" high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6' 6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart along both sides of the fire lane. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the fire code official. 
Section 503.4 is amended to read as follows: 
503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in Section 503.2.1 and any area marked as a fire lane as described in Section 503.3 shall be maintained at all times. 
Section 505.1 is amended to read as follows: 
505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals. Numbers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 2 inches (50 mm). Suite numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches (154 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1 inch (25mm) and numbers on rear-entry doors shall be a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm) high with a minimum stroke of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). Obsolete address numbers shall be removed as directed by the code official. 
Section 507.4 is amended to read as follows: 
507.4 Water Supply Test Date and Information. The water supply test used for hydraulic calculation of fire protection systems shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 291 "Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants" and within one year of sprinkler plan submittal. The fire code official shall be notified prior to the water supply test. Water supply tests shall be witnessed by the fire code official, as required. The exact location of the static/residual hydrant and the flow hydrant shall be indicated on the design drawings. All fire protection plan submittals shall be accompanied by a hard copy of the waterflow test report, or as approved by the fire code official. The report must indicate the dominant water tank level at the time of the test and the maximum and minimum operating levels of the tank, as well, or identify applicable water supply fluctuation. The licensed contractor must then design the fire protection system based on this fluctuation information, as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard. Reference Section 903.3.5 for additional design requirements. 
Sections 507.5.1 and 507.5.1.1 are amended to read as follows: 
507.5.1 Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 300 feet (91 m) from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official. 
507.5.1.1 Hydrant for sprinkler and standpipe systems. Buildings equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler or standpipe system shall have a fire hydrant within 100 feet (30 480 mm) of the fire department connection. 
Exception: The distance shall be permitted to exceed 100 feet (30 480 mm) where approved by the fire code official. 
Section 507.5.4 is amended to read as follows: 
507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. Posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately discernible. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants. 
Section 509.1 is amended by adding a new Section 509.1.2 to read as follows: 
509.1.2 Sign Requirements. Unless more stringent requirements apply, lettering for signs required by this section shall have a minimum height of two (2) inches (50.8 mm) when located inside a building and four (4) inches (101.6 mm) when located outside, or as approved by the fire code official. The letters shall be of a color that contrasts with the background. 
Sections 603.3.1, 603.3.2, and 603.3.2.1 are amended to read as follows: 
603.3.1 Fuel oil storage in outside, above-ground tanks. Where connected to a fuel-oil piping system, the maximum amount of fuel oil storage allowed outside above ground without additional protection shall be 660 gallons (2498 L). The storage of fuel oil above ground in quantities exceeding 660 gallons (2498 L) shall comply with NFPA 31 and Chapter 57. 
603.3.2 Fuel oil storage inside buildings. Fuel oil storage inside buildings shall comply with Sections 603.3.2.1 through 603.3.2.5 and Chapter 57. 
603.3.2.1 Quantity limits. One or more fuel oil storage tanks containing Class II or III combustible liquid shall be permitted in a building. The aggregate capacity of all tanks shall not exceed the following: 
1.  660 gallons (2498 L) in unsprinklered buildings, where stored in a tank complying with UL 80, UL 142 or UL 2085 for Class III liquids, and also listed as a double-wall/secondary containment tank for Class II liquids. 
2.  1,320 gallons (4996 L) in buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, where stored in a tank complying with UL 142 or UL 2085 as a double-wall/secondary containment tank. 
3.  3,000 gallons (11 356 L) where stored in protected above-ground tanks complying with UL 2085 and Section 5704.2.9.7 and the room is protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
Section 607.2 is amended to read as follows: 
[M]607.2 Where Required. A Type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking appliances and domestic cooking appliances used for commercial purposes that produce grease vapors, including but not limited to cooking equipment used in fixed, mobile, or temporary concessions, such as trucks, buses, trailers, pavilions, or any form of roofed enclosure, as required by the fire code official. 
Exceptions: 
1.  {No change to Exception 1.} 
2.  {No change to Exception 2.} 
3.  {No change to Exception 3.} 
4.  {No change to Exception 4.} 
5.  Tents, as provided for in Chapter 31. 
Section 807.5.2.2 is amended to read as follows: 
807.5.2.2 Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area. 
Section 807.5.2.3 is amended to read as follows: 
807.5.2.3 Artwork in Classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Section 807.5.5.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 807.5.5.2 Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area. 
Section 807.5.5.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 807.5.5.3 Artwork in Classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Section 901.6.1 is amended by adding Section 901.6.1.1 to read as follows: 
901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years: 
1.  The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be backflushed or inspected by approved camera when foreign material is present or when caps are missing, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems. 
2.  For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system. 
3.  Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised. 
4.  If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official. 
5.  Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as "Fifth Year" for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read "5 Year Standpipe Test" at a minimum. 
6.  The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed. 
7.  Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25. 
8.  Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions. 
9.  Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official. 
Section 901.6 is amended by adding Sections 901.6.4, 901.6.5, 901.6.6 to read as follows: 
901.6.4 False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given, signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner. 
901.6.5 Systems in high-rise buildings. The owner of a high-rise building shall be responsible for assuring that the fire and life-safety systems required by the Building Code are maintained in an operable condition at all times. Unless otherwise required by the chief, quarterly tests of such systems shall be conducted by approved persons. A written record shall be maintained and shall be made available to the inspection authority. 
901.6.6 Smoke-control systems. Mechanical smoke-control systems, such as those in high-rise buildings, buildings containing atria, covered mall buildings and mechanical ventilation systems utilized in smoke proof enclosures and for smoke-removal systems utilized in high-piled combustible storage occupancies, shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times. Unless otherwise required by the chief, quarterly tests of such systems shall be conducted by approved persons. A written record shall be maintained and shall be made available to the inspection authority. 
Section 901.7 is amended to read as follows: 
901.7 Systems Out of Service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in the event of an excessive number of activations, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shut down until the fire protection system has been returned to service.... {Remaining text unchanged} 
Section 903.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard or as approved by the fire code official. 
Section 903.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12. Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED." 
Section 903.2 is further amended by deleting the paragraph titled "Exception." 
Section 903.2.8 is amended by adding Section 903.2.8.5 to read as follows: 
903.2.8.5 Townhouses. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all Group R-3 Townhouse Occupancies. 
Section 903.2.9 is amended by adding Section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows: 
903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities. 
Section 903.2.11.3 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.11.3 Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings that have one or more stories, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1510 of the International Building Code, that is located 35 feet (10,668 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage and has a minimum of two complete sides unobstructed for fire department access by roadway or fire lane. 
2.  All Group R-3 Single Family Home (detached) Occupancies. 
Section 903.2.11 is amended by adding Sections 903.2.11.7, 903.2.11.8, and 903.2.11.9 to read as follows: 
903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4572 mm), see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply. 
903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
903.2.11.9 Buildings Over 6,000 sq. ft. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all buildings with a building area 6,000 sq. ft or greater and in all existing buildings that are enlarged to be 6,000 sq. ft. or greater. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings. 
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code. 
Section 903.1.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the building official and fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion and/or rate of rise heat detectors. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance rated construction or contains electrical equipment. 
1.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard as determined by the building official or fire code official. 
2.  Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the building official or fire code official. 
3.  Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
4.  Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. 
Section 903.3.1.2 is amended by adding Section 903.3.1.2.3 to read as follows: 
903.3.1.2.3 Attics, Open Breezeways, and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attached garages, open breezeways, and in the following attic spaces: 
1.  Attics that are used or intended for living purposes or storage shall be protected by an automatic sprinkler system. 
2.  Where fuel-fired equipment is installed in an unsprinklered attic, not fewer than one quick-response intermediate temperature sprinkler shall be installed above the equipment. 
3.  Attic spaces of buildings that are two or more stories in height above grade plane or above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
4.  Group R-4, Condition 2 occupancy attics not required by Item 1 or 3 to have sprinklers shall comply with one of the following: 
4.1.  Provide automatic sprinkler system protection. 
4.2.  Provide a heat detection system throughout the attic that is arranged to activate the building fire alarm system. 
4.3.  Construct the attic using noncombustible materials. 
4.4.  Construct the attic using fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section 2303.2 of the International Building Code. 
4.5.  Fill the attic with noncombustible insulation. 
Section 903.3.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law. 
Section 903.3.1 is amended by adding Section 903.3.1.4 to read as follows: 
903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section. 
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, pre-action, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces. 
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces where: 
1.  The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the building, and 
2.  Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard, and 
3.  The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level. 
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved by the fire code official. 
Section 903.3.5 is amended to read as follows: 
903.3.5 Water supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements of this section and the International Plumbing Code. For connections to public waterworks systems, the water supply test used for design of fire protection systems shall be adjusted to account for seasonal and daily pressure fluctuations based on information from the water supply authority and as approved by the fire code official. Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of the respective standards; however, every fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference Section 507.4 for additional design requirements. 
Section 903.4 is amended by adding the following paragraph after the Exceptions. 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Section 903.4.2 is amended to read as follows: 
903.4.2 Alarms. An approved audible device, located on the exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be connected to every automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. 
Section 903.4.3 is amended to read as follows: 
903.4.3 Floor control valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves and shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in all buildings. 
Section 905.2 is amended to read as follows: 
905.2 Installation standards. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14. Manual Dry Standpipes shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum 40-psig-air pressure with a high/low alarm. 
Section 905.3 is amended by adding Section 905.3.9 to read as follows: 
905.3.9 Buildings Exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 150 feet (45720 mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry, or manual dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14 when approved by Code Official. 
2.  R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors. 
Section 905.4 is amended to read as follows: 
905.4 Location of Class I standpipe hose connections 
Class I standpipe hose connections shall be provided in all of the following locations: 
1.  In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
2.  On each side of the wall adjacent to the exit opening of a horizontal exit. 
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to a horizontal exit are reachable from an interior exit stairway hose connection by a 30-foot (9144 mm) hose stream from a nozzle attached to 100 feet (30480 mm) of hose, a hose connection shall not be required at the horizontal exit. 
3.  In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building. 
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an exit stairway hose connection by a 30-foot (9144 mm) hose stream from a nozzle attached to 100 feet (30480 mm) of hose, a hose connection shall not be required at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of the building. 
4.  In covered mall buildings, adjacent to each exterior public entrance from an exit passageway or exit corridor to the mall. In open mall buildings, adjacent to each public entrance to the mall at the perimeter line and adjacent to each entrance from an exit passageway or exit corridor to the mall. 
5.  Where the roof has a slope less than four unit's vertical in 12 unit's horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the roof or at the highest landing of an exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1011.12. 
6.  Where the most remote portion of a nonsprinklered floor or story is more than 150 feet (45720 mm) from a hose connection or the most remote portion of a sprinklered floor or story is more than 200 feet (60960 mm) from a hose connection, the fire code official is authorized to require that additional hose connections be provided in approved locations. 
7.  When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
Section 905.9 is amended by adding the following paragraph after the Exceptions: 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Paragraph 1 of Section 906.1 is amended to read in its entirety as follows, including the deletion of the Exception: 
1.  In new and existing Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-2, R-4 and S occupancies 
Section 907.1 is amended by adding Section 907.1.4 to read as follows: 
907.1.4 Design Standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke detectors shall have analog initiating devices. 
Section 907.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. 
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall: 
1.  Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (1 llux) at the walking surface level, and 
2.  Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions. 
Section 907.2.2 is amended by deleting the paragraph titled "Exception". 
Section 907.2.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarms system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, where portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
Exceptions: 
1.  A manual fire alarm system is not required in Group E occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or less when provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
1.1.  Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use hard-wired or wireless interconnected single station detectors with battery backup in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2 ½ or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6). 
2.  Emergency voice/alarm communication systems meeting the requirements of section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with section 907.6 shall not be required in Group E occupancies with occupant loads of 100 or less, provided that activation of the manual fire alarm system initiates an approved occupant notification signal in accordance with Section 907.5. 
Section 907.2.4 is amended by deleting the paragraph titled "Exception." 
Section 907.2.7 is amended by deleting Exception 2. 
Section 907.2.8.1 is amended by deleting Exceptions 2, 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3. 
Section 907.2.9.1 is amended by deleting Exceptions 2 and 3. 
Exception 3 in Section 907.2.12 is amended to read as follows: 
3.  Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to skyboxes, restaurants and similarly enclosed areas. 
Section 907.2.12.1.1 is amended by amending numbered paragraph 1 and adding a new numbered paragraph 3 to read as follows: 
1.  In each mechanical equipment, electrical, transformer, telephone equipment or similar room, and Central Control Station. 
* * * 
3.  For Group R, Division 1 Occupancies, in all interior corridors serving as a means of egress for an occupant load of 10 or more. 
Section 907.4.2 is amended by adding Section 907.4.2.7 to read as follows: 
907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm actuating devices shall be an approved double action type. 
Section 907.6.1 is amended by adding Section 907.6.1.1 to read as follows: 
907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from an addressable input (monitor) module may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the addressable module to the initiating device is ten feet or less. 
Section 907.6.3 is amended by deleting all "Exceptions." 
Section 907.6.4.2 is amended to read as follows: 
907.6.4.2 High-rise buildings. In high-rise buildings, a separate zone by floor or an addressable fire alarm system shall be provided, based on the current fire alarm system installation for each of the following types of alarm-initiating devices where provided: 
1.  Smoke detectors. 
2.  Sprinkler waterflow devices. 
3.  Manual fire alarm boxes. 
4.  Other approved types of automatic fire detection devices or suppression systems. 
5.  In Group B office buildings, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire resistive construction within office spaces of a single tenant when the space is equipped with an automatic smoke-detection system within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate alarms audible in all areas served by the corridor. The smoke-detection system shall be connected to the building's fire alarm system where such a system is provided. 
Section 907.6.6 is amended by adding a sentence at the end of paragraph to read as follows: 
See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station. 
Section 907.6.6 is amended by adding Section 907.6.6.3 to read as follows: 
907.6.6.3 Communication requirements. All alarm systems, new or replacement, shall transmit alarm, supervisory and trouble signals descriptively to the approved central station, remote supervisory station or proprietary supervising station as defined in NFPA 72, with the correct device designation and location of addressable device identification. Alarms shall not be permitted to be transmitted as a general alarm or zone condition. 
Section 909.2 is amended by adding Section 909.2.1 to read as follows: 
909.2.1 Smoke-control System for High-Rises. A smoke control system meeting the requirements of Section 909 in the International Fire Code-2018 Edition and the International Building Code-2018 Edition shall be provided for high-rise buildings. 
Section 909 is amended by adding Section 909.22 and related subsections to read as follows: 
909.2.2 Stairway or Ramp Pressurization Alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization alternative is chosen for compliance with Building Code requirements for a smoke proof enclosure, interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with Section 909, including the installation of a separate fire-fighter's smoke control panel as per Section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required from the fire department as per Section 105.7. 
909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved location at the entrance to the smoke proof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, the mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3. 
909.22.1.1 Ventilation Systems. Smoke proof enclosure ventilation systems shall be independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following: 
1.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building and directly connected to the smoke proof enclosure or connected to the smoke proof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
2.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the smoke proof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or through ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
3.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable system. 
2.  Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete. 
3.  Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit protective systems with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
909.22.1.2 Standby Power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 2702 of the Building Code. 
909.22.1.3 Acceptance and Testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the system shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is operating in compliance with these requirements. 
Section 910.2 is amended by amending Exceptions 2 and 3 to read as follows: 
2.  Where areas of buildings are equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers, only manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas. Automatic smoke and heat vents are prohibited. 
3.  Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*s) 1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited. 
Section 910.2 is amended by adding Section 910.2.3 to read as follows: 
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as Section follows: 
1.  In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 5,000 square feet in single floor area. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
2.  In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
Section 910.3 is amended by adding Section 910.3.4 and related subsections to read as follows: 
910.3.4 Vent Operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3. 
910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically. The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered Buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above ambient. 
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents. 
910.3.4.3 Gravity-operated drop out vents. Automatic smoke and heat vents containing heat sensitive glazing designed to shrink and drop out of the vent opening when exposed to fire shall fully open within 5 minutes after the vent cavity is exposed to a simulated fire represented by a time-temperature gradient that reaches an air temperature of 500 degrees F (260 degrees C) within 5 minutes. 
Section 910.4.3.1 is amended to read as follows: 
910.4.3.1 Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust. 
Section 910.4.4 is amended to read as follows: 
910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated automatically by the automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual controls shall also be provided. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
Section 912.2 is amended by adding Section 912.2.3 to read as follows: 
912.2.3 Hydrant Distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path. 
Section 913.2.1 is amended by adding the following second paragraph and exception to read as follows: 
When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as required by Section 506.1. 
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by Section 506.1. 
Section 914.3.1 is amended to read as follows, including deletion of the Exception: 
914.3.1 Automatic sprinkler system. Buildings and structures shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and a secondary water supply where required by Section 914.3.2. 
Section 914.3.1.2 is amended to read as follows: 
914.3.1.2 Water Supply to required Fire Pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (128 m) in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate. 
Exception: {No change to exception.} 
Chapter 10 is amended by replacing all references to "fire code official" with "building official." 
Section 1006.2.2 is amended by adding Section 1006.2.2.7 to read as follows: 
1006.2.2.7 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 1009.8 is amended by adding Exception 7 to read as follows: 
7.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1009 and Chapter 11. 
Section 1010.1.9.5 is amended by amending Exceptions 3 and 4 to read as follows: 
3.  Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M, or S occupancy, manually operated edge-or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf. The inactive leaf shall contain no doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware. 
4.  Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy, manually operated edge- or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf provided such inactive leaf is not needed to meet egress width requirements and the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The inactive leaf shall contain no doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware. 
Section 1015.8 is amended by amending paragraph 1 to read as follows: 
1.  Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 55-ft (16 764 mm) above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F 2006. 
Section 1020.1 is amended by adding Exception 6 to read as follows: 
6.  In Group B office buildings, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate self-annunciating alarms audible in all areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm system where such system is provided. 
Section 1029.1.1.1 is deleted. 
Section 1031.2 is amended to read as follows: 
1031.2 Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits and exit discharges shall be continuously maintained free from obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or other emergency. An exit or exit passageway shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with a means of egress. 
Section 1103.3 is amended by adding the following sentence to end of paragraph: 
Provide emergency signage as required by Section 606.3. 
Section 1103.5 is amended by adding Section 1103.5.5 to read as follows: 
1103.5.5 Spray Booths and Rooms. Existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Section 2404. 
Section 1103.7.5.1 is amended by deleting Exceptions 2, 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3. 
Section 1103.7 is amended by adding Sections 1103.7.7 and 1103.7.7.1 to read as follows: 
1103.7.7 Fire Alarm System Design Standards. Where an existing fire alarm system is upgraded or replaced, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke and/or heat detectors shall have analog initiating devices. 
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building, or fire alarm system, remodel or expansion exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building, or fire alarm system, remodel or expansion initiated after the date of original fire alarm panel installation exceeds 50% of the building, or fire alarm system, the fire alarm system must comply within 18 months of permit application. 
1103.7.7.1 Communication requirements. Refer to Section 907.6.6 for applicable requirements. 
Section 1203.1.3 is amended to read as follow: 
1203.1.3 Emergency power systems and standby power systems shall be installed in accordance with the International Building Code, NFPA 70, NFPA 110 and NFPA 111. Existing installations shall be maintained in accordance with the original approval, except as specified in Chapter 11. 
Section 1203.1.10 is amended to read as follows: 
1203.1.10 Critical Operations Power Systems (COPS). For Critical Operations Power Systems necessary to maintain continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities that require continuous operation for the reasons of public safety, emergency management, national security, or business continuity, see NFPA 70. 
Section 1203.2 is amended to read as follows: 
1203.2 Where Required. Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required by Sections 1203.2.1 through 1203.2.26 or elsewhere identified in this code or any other referenced code. 
Section 1203.2.4 is amended to read as follows: 
1203.2.4 Emergency Voice/Alarm Communications Systems. Emergency power shall be provided for emergency voice/alarm communications systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 907.5.2.2.5. The system shall be capable of powering the required load for a duration of not less than 24 hours, as required in NFPA 72. 
Covered and Open Malls, Section 907.2.19 and 914.2.3. 
Group A Occupancies, Sections 907.2.1 and 907.5.2.2.4. 
Special Amusement Buildings, Section 907.2.11. 
High-rise Buildings, Section 907.2.12. 
Atriums, Section 907.2.13. 
Deep Underground Buildings, Section 907.2.18. 
Sections 1203.2.14 and 1203.2.15 are amended to read as follows: 
1203.2.14 Means of Egress Illumination. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Sections 1008.3 and 1104.5.1. (90 minutes) 
1203.2.15 Membrane Structures. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs in temporary tents and membrane structures in accordance with Section 3103.12.6. (90 minutes) Standby power shall be provided for auxiliary inflation systems in permanent membrane structures in accordance with Section 2702 of the International Building Code. (4 hours) Auxiliary inflation systems shall be provided in temporary air-supported and air-inflated membrane structures in accordance with Section 3103.10.4. 
Section 1203.2.17 is amended to read as follows: 
1203.2.17 Smoke Control Systems. Standby power shall be provided for smoke control systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 909.11: 
Covered Mall Building, International Building Code, Section 402.7. 
Atriums, International Building Code, Section 404.7. 
Underground Buildings, International Building Code, Section 405.8. 
Group I-3, International Building Code, Section 408.4.2. 
Stages, International Building Code, Section 410.2.5. 
Special Amusement Buildings (as applicable to Group A's), International Building Code, Section 411.1. 
Smoke Protected Seating, Section 1029.6.2. 
Sections 1203.2.19 through 1203.2.26 are amended to read as follows: 
1203.2.19 Covered and Open Mall Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.19 and 914.2.3. 
1203.2.20 Airport Traffic Control Towers. A standby power system shall be provided in airport traffic control towers more than 65 ft. in height. Power shall be provided to the following equipment: 
1.  Pressurization equipment, mechanical equipment and Lighting. 
2.  Elevator operating equipment. 
3.  Fire alarm and smoke detection systems. 
1203.2.21 Smokeproof Enclosures and Stair Pressurization Alternative. Standby power shall be provided for smokeproof enclosures, stair pressurization alternative and associated automatic fire detection systems as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.20.6.2. 
1203.2.22 Elevator Pressurization. Standby power shall be provided for elevator pressurization system as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.21.5. 
1203.2.23 Elimination of Smoke Dampers in Shaft Penetrations. Standby power shall be provided when eliminating the smoke dampers in ducts penetrating shafts in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 717.5.3, exception 2.3. 
1203.2.24 Common Exhaust Systems for Clothes Dryers. Standby power shall be provided for common exhaust systems for clothes dryers located in multistory structures in accordance with the International Mechanical Code, Section 504.10, Item 7. 
1203.2.25 Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms. Standby power shall be provided for mechanical ventilation and gas detection systems of Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 421. 
1203.2.26 Means of Egress Illumination in Existing Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Section 1104.5 when required by the fire code official. (90 minutes in I-2, 60 minutes elsewhere.) 
Section 1203.7 is amended to read as follows: 
1203.7 Energy Time Duration. Unless a time limit is specified by the fire code official, in this chapter or elsewhere in this code, or in any other referenced code or standard, the emergency and standby power system shall be supplied with enough fuel or energy storage capacity for not less than 2-hour full-demand operation of the system. 
Exception: Where the system is supplied with natural gas from a utility provider and is approved. 
Section 2304.1 is amended to read as follows: 
2304.1 Supervision of Dispensing. The dispensing of fuel at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Conducted by a qualified attendant; and/or, 
2.  Shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant; and/or 
3.  Shall be an unattended self-service facility in accordance with Section 2304.3. 
At any time the qualified attendant of item Number 1 or 2 above is not present, such operations shall be considered as an unattended self-service facility and shall also comply with Section 2304.3. 
Section 2401.2 is deleted. 
Section 3103.3.1 is deleted. 
Table 3206.2 is amended by amending Footnote h to read as follows: 
h.  Where storage areas are protected by either early suppression fast response (ESFR) sprinkler systems or control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50 (m • s) 1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in the stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers, installed in accordance with NFPA 13, manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas. 
Table 3206.2 is amended by adding footnote j to row titled 'High Hazard' and 'Greater than 300,000' to read as follows: 
j.  High hazard high-piled storage areas shall not exceed 500,000 square feet. A 2-hour fire wall constructed in accordance with Section 706 of the International Building Code shall be used to divide high-piled storage exceeding 500,000 square feet in area. 
Section 3310.1 is amended to read as follows: 
3310.1 Required access. Approved vehicle access for firefighting shall be provided to all construction or demolition sites. Vehicle access shall be provided to within 100 feet (30 480 mm) of temporary or permanent fire department connections. Vehicle access shall be provided by either temporary or permanent roads, capable of supporting an 80,000 lb. vehicle loading under all weather conditions. Vehicle access shall be maintained until permanent fire apparatus access roads are available. When fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure. 
Section 5601.1.3 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Only when approved for fireworks displays, storage and handling of fireworks as allowed in Section 5604 and 5608. 
2.  The use of fireworks for approved displays as allowed in Section 5608. 
Section 5703.6 is amended to read as follows: 
5703.6 Piping Systems. Piping systems, and their component parts, for flammable and combustible liquids shall be in accordance with Section 5703.6.1 through 5703.6.11. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
Section 5704.2.9.5 is amended to read as follows: 
5704.2.9.5 Above-ground tanks inside of buildings. Above-ground tanks inside of buildings shall comply with Sections 5704.2.9.5.1 and 5704.2.9.5.2 through 5704.2.9.5.3. Storage of flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials in above-ground tanks inside of buildings is prohibited within limits established by law in the adopting ordinance as the limits of districts in which such storage is prohibited. The storage of flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials in aboveground tanks is prohibited in residential areas. 
Section 5704.2.9.5 is amended by adding Section 5704.2.9.5.3 to read as follows: 
5704.2.9.5.3 Combustible Liquid Storage Tanks Inside of Buildings. The maximum aggregate allowable quantity limit shall be 3,000 gallons (11 356 L) of Class II or III combustible liquid for storage in protected aboveground tanks complying with Section 5704.2.9.7 when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The entire 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) quantity shall be stored in protected above-ground tanks; 
2.  The 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) capacity shall be permitted to be stored in a single tank or multiple smaller tanks; 
3.  The tanks shall be located in a room protected by an automatic sprinkler system complying with Section 903.3.1.1; and 
4.  Tanks shall be connected to fuel-burning equipment, including generators, utilizing an approved closed piping system. 
The quantity of combustible liquid stored in tanks complying with this section shall not be counted towards the maximum allowable quantity set forth in Table 5003.1.1(1), and such tanks shall not be required to be located in a control area. Such tanks shall not be located more than two stories below grade. 
Section 5704.2.9.6 is amended to read as follows: 
5704.2.9.6 Above-ground tanks outside of buildings. Above-ground tanks outside of buildings shall comply with Sections 5704.2.9.6.1 through 5704.2.9.6.3. The storage of flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials in aboveground tanks is prohibited in residential areas. 
Section 5704.2.11.1 is amended by adding a paragraph 4 to read as follows: 
4.  The storage of flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials in underground tanks is prohibited in residential areas. 
Section 5704.2.11.4 is amended to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.4 Leak Prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with Sections 5704.2.11.4.1 through 5704.2.11.4.3. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
Section 5704.2.11.4.2 is amended to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.4.2 Leak Detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be provided with an approved method of leak detection from any component of the system that is designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 30 and as specified in Section 5704.2.11.4.3. 
Section 5704.2.11.4 is amended by adding Section 5704.2.11.4.3 to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.4.3 Observation wells. Approved sampling tubes of a minimum 4 inches in diameter shall be installed in the backfill material of each underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tank. The tubes shall extend from a point 12 inches below the average grade of the excavation to ground level and shall be provided with suitable surface access caps. Each tank site shall provide a sampling tube at the corners of the excavation with a minimum of 4 tubes. Sampling tubes shall be placed in the product line excavation within 10 feet of the tank excavation and one every 50 feet routed along product lines towards the dispensers, a minimum of two are required. 
Section 5704.3.8 is amended to read as follows: 
5704.3.8 Liquid storage warehouses. The storage of flammable liquids as specified in Chapter 57 as "Liquid Storage Warehouses" is prohibited. 
Section 5707.4 is amended to read as follows: 
5707.4 Mobile Fueling Areas. 
Mobile fueling shall not occur on public streets, public ways, or inside buildings. Fueling on the roof level of parking structures or other building is prohibited. Mobile fueling sites shall be restricted to commercial, industrial, governmental, or manufacturing, where the parking area having such operations is primarily intended for employee vehicles. Mobile fueling shall be conducted for fleet fueling or employee vehicles only, not the general public. Commercial sites shall be restricted to office-type or similar occupancies that are not primarily intended for use by the public. 
Section 6103.2.1 is amended by adding a new Section 6103.2.1.8 to read as follows: 
6103.2.1.8 Jewelry Repair, Dental Labs and Similar Occupancies. Where natural gas service is not available, portable LP-Gas containers are allowed to be used to supply approved torch assemblies or similar appliances. Such containers shall not exceed 20-pound (9.0 kg) water capacity. Aggregate capacity shall not exceed 60-pound (27.2 kg) water capacity. Each device shall be separated from other containers by a distance of not less than 20 feet. 
Section 6104.2 is amended by numbering the existing Exception as "1" and adding an Exception 2 to read as follows: 
2.  Except as permitted in Sections 308 and 6104.3.2, LP-gas containers are not permitted in residential areas. 
Section 6104.3 is amended by adding a new Section 6104.3.2 to read as follows: 
6104.3.3 Spas, Pool Heaters, and Other Listed Devices. Where natural gas service is not available, an LP-gas container is allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or other listed devices. Such container shall not exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot. See Table 6104.3 for location of containers. 
Exception: Lots where LP-gas can be off-loaded wholly on the property where the tank is located may install up to 500 gallon above ground or 1,000 gallon underground approved containers. 
Section 6107.4 is amended to read as follows: 
6107.4 Protecting Containers from Vehicles. Where exposed to vehicular damage due to proximity to alleys, driveways or parking areas, LP-gas containers, regulators and piping shall be protected in accordance with Section 312. 
Section 6109.13 is amended by deleting the "Exception." 
Appendix M "High-Rise Buildings - Retroactive Automatic Sprinkler Requirement" of the Fire Code is adopted to read as follows: 
APPENDIX M - HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS - RETROACTIVE AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER REQUIREMENT 
M101.1 Scope. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all existing high-rise buildings in accordance with the requirements and compliance schedule of this appendix. 
M102.1 High-Rise buildings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 of the International Fire Code shall be provided throughout existing high-rise buildings. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Airport traffic control towers 
2.  Open parking structures 
3.  Group U occupancies 
4.  Occupancies in Group F-2 
M103.1 Compliance Schedule. Building owners shall file a compliance schedule with the fire code official not later than 365 days after the effective date of this code. The compliance schedule shall not exceed 12 years for an automatic sprinkler system retrofit. 
(Code 1969, §§ 12-14, 12-15; Ord. No. 1166, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1167, §§ 1—20, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1441, §§ 1—31, 5-2-1983; Ord. No. 1563, § 1, 6-24-1985; Ord. No. 2013, §§ 1—25, 1-4-1993; Ord. No. 2269, §§ 3—27, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 2530, §§ 3—28, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 2652, § 3, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2841, § 4, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2968, § 4, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3266, § 1, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3414 , § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 3522, § 2, 9-11-2018 ; Ord. No. 3607 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Secs. 38-39—38-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE MARSHAL 
 
Sec. 38-71. - Office created; division of fire department. 
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be a division of the fire department. 
(Code 1969, § 12-35)  
Sec. 38-72. - To be fire chief or designated person. 
The fire marshal shall be the fire chief or some other designated person reporting directly to the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1969, § 12-36)  
Sec. 38-73. - Appointment; removal; compensation. 
The office of fire marshal shall be filled by appointment by the chief of the fire department, with the consent and approval of the city manager. The fire marshal shall be removed only for cause as contained in the rules, regulations and procedures of the city fire department. He shall receive an annual salary of $1.00, or such other compensation as may be determined from time to time by the city council as full compensation for his services. 
(Code 1969, § 12-37)  
Sec. 38-74. - Duty to investigate fires. 
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall begin immediately upon the report of the fire, or as soon thereafter as circumstances permit. 
(Code 1969, § 12-38)  
Sec. 38-75. - Taking of testimony generally. 
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall make or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the testimony to be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1969, § 12-39)  
Sec. 38-76. - Duty when evidence indicates crime in connection with fire. 
If the fire marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with any fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all the information obtained by him including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1969, § 12-42)  
Sec. 38-77. - Right of entry. 
The fire marshal shall have the authority, at all times of the day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near such building or premises, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Code 1969, § 12-44) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide for condemnation and removal of structures constituting fire hazards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.012.  
Sec. 38-78. - Record of fires to be kept. 
The fire marshal shall keep a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amounts of the losses, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. 
(Code 1969, § 12-47)  
Chapter 42 - FLOODS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; subdivisions, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 94. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city engineer's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
Area of controlled flood protection means the land which because of flood hazard alleviation measures requiring continuing maintenance and/or operating procedures is determined to be not subject to flooding by the occurrence of a base flood provided such flood hazard alleviation measures are perpetually maintained and/or operated in accordance with standards established by the city council. 
Area of improbable flooding means the land which because of topography or permanent flood hazard alleviation measures, not requiring maintenance and/or operating procedures, is determined to be not subject to flooding by the occurrence of a base flood. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO and AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet. This condition occurs where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on existing land use within the watershed. 
City engineer means the city engineer of the city or designated representative. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, but not limited to buildings or other structures, platting, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, the term "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zones V1-30, VE or V, the term "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building", even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, improvements for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before December 19, 1977, for FIRM's effective before that date. 
Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map approved and adopted by the city council, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the areas within the boundaries of special flood hazards have been designated as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map approved and adopted by the city council, on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report contains flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood hazard boundary floodway map. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodplain and floodprone area mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood with a one-foot increase in the water surface elevation. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include longterm storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement, area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community. 
Start of construction, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure when: 
(1)  The cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
a.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
b.  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred; or 
(2)  The improvement will increase the total area of a lot occupied by building by more than 20 percent. 
For the purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (i) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, or (ii) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city floodplain management regulations. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 2, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 2, 5-4-1987) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 42-32. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard and areas of controlled flood protection within the city. Areas of special flood hazard are those designated in section 42-37 together with such additional areas as may be designated by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 3, § A, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 3, § A, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-33. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council does ordain. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 1, § A, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 1, § A, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-34. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood hazard areas by use vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood proofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 1, § B, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 1, § B, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-35. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public funds for flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities located in floodplains; 
(6)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions; 
(7)  Provide a uniform procedure by which all alterations to the floodway and floodway fringe will be documented, reviewed, inspected and maintained within guidelines herein established; 
(8)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blighted areas; and 
(9)  Ensure the potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 1, § C, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 1, § C, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-36. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purpose, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses and development that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flooding, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 1, § D, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 1, § D, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-37. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazards. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Dallas County, Texas and Incorporated Areas," dated July 7, 2014, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) dated July 7, 2014 and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 3, § B, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 3, § B, 5-4-1987; Ord. No. 2626, § 1, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 3257, § 2, 3-3-2014 )  
Sec. 42-38. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be platted, located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 3, § D, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 3, § D, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-39. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 3, § E, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 3, § E, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-40. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally constructed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 3, § F, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 3, § F, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-41. - Removal of lands from areas of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The limits of an area of special flood hazard may be reduced if the potential for flood damage is reduced to the extent required by the city council and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and other governing agencies. A change in limits shall be accomplished by the person desiring such change furnishing either: 
(1)  Engineering evidence that the property is not subject to flooding by the base flood; or 
(2)  Engineering plans and supportive hydrologic and hydraulic studies for improvements to change the limits of the area of special flood hazard. 
(b)  The information shall be furnished to the local administrator. When it has been determined by the local administrator that the flood hazard has been alleviated, the information shall be submitted concurrently to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other agencies for review and/or approval. Upon receipt of the reviews and/or approval, the application will be forwarded to the city council for action. 
(c)  If both the Federal Emergency Management Agency and city council approve the information and plans furnished and the method of flood hazard alleviation, the limits of an area of special flood hazard may be revised as justified. Such change in limits shall occur after any required facilities have been provided in accordance with the approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 3, § G, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 3, § G, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-42. - Areas of controlled flood protection. 
(a)  The Farmers Branch-Carrollton Flood Control District shall be an area of controlled flood protection. If the flood hazard alleviation measures are not permanent in nature or if continuing maintenance and/or operating procedures are required to ensure that the occurrence of a base flood will not result in flooding, the land removed from an area of special flood hazard shall be designated as an area of controlled flood protection. The continuation of this designation shall be contingent upon the concurrence of the city council and FEMA that the flood hazard alleviation measures are maintained and/or operating procedures continued in such a manner that the occurrence of a base flood will not result in flooding. Fill permits for land so designated shall be issued during such time as flood hazard alleviation measures are determined by the local administrator to be adequate. Fill permits shall be forwarded to the Farmers Branch-Carrollton Flood Control District for review. The local administrator shall issue the fill permit after receipt of the flood control district review. The permit procedure will be the same as section 42-64(e). Adequacy shall be determined by the capability of the area of controlled flood protection being able to withstand the occurrence of a base flood without flooding occurring within the area of controlled flood protection. Streets shall have a minimum top of curb elevation of 429.00 (six-inch curb). 
(b)  The degree of control with respect to flooding by the city council and FEMA within such areas shall be commensurate with the probability of flooding occurring if such maintenance and/or operating procedures are not continued. Binding contracts or other enforceable assurances that the required flood hazard alleviation measures will be continuously capable of providing protection from flooding in accordance with standards acceptable to the city council and FEMA shall be required in such areas. Failure to comply with such standards shall result in the area of controlled flood protection being again designated as an area of special flood hazard. 
(c)  Special flood hazard areas protected from inflowing floodwaters by their total or partial enclosure by levees, canals, ditches, conduits, or similar drainage facilities shall remain as special flood hazard areas until facilities approved by the city council and FEMA have been provided which will remove any floodwaters which may accumulate in such enclosed area. The facilities provided to remove internal accumulations of floodwater shall be adequate to protect all of such enclosed area from flooding to the standards required by this article. Lands within such enclosed area necessary for canals, ditches, detention basins and similar open drainageways approved by the city council and FEMA shall be designated as floodways. All land within such enclosed areas may be designated as an area of controlled flood protection, with the exception of that designated as a floodway, upon the completion of all facilities required for the removal of internal accumulations of floodwaters and the protection from inflowing floodwaters in accordance with plans approved by the city council and FEMA. Fill permits shall not be issued for any part of such enclosed areas until the entire area so enclosed, with the exception of that designated as a floodway, has been designated as an area of controlled flood protection. Excavation, filling and/or grading operations in progress upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be continued without a fill permit unless the city engineer determines that: 
(1)  Such work, or binding contract for such work, was not initiated prior to December 19, 1977; 
(2)  Such work is not beneficial toward the development of the land to its highest and best use; or 
(3)  Such work endangers land to flooding which was not designated as a special flood hazard area on December 19, 1977. 
(d)  It is the intent of this article to provide for conditions which will permit the development and use of land to continue without threat of interruption after a special flood hazard area has been designated as an area of controlled flood protection. Adequate provision of these conditions requires that facilities for the detention of peak flows and the removal of floodwaters which may accumulate within areas totally or partially enclosed, as described in subsection (c) of this section, shall have adequate capacity to perform their required function under adverse conditions. The design capacity for such facilities shall be based upon the development of the entire area contributing flood flows to the facility under rainfall conditions which can be anticipated upon the occurrence of a base flood. The normal storage and/or discharge capacity of such facilities shall provide protection to developed land and structures and shall limit street inundation to the standards established by this article. In addition, the water surface elevation of the base flood shall not exceed the lowest floor elevation of any structure within an enclosed area, as previously described, if pumps are required for the discharge of accumulated flood flows and the largest single pump provided for that area is inoperative during the occurrence of the base flood. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 3, § H, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 3, § H, 5-4-1987; Ord. No. 2014, § 1, 1-4-1993)  
Sec. 42-43. - Improvements within the area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  Improvements that are within the area of special flood hazard but do not alter the limits of the area of special flood hazard or that are in Zones AO and AH are subject to the same conditions and procedures of section 42-41 with one exception. 
(b)  Submittal to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other agencies are not required if the local administrator determines that the improvement will not: 
(1)  Significantly change the existing topography; 
(2)  Affect the elevation and velocity of the base flood; and 
(3)  Change the floodway boundary. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 3, § I, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 3, § I, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-44. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 3, § K, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 3, § K, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-45. - Elm Fork of the Trinity River. 
There will be no encroachments allowed into the floodway of the Elm Fork of the Trinity River. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 3, § J, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 3, § J, 5-4-1987)  
Secs. 42-46—42-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 42-61. - Designation of city engineer as local administrator. 
The city engineer, or his designated representative, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 4, § A, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 4, § A, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-62. - Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Maintaining and holding open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Reviewing permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(3)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) making the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in section 42-65(b). 
(4)  Notify the state water commission prior to any alteration or relocation of a creek or channel, and submitting evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(5)  Ensuring that maintenance responsibility is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the creek or channel so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(6)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 42-37, obtaining, reviewing, and reasonably utilizing any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provision of division 3 of this article. 
(7)  Reviewing all applications or fill permits required by adoption of this article. 
(8)  Ensuring that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 4, § B, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 4, § B, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-63. - Establishment of fill permit. 
A fill permit for any improvement within a special flood hazard and within an area of controlled flood protection shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 3, § C, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 3, § C, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-64. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  An applicant for a fill permit shall submit an application to the city engineer. The application must be on a form approved by the city engineer, and must be signed by the owner of the property to be improved. 
(b)  An applicant for a fill permit shall request a preapplication conference with representatives from the engineering department. 
(c)  At the preapplication conference, the city engineer shall determine what information is necessary for a complete evaluation of the proposed project, and may require the applicant to submit the necessary information including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Vicinity map and overall map of project area. 
(2)  Improvement plan to scale showing dimensions and elevations of proposed and existing improvements and relationship to existing and proposed special flood hazard areas. 
(3)  Acreage figures for the entire tract, the area located in the special flood hazard area, and the area proposed to be removed from the special flood hazard area. 
(4)  Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. 
(5)  Water surface profiles. 
(6)  Plotted cross sections. 
(7)  Erosion control and/or sedimentation control plan. 
(8)  Landscape plan. 
All of the submittal information must be performed by a registered professional engineer in the state with the seal of the engineer affixed with signature to the same submittal. 
(d)  Approval or denial of a fill permit by the city engineer shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed improvement with existing and anticipated development. 
(5)  The safety of access to and the provision of required parking for the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities. 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the approved plan for that area. 
(9)  The preservation of wildlife and wetland areas that are so designated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(10)  The protection of significant stands of trees and vegetation. 
(e)  If the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other agencies approve the improvement plan, then the city engineer shall submit the permit application to the city council. Upon city council approval, the city engineer shall issue the fill permit. 
(f)  After the improvement has been completed, the city engineer shall inspect the area to verify compliance with the approved application. No permits applicable to the improvement area lying within the special flood hazard area shall be issued by the city prior to inspection by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 4, § C, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 4, § C, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-65. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The city council shall hear and render judgment on a request for variance only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the city engineer in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decisions in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The city engineer shall maintain a record of all actions involving variances and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures met forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to residential structures only, to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 42-64(e) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted in subsection (a)—(f) and the intent of this article, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (sections 42-35 and 42-36). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Prerequisites for granting variances are as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will he permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  Pecuniary hardship, standing alone, shall not be grounds for the granting of a variance. 
(j)  Variances may be issued by the city council for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 4, § D, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 4, § D, 5-4-1987)  
Secs. 42-66—42-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 42-81. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 5, § A, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 5, § A, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-82. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 42-37, section 42-62(6), or section 42-84(c), the following provisions are required (when an area has been removed from an area of special flood hazard, only subsection (1) of this subsection shall apply): 
(1)  Residential and non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, and access facilities elevated to two feet (minimum) above the base flood elevation. Parking facilities shall be elevated to one (1) foot (minimum) above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer shall submit a certification to the City Engineer that the standard is satisfied. There shall be no more than one basement level. 
(2)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  No manufactured home shall be placed in a floodway. 
b.  All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Specific requirements shall be as follows: 
1.  Over-the-top ties at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side. 
2.  Frame ties at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side. 
3.  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds. 
4.  Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored. 
c.  These manufactured home standards are applicable only to those which are presently permitted for use by caretakers and watchmen. 
d.  If other manufactured home uses are permitted in the future, applicable standards shall be adopted prior to such permitted use. 
e.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones A and AH on the city's FIRM map shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home be three feet (minimum) above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provision of subsection (3)b. of this section. 
(4)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-37 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If subsection (4)a. of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
c.  Prohibit the placement of any manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 5, § B, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 5, § B, 5-4-1987; Ord. No. 3278, § 1, 4-15-2014 )  
Sec. 42-83. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard and controlled flood protection established in section 42-37 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of structures shall have the lowest floor elevated not less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade at least as one foot higher as the depth number specified on the community's FIRM if such structure is within a presently platted subdivision. Basements must be floodproofed a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation. There shall be no more than one basement level. 
(2)  No new structures, required parking for such structures or access to such structures, or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be permitted in AO zones of platted areas filed for record after December 19, 1977. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer shall submit certification to the city engineer that the standards of this section are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 5, § C, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 5, § C, 5-4-1987); Ord. No. 3278, § 2, 4-15-2014  
Sec. 42-84. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections 42-34, 42-35 and 42-36. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet fill permit requirements of section 42-63, section 42-64 and the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 42-37 or section 42-62(6). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivision facilities, shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 5, § D, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 5, § D, 5-4-1987)  
Sec. 42-85. - Standards for improvements in areas of special flood hazard. 
Improvements to reduce the limits of the area of special flood hazard or within the area of special flood hazard, as referenced in sections 42-41 and 42-42, shall conform to the following criteria: 
(1)  Alterations of the area of special flood hazard may not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
(2)  Alterations of the area of special flood hazard may not create an erosive velocity on-site or off-site. The mean velocity of the stream downstream of the improvements may not exceed the velocity prior to the improvements. 
(3)  Alterations of the area of special flood hazard may be allowed only to the extent permitted by equal conveyance on both sides of the natural channel with separate owners. 
(4)  The toe of any fill slope must parallel the natural channel to maintain balanced streamflow in the altered special flood hazard area. 
(5)  An environmental impact study and complete stream rehabilitation program must be approved prior to any relocation of the natural creek. 
(6)  To provide accessibility to the special flood hazard area for maintenance and to reduce exposure to erosion, the maximum slopes shall not exceed four (horizontal) to one (vertical) in a fill area. The slope of excavated areas not in rock shall not exceed four (horizontal) to one (vertical). 
(7)  Vertical walls, terracing, and other treatments will be considered only as part of a landscaping plan and if access for maintenance is provided and if there is no unbalanced resultant streamflows. 
(8)  Landscaping plan submission shall include erosion control of cut and fill areas and sedimentation control during construction. 
(9)  The effects of existing or proposed public or private improvements will be used in determining water surface elevations an velocities. 
(10)  Any alteration of the special flood hazard area shall not cause any additional expense in any current or proposed public capital improvement. 
(Ord. No. 1172, art. 5, § E, 12-19-1977; Ord. No. 1670, art. 5, § E, 5-4-1987)  
Chapter 44 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Farmers Branch Manske Library Board, § 2-181 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 44-1—44-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC LIBRARY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-31. - Named. 
The name of the public library shall be the Farmers Branch Manske Library. 
(Code 1969, § 16-3; Ord. No. 2132, § 1, 7-11-1994)  
Sec. 44-32. - Establishment of main and branch libraries. 
The city council may establish a main library. In addition to the main library, branches of the library may be established when, in the judgment of the city council, conditions warrant the establishment of such branches. 
(Code 1969, § 16-2)  
Sec. 44-33. - Nonresident use of library. 
(a)  A nonresident fee shall be charged to residents of those cities that charge city residents a fee to use their library. The fee schedule shall be recommended by the library board and approved by the city council. 
(b)  Elementary and secondary school students attending school in the city and those attending W.T. White High School shall be exempt from the fee. 
(c)  The owner or manager of businesses within the city shall be exempt from the nonresident fee. 
(d)  The city may sell cards to those cities that do not have a public library at terms and fees established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 2(16-7), 12-15-1997)  
Sec. 44-34. - Hours of operation. 
The public library of the city shall be kept open for use of the citizens of the city during such hours as may be fixed by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 16-8; Ord. No. 3116, § 1(A), 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 44-35. - Cards required for use; fee. 
A library card shall be required of each user of the public library who desires to be loaned books and other library materials and equipment. The fee to be collected for the library card shall be established by the city council upon the recommendation of the city manager, following consultation with the library board and the library director. 
(Code 1969, § 16-9)  
Sec. 44-36. - Fines—Generally. 
Fines shall be collected for failure to return, at the date due, any books or other library materials and equipment which have been loaned to holders of library cards. The schedule of fines shall be established by the city council upon the recommendation of the city manager following consultation with the library board and the library director. 
(Code 1969, § 16-10)  
Sec. 44-37. - Same—Illegal removal of materials. 
Every person, parent or guardian of a child who is under the age of 17 years, who shall take or borrow from the Farmers Branch Manske Library any book, pamphlet, periodical, paper or other property except in accordance with the rules of such library shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1969, § 16-11)  
Sec. 44-38. - Same—Return of borrowed materials. 
Every person, parent or guardian of a child under the age of 17 years who shall take or borrow from the Farmers Branch Manske Library any book, pamphlet, periodical, paper or other property and neglect, refuse or fail to return such library materials within two weeks after the date of mailing a notice by certified mail, with return receipt requested to his address noted on the current library card, shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1969, § 16-12)  
Sec. 44-39. - Same—Defacing of library materials. 
Every person, parent or guardian of a child under the age of 17 years who shall willfully or wantonly cut, mutilate, mark, tear, write upon, deface or otherwise destroy or injure, in whole or in part, any book, pamphlet, periodical, map or document, picture, or written or engraved or printed paper or any other library property belonging to the Farmers Branch Manske Library, or shall suffer any such injury to be inflicted while such property is in his custody, or shall willfully or wantonly injure any of the furniture or property in the building of the Farmers Branch Manske Library, or shall willfully or wantonly mark or deface or in any way injure the Farmers Branch Manske Library or any part thereof, or any fixtures therein or appertaining thereto, shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1969, § 16-13)  
Sec. 44-40. - Penalty for violations of sections 44-37—44-39. 
Any person, parent or guardian of a child under the age of 17 years who violates any of the provisions of sections 44-37—44-39 shall be subject to the penalties as provided for in this section, and where the amount of the penalty is not specifically provided for in this section, any person guilty of violating any of the provisions of such sections shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. It shall be presumed that the person whose name appears on the library card is the person who took or borrowed the book or other library material and equipment from the library. The parent or guardian of a child under the age of 17 years shall be deemed legally responsible for the child taking or borrowing any book or other library material and equipment or violating any of the provisions of sections 44-37—44-39. 
(Code 1969, § 16-14; Ord. No. 1488, § 1(16-14), 2-6-1984)  
Sec. 44-41. - Damaged and lost library materials and other charges. 
There shall be charged to users of the Farmers Branch Manske Library such fees and charges for replacement of materials of borrowed materials that are lost or destroyed and for the use of various library services as are set forth in Appendix A, Fee Schedule, as amended. The city manager is hereby authorized to establish such additional charges relating to the provisions of library services and to public and enforce same. 
(Ord. No. 3103, § 2, 9-21-2010)  
Secs. 44-42—44-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LIBRARY DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Creation of new departments, § 2.11; administrative departments, § 3.04. 
 
Sec. 44-81. - Library department established. 
In accordance with sections 2.11 and 3.04 of the City Charter, there is hereby created the public library department of the city to be administered by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 16-1; Ord. No. 3116, § 1(B), 12-21-2010)  
Secs. 44-82—44-84. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3116, § 1(C), adopted Dec. 21, 2010, repealed §§ 44-82—44-84, which pertained to the library director's appointment, compensation, authority and duties and derived from Code 1969, §§ 16-4—16-6.  
Chapter 46 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Billiard halls, § 14-31 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Firearms and facsimile firearms regulated; defenses. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, words and derivations thereof shall have the meanings given herein: 
Air gun. Any gun that discharges a pellet, BB, or paintball by means of compressed air, gas propellant, or spring. 
Facsimile firearm. Any device that so closely appears to be a firearm in size, shape, color, or design that it (1) can only be differentiated from a firearm through close inspection, or (2) is likely to cause alarm by the general public. 
Firearm. Any shotgun, rifle, pistol, bb gun, air rifle, air gun, bow, or other device or instrumentality capable of propelling bullets, shots, arrows, or other solid compact substance, whether propelled by powder, fire, or other force or by combination of such forces. 
Public place. Any place where the general public may gather, whether publicly or privately owned, including streets, alleys, easements, public facilities, stadiums, retail stores, office buildings, government offices, parks, playgrounds, school facilities, parking lots and other similar property. 
Sport shooting range. A business establishment, private club, or association that operates an area for the discharge or other use of firearms for silhouette, skeet, trap, black powder, target, self-defense, or similar recreational shooting. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display or brandish a facsimile firearm in a manner that alarms or could alarm any person in a public place within the corporate limits of the city. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display or brandish a facsimile firearm in any manner anywhere within the city in a manner that causes alarm or reaction of any type by an officer or official of a public safety agency or voluntary agency organized to deal with emergencies. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than a person licensed to carry a concealed handgun under V.T.C.A. Texas Government Code Chapter 411, Subchapter H, to carry a firearm or air gun: 
a.  Within any public park within the city; 
b.  On or within a premises within the city at which a meeting of a municipality, county, or other governmental body is taking place; 
c.  On or within a premises within the city at which a political rally, parade, or official political meeting is taking place; or 
d.  On or within a premises within the city at which a non-firearms-related school, college, or professional athletic event is taking place. 
(c)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the actor was engaged in any of the following: 
a.  The protection of persons or property as authorized by Chapter 9 of the Texas Penal Code; 
b.  The enforcement of any state, federal, or local law by a legally certified peace officer; 
c.  An activity or use authorized by the comprehensive zoning ordinances; 
d.  An event, performance, demonstration or ceremony authorized through the City of Farmers Branch permit process wherein the firearm or facsimile firearm is significant to the activity; or 
e.  An event, performance, demonstration, or ceremony sponsored and conducted by a subdivision of federal, state, or local government or school district wherein the firearm or facsimile firearm is significant to the activity. 
(2)  It is a defense to an offense under subsection (b)(1) that the firearm was discharged at a sport shooting range. 
(3)  It is a defense to an offense under subsection (b)(4) that the firearm or air gun is in or carried to or from an area designated for use in a lawful hunting, fishing, or other sporting event and the firearm or air gun is of the type commonly used in the activity. 
(d)  Proof of offense. Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this section. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $1,000.00 and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2922, §§ 1, 2, 7-16-2007; Ord. No. 3272, § 1, 3-18-2014 ) 
State Law reference— Discharging firearms in public places, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.01, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 250.001 et seq.  
Sec. 46-2. - Prohibition of the sale of beer and wine in residential areas; defenses. 
(a)  The sale of beer and wine in a residential area is prohibited. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "residential area" means any location in the city located within a R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, D-1, D-2, MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, or M-4 zoning district as defined in the comprehensive zoning ordinance, or property used for residential purposes. 
(c)  It shall not be a violation of subsection (a) if the sale occurring on property used for residential purposes is located within a planned development district that authorizes both residential and non-residential uses, the property is developed and/or used for both residential and non-residential uses, and the sale of beer or wine occurred from an area of the property developed and used only for a non-residential purpose which cannot directly access any residential unit by passing through the area from which the sale occurred. 
( Ord. No. 3286, § 1, 6-17-2014 )  
Secs. 46-3—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CURFEW FOR MINORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3578 , § 2, adopted July 23, 2019, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 46-31—46-37, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3388, § 2, 8-16-2016. 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Curfew hours means: 
(1)  11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following date; and 
(2)  12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
(b)  Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
(c)  Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
(d)  Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who under court order is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
(e)  Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
(f)  Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partner of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
(g)  Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person. 
(2)  At least 18 years of age and with written authorization from a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
(h)  Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
(i)  Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or play; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
(j)  Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
( Ord. No. 3578 , § 2, 7-23-2019)  
Sec. 46-32. - Reserved.  
Sec. 46-33. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense upon conviction is punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  When required by Texas Family Code § 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 46-34(a) and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
( Ord. No. 3578 , § 2, 7-23-2019)  
Sec. 46-34. - Commission of offenses. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control, allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(c)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
( Ord. No. 3578 , § 2, 7-23-2019)  
Sec. 46-35. - Defenses to prosecution. 
It is a defense to prosecution that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop provided they possess a signed note from their parent or guardian; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Farmers Branch, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or another recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or 
(9)  Married, or had been married, or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Texas Family Code Chapter 31, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 3578 , § 2, 7-23-2019)  
Sec. 46-36. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  Contributing to the neglect or delinquency of minors. A parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or control of a minor commits an offense if, by any act or omission, or by lack of supervision and control over such minor, he encourages, contributes toward, causes or tends to cause the minor to become neglected or delinquent. 
(b)  Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the minor is married, or had been married, or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Texas Family Chapter 31, as amended. 
(c)  Penalty for violation of section. A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
( Ord. No. 3578 , § 2, 7-23-2019)  
Sec. 46-37. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and any other circumstances, no defense in section 46-35 is present. 
(b)  A peace officer taking into custody a person younger than 17 years of age for violation of section 46-34 shall, without unnecessary delay: 
(1)  Release the minor to the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian; 
(2)  Take the minor before a justice or municipal court to answer the charge; or 
(3)  Take the minor to a place designated as a juvenile curfew processing office by the head of the law enforcement agency having custody of the minor. 
(c)  A "juvenile curfew processing office" must comply with Texas Code of Criminal Procedures, article 45.059, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 3578 , § 2, 7-23-2019)  
Secs. 46-38—46-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEXUAL OFFENDERS RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 46-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Minor means a person younger than 17 years of age. 
Permanent residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Premises where children commonly gather means premises where children commonly gather and includes, but is not limited to, a playground, school, day care facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, or public swimming pool, as those terms are defined in the V.T.C.A Health and Safety Code § 481.134. 
Temporary residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
Sex offender means a person who is required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database because of a violation involving a victim who was less than 16 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2872, § 2, 8-7-2006)  
Sec. 46-52. - Offenses. 
It is unlawful for a sex offender to have a permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather. For the purposes of this article, planted street medians are not public parks. 
(Ord. No. 2872, § 2, 8-7-2006)  
Sec. 46-53. - Evidentiary matters; measurements. 
(a)  It shall be prima facie evidence that a person is a "sex offender" under this article if that person is identified on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database ("database") and the database indicates that the victim was less than 16 years of age. It shall be prima facie evidence of the sex offender's temporary or permanent residence if that residence is located in a prohibited area as depicted on the sex offender map, as described below. The Municipal Court of the City of Farmers Branch shall take judicial notice of the database and the sex offender map. 
(b)  For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of a permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, or in the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather. 
(Ord. No. 2872, § 2, 8-7-2006)  
Sec. 46-54. - Sex offender map. 
(a)  A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the City of Farmers Branch. The city shall review the map at least annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the Farmers Branch Police Department. 
(b)  Annual changes to the map will be made through a review of certificates of occupancy as provided by the community services department of the city to the police department. Community services will forward certificates of occupancy that meet the requirements of this article to the police department for inclusion on the map. 
(Ord. No. 2872, § 2, 8-7-2006)  
Sec. 46-55. - Culpable mental state not required. 
Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2872, § 2, 8-7-2006)  
Sec. 46-56. - Affirmative defenses. 
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this article; 
(2)  The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult; 
(3)  The person required to register on the database is a minor; 
(4)  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 2,000 feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas; or, 
(5)  The information on the database is incorrect, and if corrected, this article would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on the database. 
(Ord. No. 2872, § 2, 8-7-2006)  
Sec. 46-57. - Penalty. 
A violation of any provisions of this article shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of such violation, such violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day on the provisions of this article are violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2872, § 3, 8-7-2006)  
Secs. 46-58—46-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS 
 
Sec. 46-61. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking products and ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the city limits of the City of Farmers Branch. 
(Ord. No. 3092, § 1, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 46-62. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Person shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
Illegal smoking product shall mean any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one or more of the following substances or chemicals: 
(1)  Salviadivinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; or 
(2)  (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl- 
3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c] chormen-1-ol) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol). 
Ingestion device shall mean equipment, a product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including: 
(1)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  A water pipe; 
(3)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  a chamber pipe; 
(6)  A carburetor pipe; 
(7)  An electric pipe; 
(8)  An air-driven pipe; 
(9)  A chillum; 
(10)  A bong; or 
(11)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
(Ord. No. 3092, § 1, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 3162, § 1, 10-18-2011)  
Sec. 46-63. - Sell, offer, gift, display or possession. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for sale any illegal smoking product. 
(Ord. No. 3092, § 1, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 46-64. - Use or possession of ingestion devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use an ingestion device to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product. 
(Ord. No. 3092, § 1, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 46-65. - Defense. 
It shall be a defense to a violation of this article that any act described in this article is under and pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act. 
(Ord. No. 3092, § 1, 9-7-2010)  
Secs. 46-66—46-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SALE AND MERCHANDISING OF ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND LIQUID NICOTINE TO MINORS 
 
Sec. 46-70. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other entity formed for profit making or non-profit purposes, including but not limited to all retail establishments where goods or services are sold or offered for sale. 
Electronic cigarette and e-cigarette mean any electronic device composed of a mouthpiece, heating element, battery, and electronic circuits that provides, or is manufactured or intended to provide, a vapor of liquid nicotine and/or other substances mixed with propylene glycol and/or other substances delivered or deliverable to the user that he or she can inhale in simulation of smoking. This term shall include every version and type of such devices whether they are manufactured or marketed as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, or under any other product name or description. 
Liquid nicotine means any liquid product composed either in whole or in part of pure nicotine and propylene glycol and/or any other substance and manufactured for use with e-cigarettes. 
Open display unit, in the context of the retail sale of e-cigarettes and liquid nicotine, means any device, furniture, or furnishing within or upon which e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine are displayed to customers, and includes, but is not limited to, any case, rack, shelf, counter, table, desk, kiosk, booth, stand, and other surface. 
Person means any natural person, individual, sole proprietor, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, limited liability company, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or other legal entity. 
Retailer means any person or business that operates a store, stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales of e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine are made to purchasers for consumption or use. 
Self-service merchandising, in the context of the retail sale of e-cigarettes and liquid nicotine, means the open display of e-cigarettes and liquid nicotine, whether packaged or otherwise, for direct retail customer access and handling prior to purchase without the intervention of assistance of the retailer or the retailer's owner, employee, or agent. Such open display includes the use of an open display unit. 
( Ord. No. 3273, § 1, 3-18-2014 )  
Sec. 46-71. - Sale of e-cigarettes to minors prohibited. 
No person, business, retailer, or other establishment shall sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale within the city to any person under 18 years of age any e-cigarette or liquid nicotine. A violator of this section includes the person who sells, permits to be sold, or offers for sale within the city any such product to a person under 18 years of age as well as his or her employer and any person who controls the person who sells, permits to be sold, or offers for sale within the city any such product to a person under 18 years of age. 
( Ord. No. 3273, § 1, 3-18-2014 )  
Sec. 46-72. - Self-service merchandising prohibited. 
(a)  No person, business, retailer, or other establishment engaged in the retail sale of e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine shall sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, or display for sale e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine within the city by means of self-service merchandising which allows a purchase of e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine without verification of the age of the purchaser. 
(b)  No person, business, retailer, or other establishment engaged in the retail sale of e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine shall place e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine in an open display unit within the city unless the same is located in an area that is inaccessible to a person under 18 years of age. 
( Ord. No. 3273, § 1, 3-18-2014 )  
Sec. 46-73. - Possession prohibited. 
A minor commits an offense if the minor possesses an electronic cigarette provided, however, it is not a violation of this section for a minor to possess a tobacco product if such possession would be a violation of V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 48.01. 
( Ord. No. 3273, § 1, 3-18-2014 )  
Chapter 50 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power of city to acquire land for parks, playgrounds, etc., § 1.08; notice of damage or injury required prior to suit, § 9.04. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director means a person so designated and in charge of the parks and recreation department and its divisions. 
Disrupt means to interrupt the orderly course of, by action or noise. 
Disturb means to throw into disorder; to move from a state of rest or regular order; to interrupt a settled state of, to throw out of course or order; to cause annoyance, disquiet, agitation or derangement to any person or group of persons, or interrupt his or their peace, or to interfere with him or them by the use of loud or vociferous or obscene, vulgar or indecent language, or by the use of yelling or shrieking or any other loud, unreasonable or otherwise disruptive action or noise. 
Park means a playground, recreation center or any other area in the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation, including all planted expressways, parkways and traffic circles maintained by the city, except the parkway strips between curb and sidewalks along the several streets and expressways of the city. 
Smoking means the combustion of any cigar, cigarette, pipe or other similar article, using any form of tobacco or other combustible substance in any form. This includes the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device, and the lighting or emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
Tobacco products mean any cigar, cigarette, chewing tobacco, snuff or other tobacco derivative. 
Vehicle means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered or drawn. Exception is made for baby carriages, bicycles and tricycles on designated paths, and vehicles in the service of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 18-2; Ord. No. 98-094, § 3, 9-21-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-2. - Enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  Officials. The director and park attendants shall in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter with the limitations described in this section. 
(b)  Ejectment. The director and any park attendant shall have the authority to order from the park any person acting in violation of this chapter. If such person refuses to leave, then the director or park attendant shall contact the police for ejectment. 
(c)  Seizure of property. The director and any park attendant shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or devices in the park, or used in violation of this chapter unless the violator refuses to voluntarily relinquish such property in which case the director or attendant shall contact the police for involuntary confiscation. 
(d)  Issuance of permits. The director is authorized to issue all permits and other consents with respect to the reservation and use of the city parks and recreation facilities for events including, but not limited to, permits related to the service of alcoholic beverages in city parks. 
(Code 1969, § 18-3; Ord. No. 3054, § 1, 11-3-2009)  
Sec. 50-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-14. 
(Code 1969, § 18-4)  
Secs. 50-4—50-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 50-34. - Use of tobacco products. 
Smoking and the use of tobacco products at any city-owned or city-operated athletic complex or Don Showman Park, including but not limited to those listed in section 50-35, shall be prohibited at all times. 
(Ord. No. 98-094, § 4, 9-21-1998)  
Sec. 50-35. - Signs posted. 
Signs will be posted at all city-owned or city-operated athletic complexes and at Don Showman Park stating that smoking and tobacco use is prohibited. This will include Cox, Farmers Branch, Jaycee, Oran Good, Pepper, and Don Showman parks; leased facilities located at Dallas Christian College; and Carrollton-Farmers Branch Independent School District property utilized as part of Oran Good and Cox parks. The ban includes athletic fields, dugouts, team benches, spectator areas, restrooms, concession stands, and all of Don Showman Park including the areas surrounding the recreation center and swimming pool. The absence of such signage shall not be an affirmative defense to an offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-094, § 5, 9-21-1998)  
Sec. 50-36. - Prohibited acts within city parks. 
Within the limits of any of the parks, it shall be unlawful for any person, except as otherwise provided, to: 
(1)  Hitch, fasten, lead, drive or let loose any animal of any kind. Dogs shall be permitted if they are kept on a leash by a cord or chain not to exceed six feet in length. On special occasions and under special situations, the director of the parks and recreation department shall be authorized to issue a special permit to allow other animals in the park. 
(2)  Discharge any firearms, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, or any other fireworks, or airguns or slingshots or any device which would or could project any object which would or could create a fire hazard or any hazard or danger to the public, except for special circumstances and occasions when under specific supervision, the director shall be authorized to issue written permission. 
(3)  Damage, cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property, or to pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, brush, plant or flower, or to mark or write upon, paint, or deface in any manner any building, monument, fence, bench, or other structure without written permission of the parks and recreation director, except for city employees engaged in city work. 
(4)  Swim, bathe or pollute the water of any fountain, pond or stream. 
(5)  Make or kindle a fire, except in picnic stoves, braziers or fire pits provided for that purpose without written consent of the parks and recreation director. 
(6)  Leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse elsewhere than in receptacles provided for such refuse. 
(7)  Participate in any activity on any public park area when such activity may create a danger to the public or may be considered a public nuisance. The director of parks and recreation may designate particular locations within areas for specific activities. Overnight camping is prohibited on any park property except by written permission issued by the director of parks and recreation. 
(8)  Sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, confections, merchandise or services unless the person has a written agreement or permit issued by the parks and recreation director. 
(9)  Remain, stay, or loiter in any public park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless a written authorization has been issued by the director of parks and recreation. 
(10)  Use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex if the person is over the age of six years. 
(11)  Consume or possess an alcoholic beverage; provided, however, it shall be an affirmative defense if the person is consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage obtained from a person authorized to serve or sell the alcoholic beverage at an event being held in the park pursuant to a permit approved by the director of parks and recreation in accordance with authority granted to the director of parks and recreation by the city council. 
(12)  Use any type of sound amplification system without the written consent of the director of parks and recreation. 
(13)  Ride or drive any horse or other animal without the written consent of the director of parks and recreation. 
(14)  Ride, drive or go at a rate of speed faster than speed limits as posted on standard traffic signs, upon any bicycle, motorcycle or any other vehicle whatsoever, upon any drive or street in any park of the city, or to ride or drive any wheeled vehicle upon any walk except baby carriages, bicycles or tricycles on designated bicycle or tricycle paths at the posted speed limits and except for special occasions and under special situations, the director may be authorized to issue written permission. 
(15)  Cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel or fertilizer without written permission of the director of parks and recreation. 
(16)  Play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, or other device, for money, chips, shells, credit or any other representative of value, or to maintain or exhibit any gambling table or other instrument of gambling or gaming without written permission of the director of parks and recreation. 
(17)  Use or speak any threatening, abusive, insulting, or indecent language in any of the public parks, and no person shall commit, in any such parks, any obscene, lewd or indecent act or create any nuisance. 
(18)  Disturb or disrupt, as defined in section 50-1, any picnic, meeting, service, concert, exercise or exhibition. 
(19)  Distribute, post, place or erect any advertising, handbill, circular, bill, notice, paper or other advertising device without written consent of the director of parks and recreation. 
(20)  Capture, maim, destroy, kill, poison or injure any animal, except city employees who are permitted to capture at-large animals. 
(Code 1969, § 18-5; Ord. No. 3054, § 2, 11-3-2009)  
Sec. 50-37. - Commercial vehicles prohibited in parks; exception. 
All vehicles used for the purpose of transporting freight and merchandise, or brick, stone or gravel, and all those commonly known as floats, moving wagons and express or delivery wagons are prohibited from entering upon or being driven through any of the public parks of the city, except by special permission of the director of parks and recreation, subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards. 
(Code 1969, § 18-6)  
Sec. 50-38. - Parking of vehicles in city parks. 
Where vehicle parking lots or areas have been set aside in public parks in the city, no vehicle shall be driven over or across the curbs, sidewalks, grass or lawn within such park, but shall be parked on such lots within and between the lines designating a single vehicle parking space and not otherwise. Where parking lots or areas within public parks of the city have been designated for head-in parking to front on a visible parking line without delineated single vehicle spaces, the front of the vehicle shall be placed on the parking line and as near as practicable to the side of the last parked vehicle in line. No vehicle shall be parked or left behind any other vehicle in the parking line or back of such parking line in any manner so as to obstruct, block or hinder ingress or egress from the line. Officers of the police department of the city shall issue to violators of this section traffic tickets or notices to answer to charges in the manner prescribed by the applicable ordinances and the case shall proceed in accordance with such applicable sections. Where a vehicle is parked or left in violation of this section in such a manner as to obstruct or block traffic, and the owner or operator of the vehicle refuses to or will not move such vehicle or cannot be found, police officers of the city may move or impound the vehicle so that traffic will not be impeded. 
(Code 1969, § 18-7)  
Sec. 50-39. - Certain rules and regulations to be posted. 
The director of parks and recreation shall recommend to the city manager such rules and regulations as he deems best for the management of the public parks, and where such rules have been adopted for a specific park area and posted within the specific park so regulated, any person found guilty of violating such rules or any rules in this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 18-8)  
Sec. 50-40. - Skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates, and similar devices. 
No person shall knowingly skate by means of roller skates, roller blades, skateboard, or similar devices upon the sidewalks, areas, or streets of the city designated by the city manager as provided for herein. Upon recommendation of the director of parks and recreation, the city manager is authorized to designate locations that skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates, and similar devices should be prohibited for the protection of city-owned/operated facilities. Where this is deemed necessary, signs will be posted prohibiting such activities. Any person found in violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2665, § 1, 5-7-2002)  
Sec. 50-41. - Parks and recreation user fees. 
User fees for use of parks and recreation services are hereby established and approved as delineated in appendix A. 
(1)  Fees; generally. User fees are established as those fees charged for the use of parks and recreation services, rentals, facilities, membership fees and other recreational uses as specified in this section and listed in appendix A as amended with said amendment being attached hereto. 
(2)  Collection; disposition. All user fees listed in appendix A shall be collected and credited to the appropriate funds of the city. 
(3)  Fees for residents and nonresidents. Different user fee amounts may be established for residents and nonresidents as recommended by the parks and recreation board and approved by the city council. 
(4)  Fee reductions. User fees may be reduced for residents of the City of Farmers Branch who demonstrate a limited income. Procedures for said reductions, including amount of the reduction and eligibility criteria, have been established by the city council and are administered by the director of parks and recreation. 
(5)  Fee adjustments. The city manager or his/her designee may establish and adjust individual class, activity, user and special event fees not listed in appendix A. 
(6)  Compliance. Any individual or organization not in compliance with this section and appendix A shall be denied use of the city's parks and recreation facilities or shall be denied participation in a program sponsored by the parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 2780, § 1, 9-20-2004)  
Sec. 50-42. - Policy regarding service of alcoholic beverages in public parks adopted. 
The "Policy Regarding Service of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Parks in the City of Farmers Branch," attached to Ordinance 3054 as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference, is hereby adopted as an official policy of the City of Farmers Branch. 
(Ord. No. 3054, § 3, 11-3-2009)  
Secs. 50-43—50-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - YOUTH PROGRAMS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 50-71—50-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS OF CARE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2696, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 28, 2002, repealed Div. 2, §§ 50-91—50-95, 50-106—50-112, 50-126—50-130, and 50-141—50-143, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2631, § 2, adopted Sept. 24, 2001. See the Code Comparative Table for further information. 
State Law reference— Exemption of certain youth programs from child care licensing, annual adoption of standards of care, V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.041(b)(14). 
 
Sec. 50-91. - Adopted. 
The Farmer's Branch Youth Programs' Standards of Care, attached to Ordinance No. 3604 as Exhibit "A" and on file in the city secretary's office, is hereby adopted and included herein as if set out in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2696, §§ 1, 2, 10-28-2002; Ord. No. 2750, §§ 1, 2, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 2798, § 2, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 2849, §§ 1, 2, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. 2890, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-2006; Ord. No. 2928, §§ 1, 2, 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 3065, § 1, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 3449 , § 1, 6-21-2017; Ord. No. 3536 , § 1 (Exh. A), 11-6-2018; Ord. No. 3604 , § 1 (Exh. A), 11-12-2019)  
Secs. 50-92—50-143. - Reserved.  
Chapter 54 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; noise regulations, § 34-246 et seq.; noises involving peddling, § 34-251. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable purpose means the use of money or property for the benefit of: 
(1)  Charity or philanthropy, or poor, impoverished, destitute, underprivileged, needy, refugee, diseased, injured, crippled, disabled, or handicapped persons, or persons in need of rehabilitation; 
(2)  A church, religious society or other religious sect, group or order; 
(3)  Patriotism, that is, for the teaching of patriotism or the relief or assistance of veterans or veterans' organizations; or 
(4)  Existing educational institutions or for the establishment or endowment of educational institutions or in aid of the education of any person or group of persons. 
Charitable solicitation means the conduct whereby a person, organization, society, corporation, or its agent, member or representative: 
(1)  Solicits property, financial aid, gifts in money, or any article representing monetary value; 
(2)  Sells or offers to sell a product, article, tag, service, publication, ticket, advertisement or subscription; or 
(3)  Holds, promotes, or participates in an entertainment, sports event, benefit dance, fair, bazaar, or other type of organized social entertainment; 
on the plea or representation, whether express or implied, that the proceeds from the solicitation, sale, or entertainment are for a charitable purpose. 
Engaging in interstate commerce means the soliciting, selling or taking orders for any goods, wares or merchandise which, at the time the order is taken, are in another state or will be produced in another state and shipped into this state in fulfillment of such orders. 
Solicitor means any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in the city soliciting, selling or taking orders for any services, goods, wares or merchandise, or any nature or kind whatsoever. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-2. - Penalties; civil remedies; license forfeiture. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  In case of any willful violation of any of the terms and provisions of this chapter, the city, in addition to imposing the penalties provided in this section, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court having proper jurisdiction, to restrain, correct or abate such violations; and the definition of any violation of the terms of this chapter as a misdemeanor shall not preclude the city from invoking the civil remedies given it by the laws of the state, but such remedies shall be cumulative and subject to prosecution as hereinabove prescribed for such violations. 
(c)  Each day's engaging in the business regulated by this chapter without the payment of the fee due thereon, and procuring a receipt, or license therefor, and each day's failure to comply with any of the other provisions of this chapter, shall constitute a separate offense, and the person so found guilty of such violation, or failing to comply with the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished therefor as provided in this section; provided the court trying such cause shall have the right and power upon conviction of any person for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter to decree and to make the decree a part of the judgment in such cause, a forfeiture of such license as such person may have procured under this chapter. However, in the event of such forfeiture of license, no part of such license fee as may have been so paid shall be refunded to such person, and no further license shall be issued to such person for the remaining period of such license year under this chapter.  
Secs. 54-3—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 54-31. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself as a solicitor without having first obtained a license therefor from the city, except that where the person who will be soliciting is under the age of 16 years, such person shall be supervised by a person who is over the age of 16 years and who shall obtain a license on behalf of the person to be supervised.  
Sec. 54-32. - Application. 
Each application for a license shall be in writing under oath and shall set out the following: 
(1)  The name of the applicant, with his permanent residence. 
(2)  The name and address of the person he represents. 
(3)  The kind, type and character of goods he will offer for sale. 
(4)  The names of any cities where the applicant has worked in the previous 30 days. 
(5)  Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, and if the applicant has been so convicted, state the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed thereof.  
Sec. 54-33. - Fees; term; exemptions from fees. 
The license fee for a solicitor under this chapter shall be listed in appendix A. Provided, however, when a person engages in such activity, through one or more agents or employees, such person shall, in addition to such fee, pay a license fee listed in appendix A for each agent or employee so engaged, all of which licenses shall be valid for one year from the date of their issuance. The fee for the replacement license that is within one year from the date of original issuance of license shall be as listed in appendix A. The license fee shall not be required of those engaging in interstate commerce, nor those conducting charitable solicitations, nor of vendors of farm or dairy products.  
Sec. 54-34. - Investigation of applicant. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate each applicant for a license under this chapter and make a report thereof to the city manager before issuance of such a license.  
Sec. 54-35. - Issuance. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to issue or refuse to issue a license under this chapter not later than two weeks from the time the application therefor is received by him.  
Sec. 54-36. - Bond. 
The application for a license shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum of $1,000.00, signed by the applicant, and signed as surety by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, or services of any nature whatsoever in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned to indemnify any purchasers or customers for any defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal of such bond at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within 30 days after delivery, and which bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons who may make any purchase or give any order to the principal of such bond, or to a agent or employee of the principal; provided that in case the applicant is engaging in any activity as defined in section 54-1 through one or more agents or employees, such applicant shall be required to enter into only one bond, in the sum of $1,000.00 as required in this section, which bond shall be made to cover the activities of all its agents or employees. This section shall not apply to those conducting charitable solicitations nor to vendors of farm or dairy products.  
Sec. 54-37. - Exemptions to licensing requirements. 
(a)  Commercial travelers, sales agents, legal sales, and established trade. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business, nor to sales made under authority and by order of law, nor to persons, or their authorized representatives, who have previously established with the owners or occupants of such private residences or property a regular business, trade, service or other contractual relationship. 
(b)  Newspaper solicitations. The licensing requirements of sections 54-31 through 54-36 shall not apply to newspaper solicitations. However, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct newspaper solicitations except in compliance with this subsection and the other applicable sections of this chapter. 
Each newspaper is required to notify the city secretary during the regular business hours of the city, and at least 12 hours in advance of such solicitation, of the date, time, and general location of the solicitation, and of the number of persons who will be soliciting. Each person conducting himself as a newspaper solicitor shall wear a badge or other form of identification which identifies the newspaper and is worn on a clearly visible location on the person.  
Sec. 54-38. - Appeals. 
If the city manager refuses to issue a license under this chapter, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the city council at its next regular meeting.  
Secs. 54-39—54-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 54-71. - Hours of operation. 
it shall be unlawful for any person acting as a solicitor to go in or upon the premises of a private residence in the city prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. of any day, Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. This section shall not apply to a visit to the premises as a result of a request or invitation made by the occupant.  
Sec. 54-72. - Health certificate for peddlers of food products. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager, before issuing a license to peddlers of merchandise of edible quality, to require the applicant for the license to first secure from the health officer a health certificate prescribing that the applicant has been duly examined by the health officer and further that the applicant is free of all contagious and communicable diseases and that the issuance of a peddler's license will not in any way endanger the public health, general welfare and safety of the city and its inhabitants; provided that the health officer may make a reasonable charge to be paid by the applicant for conducting the physical examination and issuing the certificate. This section shall not apply to sale of candy, nuts, or other edibles prepared and packaged by a nationally recognized manufacturer or a manufacturer in this state meeting standards imposed by state and local health codes, if such packages are unbroken.  
Sec. 54-73. - Cleanliness of food products and vehicles; honest weights and measures. 
Every person who shall comply with this chapter and shall sell, or offer for sale, any produce of edible quality shall at all times keep the produce in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall also keep their wagons, vehicles, or other conveyances in a clean and sanitary condition; and they shall not sell, or offer for sale, any unsound or unwholesome articles, nor shall they give, or make, any false weights or measures of any of the various articles as specified and covered by this section.  
Sec. 54-74. - Prohibited conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to: 
(1)  Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation; 
(2)  Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation; 
(3)  Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or to buy anything from that solicitor; or 
(4)  Represent the issuance of any license under this chapter as an endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation. 
State Law reference— Constitutes criminal trespass, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 30.05.  
Chapter 56 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Junked, wrecked, abandoned vehicles, § 34-201 et seq.; lawn and garden maintenance equipment, § 34-253 et seq.; nuisances, § 34-284 et seq.; accumulations of lumber, boxes, etc. prohibited, § 34-289; zoning, ch. 94. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 56-1—56-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HEALTH AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 56-21. - Purpose and intent of article. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards and regulations to help safeguard and preserve life or limb, property and public welfare by regulating the use, occupancy and maintenance of all structures, buildings and properties within the city. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of this article to regulate and control public nuisances and other conditions and circumstances, as set forth in this article, that adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the general public. It is not intended that this article be interpreted or enforced to require the city to intervene in matters which are primarily personal or private in nature and which may appropriately be resolved between or among private interests without material danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 1(B), (E), 7-1-1991)  
Sec. 56-22. - Scope of article. 
This article shall apply to all zoning districts, land, properties, structures and buildings within the city, including all vacant, occupied, residential, nonresidential, improved or unimproved land, properties, structures and buildings. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 1(C), 7-1-1991)  
Sec. 56-23. - Stricter standards or regulations. 
If any other ordinances of the city conflict with this article and the standards and regulations established in this article, the higher or stricter standard or regulation shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 1(D), 7-1-1991)  
Sec. 56-24. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Enforcement authority means the city manager or the person or department to whom the city manager from time to time may delegate the enforcement responsibility. 
Graffiti means words, phrases, designs, symbols, letters or drawings written, painted or scratched on sidewalks, fences, walls, windows, walls of buildings, trees or other structures or items. 
Lateral clearance means the dimension measured horizontally and perpendicular to a sidewalk, street, paved alley or easement within which no encroachment is allowed; or the dimension measured horizontally and perpendicular to an alley or easement line beyond which no encroachment is allowed. 
Minimum Housing Code means article IX of chapter 22. 
Nuisance means as follows: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known and established at common law or in equity jurisprudence; 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence, including, without limitation, any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations, abandoned refrigerators, inoperable motor vehicles or any structurally unsound fences or structures, or any lumber, trash, fence, debris or vegetation which are or may be hazardous to children; 
(3)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, and is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city; 
(4)  Overcrowding a room with occupants, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city; 
(5)  Insufficient ventilation or illumination, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city; 
(6)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city; 
(7)  Uncleanliness, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city; 
(8)  Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, and is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city; 
(9)  Graffiti of any type; 
(10)  A live tree, shrub or other similar plant of any description which creates a hazard or risk of damage or destruction to persons or property, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the code and ordinances of the city; and 
(11)  Any other nuisance or public nuisance as defined by the codes and ordinances of the city. 
Owner means any person claiming, or in whom is vested, the ownership, dominion or title of real or personal property, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Holder of fee simple title; 
(2)  Holder of life estate; 
(3)  Holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five years or more; 
(4)  A buyer in possession, or having right of possession under a contract for deed; 
(5)  A mortgagee, receiver, executor or trustee in possession or control, or having right of possession or control, of real property; and 
(6)  Any agent who is responsible for managing, leasing or operation of property. 
Premises means any parcel, lot or tract of land, including any structure, building, landscaping or trees thereon or other structure or improvement located thereon. 
Structure means any residential building, nonresidential building, dwelling, condominium, townhouse, apartment unit, detached garage, shed, awning, fence, screening wall, sign, swimming pool, excavation or any other edifice, erection or material placed or located on any property within the city, and any other improvement of any kind or nature. 
Tenant means any person or their agent who occupies a structure or property. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 2, 7-1-1991) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 56-25. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation continues, it shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Civil penalties may be assessed by Municipal Court of Record No. 1 for failure to comply with a lawful order of the Municipal Court of Record No. 1 as established in division 2 of this article. Civil penalties shall be assessed in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 a day for a violation of an ordinance. 
(c)  The penalties provided for in this section are in addition to any other penalties or enforcement remedies that the city may have under any applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 16, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 3118, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 3589 , § 1(A), 8-12-2019)  
Secs. 56-26—56-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 56-41. - Enforcement and inspection. 
(a)  The enforcement authority for this article shall be the city manager, or the person or department to whom the city manager delegates the enforcement responsibility. 
(b)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce this article, or whenever the enforcement authority has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any property a condition or violation which is unsafe, dangerous or hazardous or detrimental to the public interest, the enforcement authority may enter such structure or property at all reasonable times to inspect such structure or property; provided, however, that if such structure or property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and if such entry is refused, the enforcement authority shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 3, 7-1-1991)  
Sec. 56-42. - Responsibilities of owner and tenant. 
(a)  Every owner of the premises shall maintain such premises in compliance with this article. An owner shall not let, rent or lease a premises for occupancy or use, which does not comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Every owner and every tenant of the premises shall maintain the premises in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the disposal of rubbish, garbage, organic or inorganic waste, junk or other waste in a lawful manner. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 4, 7-1-1991)  
Sec. 56-43. - Substandard property. 
(a)  Declaration of substandard status. Failure of the owner to maintain any structure or property or portion of structure or property as required by article III of this chapter to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be grounds for the enforcement authority to declare the structure or property substandard. 
(b)  Order to vacate. When an occupied structure or property is declared substandard and is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or of the occupants, there shall be grounds for the enforcement authority to order the structure or property vacated. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 8, 7-1-1991)  
Sec. 56-44. - Enforcement procedures; notice, appeal and recovery of costs. 
(a)  Whenever the enforcement authority has found and determined that a building or structure is substandard and should be vacated, the enforcement authority shall give notice in accordance with the provision of the city's minimum housing code (article IX of chapter 22) and shall have, exercise and perform the rights, duties and function of the enforcement authority therein set forth. 
(b)  Appeals of any determination of the enforcement authority shall be to Municipal Court of Record No. 1 in accordance with the procedure for appeal under the provisions of the minimum housing code. 
(c)  There shall be a filing fee in an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code for an appeal of the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Enforcement of the orders issued by the enforcement authority shall be in accordance with the provisions of the minimum housing code, and the enforcement authority shall have, exercise and perform the powers, duties and functions of the building official and enforcement authority therein set forth. 
(e)  Except for vacation orders, enforcement of any notice and order of the enforcement authority under this article shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. The decision of the Municipal Court of Record No. 1 is final. 
(f)  The enforcement authority may bring forward, for a hearing before Municipal Court of Record No. 1, any single-family detached or single-family attached property that meet the requirements provided for in section 22-452 of this Code and one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The property or structure has been declared dangerous. 
(2)  The property or structure has been declared uninhabitable. 
(3)  More than six correction notices have been issued for the property in a calendar year and the property remains out of compliance. 
(4)  More than four citations have been issued for the property in a calendar year and the property remains out of compliance. 
(5)  The city has abated the same violation more than once in a calendar year for the property. 
(6)  The city has had to file more than one lien for the same violation in a calendar year against the property. 
(7)  The owner or occupant of the property has requested more than three extensions to correct a violation in a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 9, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 3118, § 3, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 3589 , § 1(B), 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 56-45. - Enforcement of order and cost recovery. 
(a)  Failure of an owner to comply with any notice or order that has become final shall be grounds for the enforcement authority to take whatever action is necessary to bring the structure or property into compliance. 
(b)  All costs for the taking down and removal, and/or restoration, of buildings declared substandard pursuant to this article shall be levied, assessed and collected in accordance with the provisions of the minimum housing code. 
(c)  All such costs shall include costs for mailing of a notice and filing of a statement with the county clerk and interest shall be levied, assessed and collected against such property for which any such final order was granted. If any owner of such property shall fail to pay the costs so assessed within 30 days after being notified of such costs, the city shall file with the county clerk a statement of such costs. The city shall have a privileged lien on the premises and the personal obligation of the owner of such property, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, to receive the costs so made and ten percent interest on the amount from the date the payment is due. For any such costs and interest, suit may be instituted in the name of the city, and the statement of costs, as provided previously in this article, shall be prima facie proof of the costs expended in such work. 
(d)  At the time of the hearing, the city council may make any written revisions or modifications to the expense report which it deems necessary and order that such expenses are made the personal obligation of the property owner and assess such expenses as a lien against the property involved. If the city council orders that the expenses shall be assessed against the property, it shall confirm the assessment, cause the assessment to be recorded on the assessment roll, and thereafter the assessment shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 10, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 3589 , § 1(C), 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 56-46. - Authority of the Municipal Court of Record No. 1. 
The Municipal Court of Record No. 1 shall have jurisdiction to: 
(a)  Uphold the determination and order of the enforcement authority; 
(b)  Allow a reasonable length of time in which to comply with the determination and order of the enforcement authority and the requirements of this article; 
(c)  Accept an alternate method for compliance with the provisions of this article or order of the enforcement authority when it can be demonstrated that such alternate method meets the intent of this article; 
(d)  When it is determined that, due to peculiarities of the property, a literal enforcement of this article would result in an unnecessary hardship, allow the minimal variation necessary to relive the hardship when such minimal variations will not result in danger to persons or property or will not result in a lack of maintenance so as to effect the appearance and/or values of the neighborhood; and 
(e)  Impose civil penalties as provided for in section 56-25. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 13, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 3118, § 4, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 3589 , § 1(D), 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 56-47. - Notice of nuisance or violation; service; failure to comply; abatement; costs; lien; administrative fees. 
(a)  If a nuisance is found to exist upon any property within the city, or if any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any property within the city limits, fails to comply with this article's provisions, it shall be the duty of the enforcement authority or his duly appointed representative to give a minimum of seven days' official notice in writing to such person which is creating and/or allowing the continuance of such nuisance, or is violating the terms of this article. If such person fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article within the specified period following notification, they shall be considered to be in violation and subject to fine and penalties as provided by this article. 
Exception: Official notice shall not be required to be given to any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of a multifamily dwelling complex for which an apartment complex license is required when a nuisance or condition is found to exist upon that apartment complex property that is a threat or danger to the health, safety or welfare of the tenants, employees or the general public. Such person shall be considered to be in violation and subject to fines and penalties as provided by this article. Nuisances or conditions that may be considered a threat or danger shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Unsanitary conditions; 
(2)  Exposed electrical wiring or electrical equipment that is not protected as required by the law; 
(3)  Blocked exits or exitways; 
(4)  Handrails or guardrails that have deteriorated members; 
(5)  Broken windows; 
(6)  Missing members of guardrails that are more than 30 inches above the grade; 
(7)  Missing or inoperable smoke detectors; 
(8)  Improperly installed and maintained hot water heaters or boilers; 
(9)  Missing air conditioning compressor fan guards; 
(10)  Inoperable plumbing fixtures such as water closets, bathtubs and showers; 
(11)  Trash or debris such as broken bottles, etc.; and 
(12)  Inoperable lighting along stairways or exitways. 
(b)  The notice shall be in writing and may be served on the property owner, or agent of the owner, by handing it to him in person, by United States mail, addressed to such owner, or agent of the owner, at his post office address, or if the address is unknown, then by posting such notices on the front door of the dwelling or establishment or where no building exists, by posting them on a sign in the front yard. 
(c)  Except as provided for multifamily dwelling complexes in subsection (a) of this section, the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall apply to all real properties occupied or unoccupied, except that the requirement of a seven-day official notification is met and fulfilled when the enforcement authority has given a seven-day notice in writing at least one time in any calendar year to such person which is creating such nuisance or is otherwise in violation of this article. 
(d)  The city shall be further entitled to go upon such nuisance properties and do or cause to be done the work necessary to abate any public nuisance existing in violation of this article if such person fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article within the specified period following official notification. 
(e)  All costs for abatement of any such public nuisance, or any part of a nuisance, including costs for mailing of a notice and filing of a statement with the county clerk and interest shall be levied, assessed and collected against such property or upon which such public nuisance, or any part of a nuisance, is located. If any owner of such property shall fail to pay the costs so assessed within 30 days after being notified of such costs, the city shall file with the county clerk a statement of such costs. The city shall have a privileged lien on the premises and the personal obligation of the owner of such property, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, to receive the costs so made and ten percent interest on the amount from the date the payment is due. For any such costs and interest, suit may be instituted in the name of the city, and the statement of costs, as provided previously in this article, shall be prima facie proof of the costs expended in such work. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 14, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2069, § 17, 9-9-1993; Ord. No. 2200, § 1, 10-9-1995; Ord. No. 2523, § 14, 2-21-2000)  
Secs. 56-48—56-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 56-81. - Exterior grounds. 
(a)  Sanitation. All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, free from accumulations of rubbish, garbage, junk or waste which constitute a public nuisance, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Grading and drainage. Grading and drainage maintenance standards are as follows: 
(1)  All property shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within or under any structure located thereon. 
(2)  No filling, excavation or other improvement shall be performed or constructed on any property which will have an adverse effect on an existing drainage pattern on an adjacent property. 
(c)  Sidewalks. All sidewalks, walkways, steps and areas located on all private property, other than single-family properties, and intended for public use, such as a sidewalk from a street to the front door of a dwelling or business, a sidewalk from a parking area to the primary public entry door of a business, a sidewalk in front of retail businesses such as a shopping center and other similar conditions shall be maintained by the owner and tenant of such property in a proper state of repair, free of mud, debris or other obstructions that would impair or prevent their use. The owner and tenant of private property adjacent to all sidewalks, walkways, steps and public areas located on public property shall keep such sidewalks, walkways, steps and public areas free of mud, debris or other obstructions that would impair or prevent their use. 
(d)  Rodent and insect control. Every owner and every tenant of a structure or property shall keep such property or structure free of insects, rats, fire ants, vermin or other pests which create a hazard or a nuisance to adjacent property or are otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(e)  Glare. Exterior lights placed or erected on private property shall be shielded, placed or erected so as not to create a traffic hazard or a public nuisance. 
(f)  Trees, shrubs and plants. Standards for trees, shrubs and plants are as follows: 
(1)  Trees, shrubs and plants shall not obstruct the access to or from any door or window of any structure which is used, or is required by city codes and ordinances to be used, for ingress and egress. 
(2)  Trees, shrubs or plants shall not create a hazard or an obstruction and shall be maintained within the following minimum clearances: 
a.  Overhead clearance of public sidewalks and other public pathways, seven feet vertical clearance. 
b.  Lateral clearance of public sidewalks and other public pathways, six inches from each edge of sidewalk or pathway. 
c.  Overhead clearance of streets, tree limbs and other projections over the street shall be maintained at a minimum of 14 feet vertical clearance above the street pavement. 
d.  Lateral clearance of streets, no encroachment over or above the back of the curb or the edge of paving. 
e.  Sight clearance at intersections of city streets, unobstructed sight distance of 200 feet. 
f.  Sight clearance for signs erected by the city, unobstructed sight distance of 100 feet. 
g.  Overhead clearance of public alleys and easements which have been dedicated and improved for vehicular use, tree limbs and other projections shall be maintained at a minimum of 14 feet vertical clearance above the alley pavement. 
h.  Lateral clearance along alleys and easements which have been dedicated and improved for vehicular use, trees, shrubs and plants (other than groundcover) shall be maintained a minimum of 18 inches horizontal clearance from the edge of the alley pavement or to the property line which ever dimension is smaller. 
(3)  Trees, shrubs or plants which are hazardous to persons or property shall be removed. Any tree, shrub or plant that appears to have lost more than 75 percent of its living foliage shall be considered dead. Any tree that is removed in accordance with this section, shall include removal of the tree stump by grinding the stump to grade level. This requirement shall only apply to trees stumps located in the front yard of a residence. 
(g)  Nuisances. All properties shall be maintained free of nuisances. 
(h)  Weeds, grass and other groundcover. Standards for weeds and grass are as follows: 
(1)  Weeds, grass and brush shall be maintained at a height not exceeding eight inches. 
(2)  All cut weeds, grass, shrubs or brush shall not be kept or allowed to accumulate on any public street, sidewalk or other public way. 
(3)  Weeds, grass, shrubs or brush shall not be deposited in any inlet, manhole or storm sewer or sanitary sewer system. 
(4)  The unpaved areas of the front yard shall be maintained with a grass, ground cover, or other type of landscaping to such an extent that the soil when wet will not be picked up and spread to sidewalks or adjacent private or public property and is not subject to erosion during rains. The landscaping occupying the unpaved areas of the front yard shall be provided with adequate water to sustain the landscape material, unless landscape watering is prohibited by mandatory water conservation regulations. 
(5)  All groundcover, including, but not limited to, grass, weeds, ivy, monkey grass, Mondo grass, Maiden grass, fountain grass, or any other variation of ornamental grass that can be used as a border or edging, and decorative groundcovers, shall be maintained by mowing, trimming, and/or edging so as to be in conformance with subsection (1) of this section and shall be maintained so as not to encroach over the edge of sidewalks, pedestrian ways, driveway, flatwork, curbs, and street pavement. This shall not preclude the use of permeable pavement or permeable flatwork techniques that incorporate groundcover in their design provided the areas are maintained in accordance with this chapter. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(j)  Accumulation of firewood. Any firewood which may be used as a harborage by rats, rodents or other vermin, or in which evidence of rats, rodents or other vermin is found shall be placed or stored on open racks and elevated with a clear intervening space of not less than six inches of clear space. 
(k)  Antennas, towers, stacks and similar structures. Antennas, towers, stacks and similar structures must be maintained structurally sound, free of deterioration and firmly secured. 
(l)  Fences. Standards for fences are as follows: 
(1)  All fences shall be maintained reasonably plumb and structurally sound (10° of center). Each structural and decorative member of a fence shall be free of deterioration and be compatible in size, material and appearance with the remainder of the fence. 
(2)  A fence that has deteriorated to a condition that it is likely to fall shall be repaired or replaced. Deteriorated fences may include any one, or a combination of, leaning fences, fences with missing/broken, and rotted pickets, and fences with posts that are bent, broken, rotted, or have loosened from the ground. 
(3)  Fences shall not be externally braced in lieu of replacing or repairing posts, columns or other structural members. 
(m)  Accessory structures. Carports, awnings, patio covers, garages, sheds, storage buildings and other accessory structures shall be maintained structurally sound, and free of deterioration. All accessory structures shall be protected from the elements by painting, staining or other weatherproofing or surface protection. 
(n)  Reserved. 
(o)  Parking lots, fire lanes, private drives and streets, driveways and improved parking surfaces. All parking lots, fire lanes, private drives and streets, driveways and improved parking surfaces shall be maintained in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances of the city. 
(p)  Permitted items in the front yard. In the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, D-1, D-2 and residential planned development zoning districts, no building, structure, fence, accessory object or other appurtenances, improved parking area or driveway shall be constructed, erected, placed or located in the front yard unless specifically listed in this section. Accessory objects and appurtenances not listed herein shall not be permitted in the front yards by exclusion. For purposes of this section, the term "height" shall mean that vertical dimension at any point measured from the average natural grade of the area within two feet of such point. Permitted items are as follows: 
(1)  Any edging for flower or hedge beds that does not exceed 12 inches in height and is constructed of brick, stone, treated lumber or other material approved by the enforcement authority. 
(2)  Freestanding statuaries, columns, bird baths and pedestals not exceeding 72 inches in height. 
(3)  Lawn furniture, including benches, tables, and stools which do not exceed 42 inches in height and are designed and constructed for outdoor use. 
(4)  Masonry, brick, concrete or stone retaining walls not exceeding 24 inches in height, provided that all requirements of the building code are met. 
(5)  The building official, or his designee, may issue a permit for decorative metal or wooden banisters and handrails for uncovered steps or a ramp that may project a maximum of six feet into the required front yard provided the design and construction is consistent with the architectural design and style of the residence. Handrails and guardrails shall be constructed as required by the building code. 
(6)  Earth berms for landscaping and screening purposes may be installed in the required front yard provided that the height of the berm shall not exceed one foot of height for each three feet of horizontal distance. Furthermore, the crown of the berm shall not exceed three feet, six inches in height. 
(7)  Landscaping, such as trees, bushes, shrubs, plants and ground cover, cultivated and maintained in conformance with all other provisions of the comprehensive zoning ordinance, the minimum housing code, the property maintenance code and all other applicable state and local laws. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "landscaping" shall not include hardscape. 
(8)  Driveways, circular drives, and improved parking areas may be permitted in the required front yard provided they are constructed, placed or located in compliance with the comprehensive zoning ordinance, vehicle parking code and all other applicable ordinances. 
(9)  Address plates and security protection signs not exceeding two square feet in area. 
(10)  Flag poles may be erected in the required front yard provided the height of the flag pole does not exceed the permitted structure height in the district in which it is located and the pole is set back a distance equal to its height from all property lines. 
(11)  Temporary signs as permitted by the sign regulations of the city. 
(12)  Landscape lighting which does not create an offensive glare to occupants of surrounding properties. 
(13)  Freestanding lampposts which do not exceed ten feet in height and are set back a distance equal to their height from all property lines and does not create an offensive glare to occupants of surrounding properties. 
(14)  Single pole basketball goals, provided they are set back a minimum of 15 feet from the front property line. 
(15)  Sidewalks and other hardscape in conformance with the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(16)  Trash and refuse containers or other personal property placed in the front of the main building for pick up by the sanitation department as addressed in other ordinances of the city. 
(17)  Landscape receptacles in good condition containing cultivated living plant material, provided the receptacle does not create a nuisance as defined by this chapter. 
The maximum number of objects or items of either lawn furniture or freestanding statuary permitted in residential front yards at any one time shall not exceed five, and that the total area such objects may occupy shall be limited to a maximum of 100 square feet. 
(q)  Outside storage. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, permit, conduct or maintain any outside storage on any portion of a lot or tract, outside of an enclosed structure, or under a carport or covered patio or other projecting overhang, for a continuous period in excess of seven days during a calendar year within the city. Each day during which outside storage occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1)  Prohibited outside storage for this section shall include, but not be limited to, the following items stored in a manner other than in an enclosed building: 
a.  Building material; 
b.  Supplies, materials or other matter associated with a home occupation; 
c.  Supplies, materials or other matter associated with a nonresidential activity; 
d.  Chemicals; 
e.  Furniture; 
f.  Appliances not designed for outdoor use; 
g.  Appliances designed for outdoor use but not currently installed; 
h.  Tools, mobile and/or mechanical equipment not connected with a residential use; 
i.  Lawn maintenance equipment; 
j.  Motor vehicle parts and/or accessories including but not limited to engines, transmissions, electrical parts, suspension parts, vehicle body parts, batteries, tires, wheels, hubcaps and other motor vehicle parts; 
k.  Other items or personal property which are not customarily used or stored outside and which are not made of a material that is resistant to damage or deterioration from exposure to the outside environment; or 
l.  Trash, garbage or other refuse. 
(2)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution: 
a.  In the case of all outside storage which is not deemed a nuisance, that such storage: 
1.  Does not occupy more than one percent of the lot area (measured by a single rectangle that would encompass all such outside storage); and 
2.  Is screened from view from private or public property by a solid fence, wall, landscaping or a combination of fence and landscaping. 
b.  In the case of building material, that such material is stored in a workmanlike manner as part of, and in conjunction with, an active building permit and is in compliance with 1401.3.1 of the building code. 
c.  In the case where the item is: 
1.  Awaiting pickup by the city or other sanitation service; 
2.  In a container or bag as approved by the city; and 
3.  In an approved location for the city or other sanitation service pickup. 
d.  In the case of furniture, that such furniture is designed and constructed for outside use, and further, that such furniture is in good condition and is not deteriorated. 
e.  In the case of outside storage of a type not specifically mentioned in this section, that such outside storage is: 
1.  Of a type that is minor in nature; 
2.  Of a type and quantity which is traditionally or commonly associated with the residential use of the property; 
3.  In combination with all other outside storage, the total does not occupy more than one percent of the lot area measured by a single rectangle that would encompass all such outside storage; and 
4.  Screened from view from private or public property by a solid fence, wall, landscaping or a combination of fence and landscaping. 
f.  In the case of chemicals that are associated with a residential use, stored in an appropriate manner and do not exceed a reasonable quantity needed for their residential use. 
g.  In the case of firewood that is stored in view from private or public property, provided the firewood is stored in conformance with subsection (j) of this section and in combination with all other outside storage does not occupy more than one percent of the lot area. 
(r)  Easements. Utility and/or drainage easements and all alleys shall be maintained clear and unobstructed, for the entire width of the easement or alley, of any brush, bushes, trees, structures or other objects that would prohibit access and maintenance of the utilities. Drainage easements having surface draining shall be maintained such that surface water is transported to the appropriate locations. Easements shall not be enclosed with a fence or by other means unless all entities having a right to the easement allow the obstruction of the easement by providing written documentation to the enforcement authority. 
(Ord. No. 1232, § 2, 1-15-1979; Ord. No. 1896-A, § 5, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2324, § 5, 6-16-1997; Ord. No. 2893, §§ 2—5, 11-13-2006; Ord. No. 2905, § 2, 2-19-2007; Ord. No. 2982, §§ 2—6, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 3067, § 2, 1-5-2010; Ord. No. 3589 , § 1(E), 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 56-82. - Exterior of structure. 
(a)  Generally. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained structurally sound. 
(b)  Structural members. All supporting structural members of all structures shall be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration and maintained capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads upon them. 
(c)  Exterior surfaces. The foundation, exterior wall, floor, roof and all exterior surfaces of every structure shall be maintained in a state of repair sufficient to exclude rats, rodents, birds, vermin and other animals. Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, broken glass, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be repaired, replaced or restored. 
(d)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to safely carry applicable dead and live loads that are imposed upon the foundation walls. 
(e)  Exterior walls. The exterior wall of every structure shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to interior of the structure. The exterior wall surface materials of every structure shall be maintained weatherproof or the surface protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(f)  Roofs and roof drainage. The roof, roof coverings and flashing on a building shall be maintained in good repair. Roof coverings shall be sound, tight and not have defects or evidence of deterioration. Repairs made to roofs shall be completed in a workmanship like manner and repair material shall match the existing roof material. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent ponding on the roof, dampness or deterioration in the exterior walls or interior portions of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Runoff water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(g)  Decorative features. The cornices, entablatures, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features of every structure shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(h)  Exterior attachments. All exterior canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, rain gutters, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions attached to a structure shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound condition, and their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(i)  Chimneys. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe, sound, properly mortared and in good repair, and their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(j)  Stairs and porches. Every stair, porch, balcony and all appurtenances attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(k)  Window and door frames. The windows, doors, and frames of every habitable structure shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible from entering the dwelling or structure. 
(l)  Weathertight. The windows and exterior doors of every habitable structure shall be fitted in their frames so as to be reasonably weathertight and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(m)  Glazing. Every window and/or window sash shall be fully supplied with approved glazing materials which are without open cracks and holes. A window and/or window sash may be temporarily secured and/or closed with alternate materials approved by the enforcement authority for periods during actual construction, remodeling or repairs, provided the period of time does not exceed 30 days. The enforcement authority may grant extensions of time due to extenuating circumstances. 
Interior or exterior window coverings that are visible from the exterior of the structure shall be maintained in good condition and have an exterior appearance that is in character with the exterior of the structure. Materials similar to aluminum foil, newspaper, unpainted plywood, other types of untreated building materials or other materials that are not normally considered window coverings shall be prohibited. 
Openings that are required for emergency escape and rescue shall be maintained in operable condition. 
(n)  Insect screens. Every window of every habitable structure which may be opened and used for ventilation shall be supplied with approved screening, except that such screens shall not be required for areas on a floor above the fifth floor and shall not be required for windows in habitable structures which have an approved and operable mechanical ventilating system as allowed by other city codes and ordinances. 
(o)  Door hardware. The exterior doors, door hinges and door latches of every habitable structure shall be maintained in good condition. Door locks in exterior doors of dwelling units shall be maintained in good repair and capable of tightly securing the door. 
(p)  Burglar bars. Burglar bars shall comply with requirements of the building code and other codes or ordinances of the city. Burglar bars on windows of bedrooms of residential structures shall be constructed and mounted in such a way so as to be operable and openable from the interior of the residence. 
(q)  Garage doors. Garage doors shall be capable of being closed reasonably plumb, properly attached and the exterior surface maintained weatherproof as required to prevent deterioration. 
(r)  Sanitation. All exterior surfaces of structures shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, free from accumulations of dirt, grime, filth, mold, mildew, fungus or other matter which constitute a nuisance or are contrary to the public heath, safety, welfare or impact property values. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 6, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2893, §§ 6, 7, 11-13-2006; Ord. No. 3313, § 1, 11-18-2014 )  
Sec. 56-83. - Interior of structure. 
(a)  Generally. The interior of a residential structure and its equipment shall be maintained structurally sound and in a sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety of the occupants, and to protect the occupants from the environment. 
(b)  Structural members. The supporting structural members of every building shall be maintained structurally sound, not showing any evidence of deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads. 
(c)  Interior surfaces. Floors, including carpets; walls, including windows and doors; ceilings; and other interior surfaces of every structure shall be maintained in a good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be repaired or replaced. 
(d)  Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be maintained so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(e)  Free from dampness. Cellars, basements and crawl spaces of every structure shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure. 
(f)  Sanitation. The interior of every structure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free from excessive or unnecessary accumulation of rubbish, refuse or garbage. 
(g)  Storage. Garbage or refuse shall not be allowed to accumulate on any property or be stored in public halls or stairways of any building. 
(h)  Insect and rat harborage. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rat infestation, and where insects or rats are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by processes permitted by the codes and ordinances of the city which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
(i)  Exit facilities. All stairs and railings and other exit facilities of every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. Treads and risers that evidence excessive wear or are broken, warped or loose shall be repaired or replaced. Every stair shall be so constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads. 
(j)  Handrails, guardrails and grab bars. Every handrail, guardrail and grab bar shall be firmly fastened and capable of bearing normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(k)  Plumbing fixtures. Every residential dwelling structure and unit shall be provided with a water closet, a lavatory and a bathtub or shower. 
(l)  Sewer. Every residential unit shall be provided with plumbing fixtures connected to the sanitary sewer, or to a private sewage system permitted by the codes and ordinances of the city if the sanitary sewer is not available. 
(m)  Water. All plumbing fixtures in residential units shall be connected to an approved water supply and each sink, lavatory and either a bathtub or shower shall be provided with hot and cold running water, except where deemed by the enforcement authority as not necessary for safety and sanitation. 
(n)  Heating and cooling. 
(1)  Every residential unit shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of at least 70 degrees Fahrenheit at a point three feet above the floor at all times in all habitable rooms. 
(2)  An owner shall maintain in operating condition, any cooling and/or air conditioning equipment that is provided by the owner, so that the room temperature is maintained at a level which is at least 15° cooler than the outside temperature, but in no event higher than 85° Fahrenheit, in all habitable rooms. 
(3)  All heating, cooling and air conditioning equipment shall be operable, and shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition in accordance with the codes and ordinances of the city. No unvented fuel-burning heater as defined in chapter 22 shall be permitted. All heating and cooling devices or appliances shall be of an approved type as outlined in chapter 22. 
(o)  Electrical equipment. All electrical equipment, wiring, and appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with the codes and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1896-A, § 7, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 3589 , § 1(F), 8-12-2019)  
Secs. 56-84—56-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARKING OF VEHICLES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2860, § 2, adopted May 1, 2006, renamed Art. III, formerly titled "parking of vehicles on private property," to "parking of vehicles." 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 56-111. - Intent of article. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish limitations on the numbers of vehicles parked or stored, the types of vehicles parked or stored and the manner in which vehicles are parked or stored on or about residential properties. 
(b)  Scope. This article shall apply to all land, properties and/or premises located in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, D-1, D-2, MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, MF-4 zoning districts and planned development districts which permit residential use, including all vacant, occupied, improved or unimproved land or properties. 
(c)  Other ordinances. If any other ordinance of the city conflicts with this article and the standards and regulations established in this article, the higher or stricter standard or regulation shall prevail. 
(d)  Further purpose and intent. It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of this article to regulate, control and limit public nuisances and other conditions and circumstances as set forth in this article that adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the general public, and that adversely affect community appearance, orderly development and property values. 
(Ord. No. 2427, § 1, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 56-112. - Definitions. 
Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meaning within the context with which they are used. Words in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Corner lot means a property located at the intersection or confluence of two or more streets such that public street rights-of-way are directly adjacent to at least two contiguous sides of the lot. 
Driveway means the continuous improved surface which provides ingress and egress from a garage, carport or off-street parking area, to an adjacent street, alley or other improved public way. 
Improved surface means a continuous area used for the movement, parking or storage of a vehicle that is overlaid or otherwise paved with Portland cement concrete, paving stones, brick pavers installed on an approved base course or other hard surfaced durable material designed to support vehicular weight and approved by the building official. The building official shall establish and maintain a set of standard construction details for improved parking surfaces and improved driveway surfaces. The city's minimum standards are as follows: a concrete pad poured to a nominal depth of four inches, at a minimum of 3,000 psi, using No. 3 rebar and set at 18 inches on center each way. 
Rear half of the lot means the portion of a lot located behind a line connecting the midpoints on the two opposite side lot lines of any lot, tract, or plot. 
Storage means the continuous parking of a vehicle for 48 hours or longer. 
Vehicle means any and every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported, drawn or moved upon a street, highway, waterway or airway and shall include but is not limited to any automobile, bus, truck, tractor, motorhouse, farm machinery, motorcycle, scooter, moped, all-terrain vehicle, boat, boat trailer, aircraft, recreational vehicle, golf cart, go-cart, trailer, fifth wheel trailer, camper, camper shell, wheeled towing frame, semitractor, semitractor trailer, truck bed mounted on a chassis and mobile home. This definition does not include nonmotorized bicycles, small engine lawn mowers and devices of similar scale. 
Vehicle, special, means a vehicle designed and used primarily for recreational uses. A special vehicle shall be, but is not limited to, the following: motor home, motorhouse, camper, camper shell, boat on or off of a trailer, RV, fifth wheel trailer or any similar vehicle. 
Vehicle, utility, means a vehicle designed and used primarily for utilitarian uses. A utility vehicle shall be, but is not limited to, the following: trailer, tractor, farm machinery, boat trailer without a boat, truck bed mounted on a chassis, wheeled towing frame, utility trailer, boxed trailer, flat bed trailer, car carrier, panel truck or other similar vehicle. 
Yard, front, means the area from the front face of a main building or structure to the front property line or street right-of-way line or when the lot is vacant, the area defined as the required front yard by the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
Yard, rear, means the area extending across the rear of a lot from one side lot line to the other side lot line and having a depth between the face of the main building and the rear lot line or when the lot is vacant, the area defined as the required rear yard by the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
Yard, side, means the area from the side of the main building or structure to the side property line or when the lot is vacant, the area defined as the required side yard by the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2427, § 2, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 3589 , § 2(A), 8-12-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 56-113. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or any amendment thereto shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in municipal court shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2427, § 10, 10-5-1998)  
Secs. 56-114—56-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARKING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 56-141. - General vehicle parking; parking surfaces. 
(a)  Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided as established in the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(b)  The total number of vehicles that may be parked or stored on, or contiguous to, a residential lot shall not exceed five; provided they can be legally parked on the property or in the public right-of-way directly contiguous to property. If the physical limitation of the property and/or right-of-way parking prohibitions reduce the number of available legal parking spaces to less than five, then the total number of vehicles shall be limited to the number of vehicles that may be legally parked on the lot or in the public right-of-way directly contiguous to the lot. See subsection 56-146 (c) for appeals to this provision. 
(c)  No vehicle may be used for housekeeping, living, sleeping quarters, or for the storage of trash, debris or personal property not normally associated with the vehicle. 
(d)  All vehicles must be maintained in an operable condition and comply with chapter 34, article IV of this Code and V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq., Abandoned and Junk Vehicles. 
(e)  All vehicles must have and comply with the required current federal and state licensing and registration. 
(f)  Vehicular access to improved parking surfaces shall be provided by means of a continuous full width improved driveway surface. 
(g)  Improved parking surfaces shall be maintained in good, and safe condition and be free of holes, cracks, spalling, or other failures that may effect the use, drainage from the property, drainage on adjoining property or the longevity of the material. 
(h)  Parking or the storage of any vehicle upon any surface other than an improved parking surface shall be prohibited. This subsection shall apply to all land, properties and/or premises located in the city, including public rights-of-way. 
Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  A vehicle, other than a utility vehicle, may be parked parallel to the street on an unimproved surface, in a public right-of-way, within eight feet of the improved surface (street) pavement, when the improved surface (street) pavement is less than 26 feet in width and the street does not have a defined curb. 
(2)  The building official may grant special permission to park vehicles upon unimproved surfaces for special events. The building official may place reasonable conditions on the approval to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(i)  The unscreened parking or storage of any vehicle within a rear yard upon any surface other than an improved rear or side entry driveway or required parking surface shall be prohibited. The parking or storage of any vehicle on an improved surface, other than a rear or side entry driveway which provides access to the required (based on the comprehensive zoning ordinance) parking spaces, shall require the parking area and the vehicle be screened from view from any street, alley, public way, or adjacent private property by: 
(1)  A solid opaque fence or wall at least six feet in height; 
(2)  Vegetation consisting of a solid hedgerow or evergreen shrubs, or trees and shrubs, providing full screening from the ground to a minimum height of six feet; 
(3)  Any combination of subsections (i)(1) and (i)(2) of this section that effectively conceals the vehicle from view and accomplishes the required screening height; or 
(4)  Any other form of compatible and appropriate screening as so determined by the building official. 
Modification to the screening requirements may be considered for special and utility vehicle parking as a special exception as addressed in section 56-146. 
(j)  No part of any parked or stored vehicle may extend over a public easement or right-of-way. 
(k)  Where parking surfaces are located parallel and adjacent to a side street property line, a minimum of five feet shall be provided between the surface and the property line. 
(l)  A vehicle may be covered with a fitted vehicle cover designed for that type of vehicle provided the cover allows for inspection of the license, registration and inspection sticker. Tarpaulins and other covers shall not be permitted. Any covered vehicle that does not provide for viewing of the license, registration and inspection sticker is presumed to be an inoperable vehicle. This presumption may be rebutted by the owner of the vehicle demonstrating, after notice of violation, to the building official or his agent that the car is not an inoperable vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2427, § 3, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 2524, §§ 1, 2, 2-21-2000; Ord. No. 2860, § 3, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 2893, § 8, 11-13-2006; Ord. No. 3589 , § 2(B), 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 56-142. - Special vehicle parking. 
(a)  Special vehicle parking regulations are as follows: 
(1)  Special vehicles shall comply with the general vehicle parking regulations unless otherwise addressed in this section. 
(2)  Special vehicles shall be parked and/or stored in conformance with this section and any provisions or conditions established by a special exception or a permit. 
(3)  All special vehicles shall be parked and/or stored on an improved parking surface. 
(4)  No special vehicle may be used for housekeeping, living, sleeping quarters or for the storage of trash, debris or personal property not normally associated with the vehicle. (See section 56-146, special exceptions, for the use of a special vehicle for temporary living facilities.) 
(5)  The vehicles must be maintained free of rust, peeling or missing paint, broken or missing windows, flat or missing tires, and excess dirt or grime. 
(6)  The vehicle must be in operable condition as defined in chapter 34, article IV (inoperable, abandoned and derelict motor vehicles). 
(7)  All equipment or attachments necessary to operate the vehicle must be in place and operational on the vehicle. 
(8)  Stored special vehicles must be secured with wheel stops or maintained so as not to present a safety problem to the neighborhoods in which they are located. 
(b)  Regulations for special vehicles parked or stored in the side or rear yards not adjacent to a street are as follows: 
(1)  The parking or storage of any special vehicle in the side or rear yard shall be screened from view from the streets that abut the lot by the following: 
a.  A solid opaque fence or wall at least five feet in height; 
b.  Vegetation consisting of a solid hedgerow or evergreen shrubs, or trees and shrubs, providing full screening from the ground to a minimum height of five feet; 
c.  Any combination of subsections (b)(l)a. and b. of this section that effectively conceals the vehicle from view and accomplishes the required screening height; or 
d.  Any other form of compatible and appropriate screening as determined by the building official. 
(2)  Exception: Special vehicles are not required to be screened if they are parked in the side or rear yard on a driveway which provides access to the required parking and where the driveway is not located in a yard that is adjacent to a street. 
a.  See subsection (c) of this section for special vehicles parked in yards adjacent to a street. 
b.  See section 56-146(b), special exceptions, for lots that have unique or unusual property constraints. 
(3)  Access to special vehicle parking surfaces located in the side or rear yard is not required to be an improved driveway surface, provided the occasional use of the special vehicle does not disrupt the ground covering over which the vehicle must travel. If it is found that the ground covering is repeatedly damaged due to the movement of the special vehicle, a continuous improved driveway surface to a public way must be installed to provide access to the parking surface. 
(4)  Gravel or crushed rock may be used in the rear ½ of the rear yard as an improved parking surface for special vehicle parking provided the gravel or crushed rock parking area is constructed as per the improved parking surface standards and is maintained in conformance with such standards. 
(c)  Regulations for special vehicles parked or stored in the yards adjacent to a street shall be as follows: 
(1)  On lots with one street frontage, one special vehicle may be stored in the front yard, provided: 
a.  Access to the side and/or rear yard is prohibitive due to physical restrictions, as determined by the building official at the time of the issuance of the first permit, such as retaining walls, trees greater than two-inch caliper, air conditioning equipment, pool equipment and/or other permanent obstructions. 
(2)  On lots with two or more street frontages, one special vehicle may be stored unscreened on the property in the yards adjacent to the street frontages provided: 
a.  Access to the side and/or rear yard is prohibitive due to physical restrictions, as determined by the building official at the time of the issuance of the first permit, such as retaining walls, trees greater than two-inch caliper, air conditioning equipment, pool equipment and/or other permanent obstructions; 
b.  A screening fence is prohibited in the yard by the zoning ordinance or the property maintenance code. 
(3)  On lots where a special vehicle can be stored in the side or rear yard and a screening fence is not prohibited by the zoning ordinance or the property maintenance code, all special vehicles shall be screened from view from the street as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(d), (e)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2427, § 4, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 3589 , § 2(C), 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 56-143. - Utility vehicle parking. 
(a)  Utility vehicles shall comply with the general vehicle parking regulations unless specifically addressed in this section. 
(b)  The parking or storage of utility vehicles in the front yard shall be prohibited. 
(c)  The parking or storage of tractors, tractor trailers, farm machinery, or other vehicles designed primarily for nonresidential purposes, such as construction equipment designed for hauling or moving of materials, is prohibited. 
(d)  No utility vehicle may be used for housekeeping, living, sleeping quarters or for the storage of trash, debris or personal property. 
(e)  The unscreened parking or storage of any utility vehicle within a rear yard or a side yard upon any surface other than an improved rear entry driveway or parking surface shall be prohibited. The parking or storage of any utility vehicle on an improved surface in the rear or side yard other than the rear or side entry driveway which provides access to the required (as defined in the comprehensive zoning ordinance) parking spaces shall require the parking area and the vehicle to be screened from view from any street, alley, public way or adjacent private property as required in the general vehicle parking regulations. 
(f)  Gravel or crushed rock may be used in the rear yard as an approved parking surface for a utility vehicle provided the gravel or crushed rock parking area is constructed as per the improved parking surface standards and is maintained in conformance with such standards. 
(g)  Access to utility vehicle parking surfaces located in the rear yard are not required to be an improved driveway surface, provided the occasional use of the utility vehicle does not disrupt the ground covering over which the vehicle must travel. If it is found that the ground covering is damaged due to the movement of the utility vehicle, a continuous improved driveway surface to a public way must be installed to provide access to the parking surface. 
(h)  Stored utility vehicles must be secured with wheel stops or maintained so as not to present a safety problem to the neighborhoods in which they are located. 
(Ord. No. 2427, § 5, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 56-144. - Driveway requirements. 
(a), (b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Driveways shall be designed and constructed as per the improved driveway standards of the city. The city's minimum standards are as follows: a concrete pad poured to a nominal depth of four inches at a minimum of 3,000 psi, using No. 3 rebar and set 18 inches on center each way. 
(d)  The approach width of driveways in residential zoning districts shall be measured at the property line and subject to the following: 
(1)  The total of all approach widths along a street or alley frontage shall not exceed the lesser of: 
a.  Fifty percent of the width of the frontage; or 
b.  Thirty lineal feet. 
(2)  Driveway pavement shall line up with the edges of the driveway approach at the property line. 
(3)  In the event more than one driveway approach is located along the same property line, the driveway approaches must be separated by a minimum of 20 feet measured at the property line. 
(4)  No single drive approach shall exceed 20 feet in width. 
(e)  No driveway or improved parking surface shall cover more than 67 percent of a front yard in a residential zoning district. 
(f)  Where driveways are located parallel and adjacent to a side street property line, a minimum of five feet shall be provided between the surface and the property line. 
(g)  Improved parking surfaces, including the area covered by vehicle storage buildings, and their access driveway may not cover greater than 33 percent of the rear half of the lot. 
(h)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for the parking or storing of vehicles at an existing residence on an unimproved driveway surface where the driveway was constructed before February 19, 1990; however, the existing unimproved drive or parking surface shall be maintained in a fashion that will support vehicular traffic, not allow grass, weeds or other vegetation to grow in the driveway area and at such time as the residence is completely rebuilt or improvements to the same real property constitute 25 percent or more of the property's total assessed value, compliance with this section shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2427, § 6, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 3002, § 4, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 3589 , § 2(D), 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 56-145. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals to the determination of the building official or the director of community services regarding these regulations or requests for special exceptions to terms of this section shall be made to the zoning board of adjustment. Such request shall be in writing on the proper form and delivered to the building official or director of community services before the expiration of ten days from the date of the decision, otherwise the decision of the building official or director of community services shall be final. 
(b)  In the event of an appeal, the zoning board of adjustment shall review the determination of the building official or the director of community services and shall have, by a majority vote, jurisdiction to: 
(1)  Uphold the determination of the building official or director of community services. 
(2)  Approve alternative paving materials where such materials are demonstrated to meet or exceed the requirements of concrete or other approved paving material. 
(3)  Allow a reasonable length of time, not to exceed a maximum of 12 months, in which to comply with the paving requirements. 
(4)  Upon the vote of no less than three-fourths of the members of the zoning board of adjustment voting at the meeting, grant a variance, to a requirement under this section where it is determined that, due to peculiarities of the property, such as shape or restricted area, literal enforcement of this section would result in an unnecessary hardship. 
(c)  Notification of the appeal shall be sent, by first class mail, to all property owners within 200 feet of the subject property at least ten days prior to the date of the appeals hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2427, § 7, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 56-146. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  Temporary quarters. Upon a request from the property owner or tenant of a property, the building official may permit the storage, parking and the use of a special vehicle in the front yard of a residence for a period not to exceed two weeks in a calendar year. The temporary parking of the special vehicle shall comply with the requirements in special vehicle parking requirements. The building official may place special conditions on the approval to ensure the health, welfare and safety of the general public. 
(b)  Special exceptions to the screening requirements. Requests for special exceptions to the screening requirements shall be received by the building official and forwarded to the director of community services. The special exception process shall be administered by the director of community services. The building official shall make available an application form and the director of community services may authorize a permit to be issued with the following special considerations: 
(1)  The director of community services may grant a special exception if the director determines that the special exception will not have a negative impact on the adjoining property or the neighborhood. Special exceptions may be granted by the director of community services for vehicles and the property that meet all of the following: 
a.  The ability to access the side or rear yard, the side yard is less than three feet larger than the vehicle. 
b.  A screening fence or wall would hinder navigation of a vehicle in the side or rear yard. 
c.  The size of the vehicle. 
1.  The width of the special vehicle or utility trailer does not exceed 102 inches. 
2.  The height of the special vehicle does not exceed 12 feet, six inches or the height of the utility trailer does not exceed six feet. 
d.  The visual appearance of the vehicle. 
1.  The vehicle must be in operable condition as defined in chapter 34, article IV (inoperable, abandoned and derelict motor vehicles). 
2.  All equipment or attachments necessary to operate the vehicle must be in place and operational on the vehicle. 
e.  The visual appearance and impact on the neighborhood. 
1.  A special vehicle stored in a side yard without the prescribed screening must be stored a minimum of five feet behind the front corner of the building. A lesser setback may be appropriate to reduce negative impact on adjacent property such as obstructing a view from a neighbor's window. 
2.  No portion of the vehicle shall project above the roof of the house on the front of the house. 
f.  All property owners within 200 feet will be notified and requested to comment on the requested special exception. Comments will be considered by the director of community services in evaluating the exception request. 
g.  Special exceptions to the screening height requirements for rear or side yard screening may be granted by the director of community services when the existing screening meets with the intent of this article. 
h.  No exit doors or emergency rescue windows on the house shall be blocked by the vehicle. 
(2)  A permit may be issued in accordance with section 56-142(d) with the following additional special conditions: 
a.  A special exception shall not carry over to new occupants, different vehicles, or different locations. 
b.  Reasonable special conditions may be placed on the approval of a permit if deemed necessary by the director of community services. The resident shall be required to sign a document that addresses conditions required as a part of the special exception to mitigate negative impact on the neighbors or neighborhood. 
c.  No special exception shall be granted when a special vehicle or utility trailer has access to a garage on the property that is large enough to house the vehicle, but is being used for other purposes such as storage, hobby area, etc. 
d.  No utility trailer shall be stored unscreened adjacent to a side street. 
e.  For utility trailers, the special exception permit shall be applied for prior to December 15, 1998, and obtained prior to February 1, 1999. 
(c)  Special exceptions to the number of vehicles that may be parked or stored. Appeals to section 56-141(b) shall be heard by the zoning board of adjustment. 
(1)  The members and procedures of the zoning board of adjustment shall be established by an administrative policy, promulgated by the city manager or his/her designee, filed with the city secretary. 
(2)  The zoning board of adjustment shall have the authority to grant special exceptions to the terms of section 56-141(b) provided: 
a.  That all property owners owning property within 200 feet of the subject property be notified of the requested special exception by regular mail to the last address reflected on the current tax roll of Dallas County 15 days prior to the administrative board hearing. 
b.  That the board considers any comments received from the surrounding property owners during its deliberation. 
c.  That the board determines that the granting of the special exception would not be injurious or detrimental to surrounding residents or their property. 
d.  That the board determines that the granting of the special exception would not detract from the neighborhood appearance. 
e.  That the board determines that the granting of the special exception would not hamper emergency response in the area. 
f.  That the board determines that the granting of the special exception would be in the best interest of the community. The board may impose additional requirements deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2427, § 8, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 2860, § 4, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 3589 , § 2(E), 8-12-2019)  
Sec. 56-147. - Vehicles being offered for sale. 
(a)  In all zoning districts, vehicles being offered for sale shall not be parked or stored in the public right-of-way or on public property. 
(b)  In residential zoning districts, no more than two vehicles may be parked and offered for sale from a property in a calendar year. Said vehicles must be registered to the occupant of the property. 
(c)  In nonresidential zoning districts, vehicles shall only be offered for sale on a property that has a current certificate of occupancy that allows vehicle sales. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 5, 5-1-2006)  
Chapter 58 - SALES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GARAGE SALES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 94. 
 
Sec. 58-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garage sale means a sale conducted by a dwelling occupant on the property of the occupant of personal items accumulated by the occupant, such as used clothing, furniture, lawn care equipment and other items normally found in a dwelling. Garage sales are not intended and shall not allow businesses to be operated out of homes. 
(Ord. No. 1991, § 3, 6-15-1992) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-32. - Limit on number and frequency. 
A maximum of two garage sales per year may be conducted at a dwelling address, and each separate garage sale may not exceed three consecutive days in duration and there shall be at least five days between each separate sale. 
(Ord. No. 1991, § 4, 6-15-1992)  
Secs. 58-33—58-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESALE OF CERTAIN PROPERTY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized vendor means a commercial supplier who deals in the wholesale distribution of regulated property in the ordinary course of business. 
Crafted precious metals means jewelry, silverware, art objects or any other thing or object made, in whole or in part, from gold, silver, platinum, palladium, iridium, rhodium, osmirum, ruthenium or their alloys, excluding coins and commemorative medallions. 
Personal identification certificate means a certificate issued by the state department of public safety under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 521.001 et seq. 
Purchase means a transaction in which a person takes title to regulated property in exchange for valuable consideration. 
Regulated property means new or used: 
(1)  Electronic equipment; 
(2)  Business machines; 
(3)  Photographics equipment; 
(4)  Radio equipment; 
(5)  Power tools; 
(6)  Pneumatic equipment; 
(7)  Welding equipment; and 
(8)  Jewelry, including stones removed from mounting. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 1, 3-23-1981) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-67. - Regulated property purchases; records. 
A person who purchases regulated property for the purpose of resale shall: 
(1)  Keep a sales record which indicates the manufacturer or authorized vendor from which the regulated property was purchased; or 
(2)  If the regulated property was purchased from other than a manufacturer or authorized vendor, the person shall: 
a.  At the time of purchase, record in a legible manner, the name, address, driver's license number or personal identification certificate number of the seller; a description of the property purchased; and the price paid or other consideration exchanged for the property purchased; 
b.  At the time of purchase, determine that the photograph on the driver's license or personal identification certificate is a photograph of the seller; 
c.  Retain possession of the property purchased and withhold the property from resale for seven business days; 
d.  Make the purchased property available for inspection by any police officer during regular business hours while the property is in the person's possession; and 
(3)  Maintain on file the information required by this article, for one year from the date of purchase or until the item is sold, whichever occurs later. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 3-23-1981)  
Secs. 58-68—58-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CRAFTED PRECIOUS METALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Crafted precious metals, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9009a. 
 
Sec. 58-91. - Purchases from minor. 
(a)  A dealer may not purchase crafted precious metals from a person under 18 years of age unless the seller delivers to the dealer before the purchase a written statement from a parent or legal guardian of the seller consenting to the transaction. The dealer shall preserve the statement with the records required to be kept under this article. The dealer may destroy the statement one year from the date of purchase or until the item is sold, whichever occurs later. 
(b)  A person who fails to obtain or keep a statement as required by this section commits a class B misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9009a, § 2.  
Sec. 58-92. - Report of purchasing. 
(a)  Not later than 48 hours after the time it is received, each dealer shall report in accordance with section 58-93 all identifiable crafted precious metals that the dealer purchases, takes in trade, accepts for sale on consignment or accepts for auction. 
(b)  Each dealer, before the time any crafted precious metal is offered for sale or exchange, shall notify each person intending to sell or exchange the crafted precious metal that the person must file with the dealer, before the dealer may accept any of the person's property, a list describing all of the person's crafted precious metal to be accepted by the dealer. The list must set forth the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the proposed seller; 
(2)  A complete and accurate description of the crafted precious metal; 
(3)  A certification by the proposed seller that the information is true and complete; and 
(4)  The driver's license number or DPS identification card number of the seller, as recorded by the dealer upon being physically presented the driver's license or DPS identification card by the seller. 
(c)  On demand, the dealer shall provide the list required by subsection (b) of this section to any peace officer and shall mail or deliver a complete copy of each list to the chief of police or to the sheriff in accordance with section 58-93 not later than 48 hours after it is filed with the dealer. 
(d)  A dealer who fails to make or permit inspection of a report as required by this section commits a class B misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9009a, § 3.  
Sec. 58-93. - Form of report; filing. 
(a)  Each report required by this division must be filed in accordance with this section unless a similar report is required by other state law or by a city ordinance. If such a report is required, the report must comply with and be submitted in accordance with the applicable law or ordinance. 
(b)  Any report required by this division shall be submitted to the chief of police. 
(c)  In the absence of other state law or a city ordinance that requires reporting of property acquired by a dealer in a transaction enumerated by section 58-92(a), the report shall be submitted on forms prescribed by the district attorney or person performing the duties of district attorney of the county where the transaction occurs. 
(d)  The original report and a copy shall be submitted by the dealer in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. The dealer shall retain a copy of the report until the third anniversary of the date on which the report is filed. 
(e)  A dealer who fails to make or permit inspection of a report as required by this section commits a class B misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9009a, § 4.  
Sec. 58-94. - Retention of property. 
(a)  A dealer may not melt, deface, alter, or dispose of crafted precious metal for which a report is required under this division before the 11th day after the day on which the report is filed unless: 
(1)  The peace officer to whom the report is submitted, for some good cause, authorizes disposition of that crafted precious metal; 
(2)  The dealer obtains the name, address, and description of the buyer and retains this information record, which shall be made available for inspection by any peace officer; or 
(3)  The dealer is a pawnbroker and the disposition is the redemption of pledged property by the pledgor. 
(b)  A person who disposes of property or who fails to make a record available for inspection by a peace officer as required by this section commits a class B misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9009a, § 4A.  
Sec. 58-95. - Inspection of property. 
(a)  The purchased property must be made available by the dealer for inspection by any police officer during regular business hours while the property is in the dealer's possession. 
(b)  Information obtained under this section is confidential except for use in a criminal investigation or prosecution or a civil court proceeding. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9009a, § 5.  
Sec. 58-96. - Purchases at temporary locations. 
(a)  A dealer who conducts business from a temporary location may not engage in business of buying precious metal or used items made of precious metal unless the person has filed a registration statement with the police department within a 12-month period at least 30 days preceding the date on which each purchase is made. A registration statement must set forth the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the person; 
(2)  The location where business is to be conducted; and 
(3)  Other relevant information required by the police department. 
(b)  If the dealer is an association or corporation, the statement must set forth the name and address of each member of the association or each officer and director of the corporation, respectively. 
(c)  A dealer who fails to file a registration statement in violation of this section commits a class B misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9009a, § 6.  
Sec. 58-97. - Purchase of melted items. 
(a)  A dealer, in the course of business, may not purchase an object that is formed as the result of the melting of crafted precious metal unless the object is purchased from a manufacturer of or a regular dealer in crafted precious metal. 
(b)  A person who purchases an object in violation of this section commits a class B misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9009a, § 7.  
Sec. 58-98. - Application of division. 
(a)  This division applies only to the crafted precious metals that have been sold or used primarily for personal, family or household purposes. This division does not apply to any person whose purchases and sales of precious metals and products made thereof are merely incidental to its business of extracting, recovering or salvaging precious metals from industrial byproducts and industrial waste products nor does this division apply to dental, pharmaceutical or medical applications of crafted precious metals. 
(b)  This division does not apply to crafted precious metal that has been: 
(1)  Acquired in good faith in a transaction involving the stock in trade of another dealer who previously made the reports required by this division concerning the crafted precious metal included in the transaction if: 
a.  The selling dealer delivers to the acquiring dealer a written document that states that the reports have been made; 
b.  The acquiring dealer submits a copy of the statement to the chief of police; and 
c.  Each dealer involved in the transaction retains a copy of the statement required by this division until the third anniversary of the date of the transaction; 
(2)  Acquired in a nonjudicial sale, transfer, assignment, assignment for the benefit of creditors, or consignment of the assets or stock in trade, in bulk, or a substantial part of those assets, of an industrial or commercial enterprise, other than a dealer, for the voluntary dissolution or liquidation of the seller's business, or for disposing of an excessive quantity of personal property, or property that has been acquired in a nonjudicial sale or transfer from an owner other than a dealer, his entire household of personal property, or a substantial part of that property, if: 
a.  The dealer gives written notice to the chief of police that exemption from reporting is being claimed under this division; and 
b.  The dealer retains in his place of business, until the third anniversary of the date of the transaction, a copy of the bill of sale, receipt, inventory list or other transfer document as a record which shall be made available for inspection by any peace officer; 
(3)  Acquired in a sale made by any public officer in his official capacity as a trustee in bankruptcy, executor, administrator, receiver or public official acting under judicial process or authority, or acquired in a sale made on the execution of, or by virtue of, any process issued by a court; 
(4)  Acquired in good faith as part or complete payment for other crafted precious metal by a person, partnership, firm, or corporation whose principal business is primarily that of selling directly to the consumer crafted precious metal that has not been subject to a prior sale; 
(5)  Acquired as surplus property from the United States or a state, subdivision of a state, or municipal corporation; 
(6)  Reported by a dealer as an acquisition or a purchase, or reported as destroyed or otherwise disposed of, to: 
a.  A state agency in accordance with another law of this state; or 
b.  A city or county office or agency in accordance with another law of this state or a city ordinance; or 
(7)  Acquired by a person licensed and regulated under the Texas Pawnshop Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5069-51.01 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9009a, § 10.  
Chapter 62 - SIGNS, ADVERTISING, MERCHANDISE SALE AND DISPLAY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3247, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2013 , amended Ch. 62 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 62, §§ 62-1—62-38, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 26; zoning, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate signs and billboards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 216.901, 216.902. 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to set forth standards and regulations to help safeguard and preserve health, safety, property values and the welfare of the general public by regulating the erection, placement, use and maintenance of signs and advertising within the city. 
(b)  It is hereby declared by the city council that the purpose and intent of the provisions of this chapter is to regulate and control signs and other means of advertising means, that, if not regulated and controlled, may adversely affect the health, safety, property values, quality of life and welfare of the general public. The city council, in adopting this chapter, does not intend this chapter to be interpreted or enforced in a manner which requires the city to intervene in matters that are primarily personal or private in nature and which may be appropriately resolved between or among private interests without material danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-2. - Scope. 
(a)  Generally. This chapter shall apply to all signs or other means of advertising that are, or may be, erected, installed, placed, altered, maintained, or improved on land, property, buildings or structures within all zoning districts in the city, including all vacant, occupied, residential, nonresidential, improved or unimproved land, properties, buildings or structures. 
(b)  Planned developments. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to signs located on property within a PD Planned Development District except to the extent the regulations controlling the development and use of the property located within said PD Planned Development District expressly amend, replace, or otherwise, conflict with this chapter, in which case the regulations controlling the development and use of the property located within said PD Planned Development District shall control. 
(c)  Sexually oriented businesses; alcoholic beverage establishments. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to authorize signs that are prohibited by: 
(1)  Chapter 26, Businesses, Article VI, Sexually Oriented Businesses, of this Code; or 
(2)  Regulations set forth in this Code that regulate signs used in association with the operation of a business that serves, distributes, or sells alcoholic beverages to the extent such regulations are not pre-empted by state law. 
(d)  Conflicting ordinances. Except as provided in subsection (b), in the event of any conflict between the standards and regulations established in this chapter and those set forth in any other city ordinance, the higher, stricter or more specific standard or regulation shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-3. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required; application. Unless specifically exempted, a permit must be obtained from the building official prior to the erection, repair, replacement, relocation and/or maintenance of all signs within the city in accordance with this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code. The building official shall require each person desiring to obtain a sign permit pursuant to this section to make application for such permit on a form approved by the building official and requiring such information as may be required to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Compliance required without permit. A sign located within the city shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter even if the installation or erection of said sign does not require the prior issuance of a permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Permit fees. No permit for the erection, installation, repair, alteration, replacement, or relocation of a sign shall be issued until the permit fee, set forth in Appendix A of this Code, has been paid. 
(d)  Work without permit. A person who performs work relating to the erection, installation, replacement, repair, alteration, relocation, or maintenance of a sign prior to obtaining a sign permit required by this chapter shall pay a late fee equal to twice the amount of the sign permit fee. The payment of a late fee as provided by this subsection (d) shall not be a defense to a violation of this section for failing to obtain a sign permit. 
(e)  Permit expiration. A sign permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire if the work for which the permit is issued has: 
(1)  Not commenced on or before the 60th day after issuance of the permit; or 
(2)  Not been completed on or before the 60th day after the work is commenced. 
A new sign permit must be issued and a new permit fee paid before commencing or completing any work authorized pursuant to an expired permit. 
(f)  Other permits to be obtained. The issuance of a sign permit for a sign which requires the construction of a structure or installation of plumbing or electrical improvements that otherwise requires the issuance of a building, plumbing, or electrical permit pursuant to Chapter 22 of this Code shall not exempt any person from making an application for or obtaining such additional permits prior to the commencing any work which requires issuance of such permits. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-4. - Construction documents. 
Before any permit can be granted for the erection of a sign or sign structure requiring such permit, construction documents shall be filed with the building official showing the dimensions, materials and required details of construction, including loads, stresses, anchorage and any other pertinent data. The permit application shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be erected and where required, the plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed by a registered design professional. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-5. - Changes to signs. 
No sign shall be structurally altered, enlarged or relocated except in compliance with this chapter and pursuant to a permit issued for such work. The changing or maintenance of internal parts or components of a sign installed pursuant to a sign permit shall not be deemed a structural alteration. A permit issued pursuant this chapter shall be required to change the copy, lettering, sign face, color, display and/or graphic matter of a sign, which change shall be deemed an alteration of the sign. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-6. - Exempt signs. 
The chapter shall not apply to the following signs, provided that such signs shall not violate the general prohibitions or the unsafe and unlawful provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Signs located on the interior of a building which are not defined as window signs. 
(2)  Traffic and other signs erected or maintained by a governmental agency. 
(3)  Official and posted legal notices authorized by a court, public body or public safety officer. 
(4)  Street number signs not exceeding one square foot in area in residential zoning districts and three square feet in area in non-residential zoning districts. 
(5)  Nameplates not exceeding two square feet in area. 
(6)  National, state and historical flags;, provided, however, flagpoles must comply with the requirements of the building code and must be set back a distance from the property line not less than a distance equal to the height of the pole, but in no case within any easement or public right-of-way. 
(7)  Memorial plaques, building identification signs and building cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when made of noncombustible material and made an integral part of the building or structure. 
(8)  Any sign erected and maintained by the city. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-7. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise interfere with an official traffic sign, signal, or devices, or obstruct or interfere with a driver's view of approaching, merging or intersection traffic or pedestrians; 
(2)  Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, signs encroaching upon or overhanging public right-of-way; including, but limited to, signs attached to any utility pole, utility structure, light standard, street tree or any other public facility located within the public right-of-way; 
(3)  Signs which blink, flash or are animated by light or any other means except as provided in section 62-14; 
(4)  Portable signs except for temporary signs authorized pursuant to section 62-17; 
(5)  Any sign attached to, or placed on, a vehicle, trailer or other movable object and placed or parked on public or private property for an extended period of time so as to draw attention to a business, location, product or service; 
(6)  A sign consisting of a cloth, paper, banner, flag, device or other similar advertising matter attached to, suspended from or allowed to hang loose from any sign, pole, building or structure, except as allowed by other provisions of this chapter; 
(7)  A sign made of paper, paint stencil, or other material and consisting of any name, number (except address numbers) or other text, mark, or graphic on any sidewalk, curb, gutter or street; 
(8)  A sign, other than a nameplate sign, painted on or attached to the outside of a fence, railing or a wall which is not a structural part of a building, whether or not on the property line of the property on which the fence or wall is located; 
(9)  A balloon, streamer, pinwheel or other floating or motion device anchored to the ground or to any structure, or a sidewalk sandwich board, except those temporarily displayed as part of a special sale, promotion or community event as authorized by other provisions of this chapter; 
(10)  Any type of sign or display intended to draw attention or advertise, which is not defined by this chapter shall be prohibited until said sign or display type has been defined by the city council and appropriate regulations regarding said sign or display type has been considered and adopted; 
(11)  Roof signs; 
(12)  Non-real estate personal property sales signs; 
(13)  Off-premise signs except in HI Heavy Industrial Districts; and 
(14)  Framed, internally illuminated wall signs. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-8. - General sign regulations. 
(a)  Sign quality. All signs shall be manufactured or rendered in a workmanlike manner with materials as required by this chapter or as approved by the building official. All text (alpha or numeric characters) shall be rendered to meet a standard recognizable font. All other graphics shall be rendered in a workmanlike manner. Required or permanent signs shall not be painted or rendered to appear to be freehand text or graphics. Temporary window signs may be freehand painted provided they meet with the intent of this chapter. 
(b)  Maintenance, repair and removal. Every sign permitted by this chapter shall be kept in good condition and repair. When any sign becomes insecure, in danger of falling or is otherwise deemed unsafe by the building official, or if any sign shall be unlawfully installed, erected or maintained in violation of any provision of this chapter, the owner thereof or the person or firm using the sign shall immediately (in the case of risk of eminent injury to person or property), and, in any other case, not later than ten days after receiving written notice from the building official, make such sign conform to the provisions of this chapter, or shall remove it. If the recipient of the notice fails to comply with the directions of the building official within ten days after receipt of the notice, the building official shall be permitted to remove or cause such sign to be removed at the expense of the owner and/or the user of the sign. 
(c)  Obsolete sign copy. Any sign copy that no longer advertises or identifies a use conducted on the property on which the sign is erected shall have the sign copy removed within 30 days after written notification from the building official; and upon failure to comply with such notice, the building official is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign copy, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure or ground on which the sign is located. 
(d)  Traffic visibility. No sign or sign structure shall be erected near any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, nor at any location where by its position, shape, color, degree, manner or intensity of illumination, it may interfere with or obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign signal or device or interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Pursuant to the foregoing, no sign shall be erected or maintained in such manner as to be likely to interfere with, obstruct the view of, distract from or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device. Accordingly, no sign shall make use of the words "stop," "go," "look," "slow," "danger," or any other similar words, phrase, symbol, or character or employ any red, yellow, orange, green or other colored lamp or light in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(e)  Illumination. No sign shall be illuminated to an intensity to cause glare or brightness to a degree that could constitute a hazard or nuisance. Moving, beacons, revolving or similarly constructed signs shall not be allowed unless otherwise authorized by this chapter. No sign, name plate or similar device located in a residential district or within 100 feet of a residential district boundary shall be of a flashing, intermittent or pulsating type illumination. The elements of illumination on an illuminated signs located in a residential zoning district or located within 100 feet of a residential district shall be installed and maintained on a timing mechanism that shall turn off the illumination from 10:00 p.m. in the evening until 7:00 a.m. the next morning. 
(f)  Location. Final location for all signs shall be approved by the building official. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-9. - Sign types—Window. 
A window sign may be affixed to or painted on the interior or on the exterior of the exterior glazed surfaces of the building, provided the sign does not obstruct more than 25 percent of the total area or more than 25 percent of a single pane of glazing. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting the display of merchandise in a window regardless of the area of the window obstructed. (See Illustration 62-9—Window Sign Calculation Examples.) 
Illustration 62-9: Window Sign 
Calculation Example 
 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-10. - Sign types—Wall or awning. 
On-premise wall, projecting or awning signs shall be used only for business identification purposes and shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  A wall sign shall be erected parallel to the plane of the wall of the building facade or to the face or faces of the architectural projections to which it is affixed. 
(2)  A projecting sign shall be erected perpendicular to the plane of the wall of the building facade to which it is affixed. No more than one projecting sign may be installed on a building facade. The sign area of a projecting sign shall not exceed 40 square feet. The lowest portion of a projecting sign must be located at least ten feet above the grade or sidewalk immediately below the sign. A projecting sign shall not extend more than three feet from the wall of the building or structure to which it is affixed. A projecting sign shall not exceed the height of a wall to which it is attached. 
(3)  A wall sign shall not project more than 12 inches from the building or structure wall. 
(4)  A wall sign shall not exceed 75 percent of the length of a wall or storefront elevation. 
(5)  A wall sign shall not extend above the wall of the building. 
(6)  An awning sign shall count towards the allowable sign area. 
(7)  Neither the background color of an awning nor any striping, patterns or valances, shall be included in the computation of sign face area. 
(8)  All illuminated wall signs shall be a raceway or individual channel letters (no framed or can signs). Raceways shall not extend width or height beyond the area of the sign. All raceways must be finished to match the background wall. 
(9)  The total area of the sign face shall not exceed the maximum allowable sign area in the zoning district as follows: 
a.  In LR-1, LR-2 and O zoning districts—200 square feet for each storefront facing the street or on-site parking lot or ten percent of the building elevation, whichever is less. (See Illustration 62-10—Wall Sign Elevation Examples.) 
b.  In LI, HI and C zoning districts—200 square feet for each 300 linear feet of building elevation facing the street or ten percent of the building elevation, whichever is less. 
c.  In MF-1, MF-2, MF-3 and MF-4 zoning districts—50 square feet per frontage or ten percent of the building elevation, whichever is less. 
d.  In I-RU zoning districts—special sign requirements are outlined in Ordinance No. 2614. 
e.  In R-1 through R-6 and D-1 and D-2 zoning districts, Institutional signs—32 square feet in area per frontage. 
f.  In PD zoning districts—specific language in a planned development ordinance regarding signage shall supersede the requirements in this sign ordinance. 
g.  For non-residential properties, if the property has frontage along Interstate 35E or Interstate 635—300 square feet for each storefront facing the street or on-site parking lot or ten percent of the building elevation, whichever is less. 
Illustration 62-10—Wall Sign Elevation Examples 
 
 
 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-11. - Sign types—Freestanding. 
No more than one of the following sign types is allowed on any lot or parcel: 
(1)  Monument (individual). Monument signs may be used for identification in non-residential zoning districts and in residential zoning districts and shall comply with the all of the following: 
a.  In LR-1, LR-2, MF, C, O, LI, and HI zoning districts and planned development districts where the use and development regulations of the LR-1, LR-2, MF, C, O, LI, and/or HI zoning district constitute the base zoning regulations, a freestanding on-premises single tenant monument sign face not exceeding 75 square feet in area and maximum six feet in height, and setback a minimum of five feet from the front property line, may be located within the required front yard. (See Illustration 62-11.1—Monument Sign Calculation Examples.) 
b.  In I-RU zoning districts, special sign requirements are outlined in Ordinance No. 2614. 
c.  In R-1 through R-6 and D-1 and D-2 zoning districts, institutional signs—32 square feet in area per frontage, shall not exceed six feet in height and shall be setback five feet from the front property line. 
d.  All individual monument signs, the base of the sign shall be, at least, equal to the width of the sign. 
e.  No sign shall be erected or placed so as to create a hazard to vehicular traffic and all signs erected or placed in the required front yard shall not encroach within the sight lines established by this or other ordinances or by normally accepted engineering practices. 
f.  No monument sign shall be erected closer than 100 feet to another freestanding sign. 
g.  The design, materials and finish of a monument sign shall match those of the buildings on the same property on which the sign is located. 
h.  A landscaped planting bed must be maintained around the base of each monument sign and shall be two feet wide. 
(2)  Monument (multi-tenant). Multi-tenant monument signs may be used for multiple business identification in non-residential zoning districts and shall comply with the all of the following: 
a.  In LR-1, LR-2, LI, HI, C, and O districts and planned development districts where the use and development regulations of the LR-1, LR-2, LI, HI, C, and/or O districts constitute the base zoning regulations, a freestanding on-premises multiple tenant monument sign face not exceeding 100 square feet in area, maximum ten feet in height and setback a minimum of five feet from the front property line may be located within the required front yard of multiple tenant sites. (See Illustration 62-11.1—Monument Sign Calculation Examples.) 
b.  Multiple tenant identification signs shall include leasing information. 
c.  No other freestanding temporary real estate signs shall be permitted if a multiple tenant monument sign is located on the property. 
d.  The background colors of a multiple tenant monument sign shall be standardized or complementary to each other. 
e.  No sign shall be erected or placed so as to create a hazard to vehicular traffic and all signs erected or placed in the required front yard shall not encroach within the sight lines established by this or other ordinances or by normally accepted engineering practices. 
f.  All multi-tenant monument signs, the base of the sign shall be, at least, equal to the width of the sign. 
g.  No monument sign shall be erected closer than 100 feet to another freestanding sign. 
h.  The design, materials and finish of a monument sign shall match those of the buildings on the same property on which the sign is located. 
i.  A landscaped planting bed must be maintained around the base of each monument sign and shall be two feet wide. 
(3)  Pylon. Pylon signs may be used to identify a business and shall comply with all of the following: 
a.  Pylon signs are only allowed in locations where the property fronts either Interstate 35E or Interstate 635. 
1.  Properties that front I-635, one on-premise pylon sign not exceeding 150 square feet in area, maximum 40 feet in height and setback a minimum of ten feet from the front property line is allowed. (See Illustration 62-11.2—Pylon Sign Calculation Examples.) 
2.  Properties that front I-35E, one on-premise pylon sign not exceeding 150 square feet in area, maximum 30 feet in height and setback a minimum of ten feet from the front property line is allowed. (See Illustration 62-12.2—Pylon Sign Calculation Examples.) 
b.  The base of a pylon sign must be at least 33 percent as wide as the cabinet (top). 
c.  No pylon sign shall be erected closer than 200 feet to another freestanding sign. 
d.  A landscaped planting bed must be maintained at the base of each pylon sign and shall be at least three feet wide on all sides. 
Illustration 62-11.1—Monument Sign Calculation Examples 
 
 
Illustration 62-11.2—Pylon Sign Calculation Examples 
 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-12. - Residential subdivision. 
Signs that identify a residential subdivision or neighborhood area shall comply with the following: 
(1)  In R-1 through R-6 and D-1, D-2 zoning districts—a sign not exceeding 40 square feet in area, maximum six feet in height may be located at the major entry ways. 
(2)  Subdivision signs may be in the form of a sign mounted to a screening wall that does not project from the face of the wall more than one inch. 
(3)  Subdivision signs may be in the form of a monument sign and shall be setback at least five feet from property line and illuminated externally only. 
(4)  The background color of the sign shall be darker than the graphic text and shall be individual letters mounted or engraved on the sign face. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-13. - Directional signs. 
(a)  In addition to any allowable window, wall, monument, and pole signs, two directional signs not exceeding three square feet in area and three feet in height above grade shall be permitted to be erected in the required front yard. 
(b)  Directional signs shall contain only the company name and/or company or district logo and the words "exit," "entrance," or other traffic control directions. 
(c)  Directional signs shall be non-illuminated or low light intensity signs and shall not extend over the property line. 
(d)  Final placement of directional signs shall be approved by the building official. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-14. - Changeable message signs. 
(a)  Manual changeable message signs shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The manual changeable message portion of a single tenant or multiple tenant sign does not exceed 50 percent of the total area of that sign. 
(2)  Manual changeable message signs shall not be erected over 30 feet in height and shall not be located above the business identification sign. 
(3)  The text displayed by changeable message sign shall be that of an on-premises sign with commercial speech only. 
(b)  Electronic changeable message signs must comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  One hundred percent of the allowable sign area can be used for individual and multi-tenant monument signs. 
(2)  Electronic changeable message signs shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign are for all pylon signs. 
(3)  Rolling, scrolling, flashing or image movement is prohibited. 
(4)  Electronic changeable message signs shall be permitted as either an allowable wall sign or an allowable freestanding sign. 
(5)  Electronic changeable message sign shall not be illuminated to an intensity to cause glare or brightness to a degree that could constitute a hazard or nuisance to occupants of surrounding properties or to passing motorist. From dusk until dawn the illumination intensity shall be decreased by a minimum of 50 percent or as approved by the building official, and the background portion of the sign shall be darker than the lettering color. 
(6)  The changing of text or graphics shall phase, fade or dissolve away, then the screen shall have no text, color or graphics for a minimum of three seconds before the new text or graphics shall phase or fades into view. 
(7)  Electronic changeable message signs that are 32 square feet or less in area shall display text or graphics for a minimum of seven seconds before fading to new text or graphics. Electronic changeable message signs that exceed 32 square feet in area shall display text or graphics for a minimum of 15 seconds before fading to new text or graphics. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-15. - District wide sales and promotional events. 
(a)  Permission may be granted by the building official to allow the use of flags, banners, balloons, searchlights and other advertising means for a consecutive ten-day period, to promote a district or area wide sales event or other promotional event. 
(b)  A district or area may be granted said permission for not more than four ten-day periods in a calendar year. 
(c)  The district or area of said event must be located in a LI, LR-1, LR-2 or a PD district with a base zoning of LI, LR-1 or LR-2 uses. 
(d)  A minimum of five properties or businesses located in the district must participate. 
(e)  Such temporary signs shall be located on the properties participating in said event. The building official must approve the type and placement of the temporary signs prior to placement. 
(f)  No sign or other advertising device shall create a traffic hazard or any other hazard. 
(g)  Any sign or other advertising device deemed as creating traffic or other hazard shall be immediately removed by the business or may be subject to impoundment by the city. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-16. - Political signs. 
Signs that contain primarily a political message may be located on private real property only with the consent of the property owner provided that the sign: 
(1)  Is not located in any public right-of-way, on any public property or in any easement dedicated for a public purpose; 
(2)  Is not illuminated; 
(3)  Has no moving elements; 
(4)  Does not exceed 36 square feet in area; and 
(5)  Does not exceed eight feet in height above grade. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-17. - Temporary signs. 
The following temporary signs shall be allowed provided they comply with the following: 
(1)  Real estate signs. In all residential districts, one real estate sign shall be permitted for each street frontage and each shall not exceed 12 square feet in area. In O, LR-1, LR-2, and C districts, real estate signs shall not exceed 32 square feet of sign area. In LI districts, real estate signs shall not exceed 64 square feet in sign area. In non-residential zoning districts, one real estate sign shall be permitted for each 200 linear feet of street frontage. Real estate signs shall be located on the property which is being offered for sale or lease and shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any street curb line. When there is no curb, the sign shall be located no closer than 15 feet to the edge of the pavement. No real estate sign shall be located in any street right-of-way. No permit is required for a temporary real estate sign. 
(2)  Temporary real estate directional signs. Homebuilders may erect, a temporary, non-illuminated, directional signs for weekend advertising of homes for sale. Signs shall not be placed earlier than 1:00 p.m. Friday and shall be removed no later than 1:00 p.m. on the following Monday. Such signs and their placement must be approved by the building official prior to placing any such signs. No permit is required for these signs. 
(3)  Temporary real estate "open" signs. Real estate companies and homeowners may erect temporary non-illuminated "open" signs without a permit in the rights-of-way of the city. Signs may be displayed only on Saturday and Sunday and one other day during the week to be specified by the building official. Only three signs shall be permitted for each house being shown. Signs shall not exceed three square feet in area. Signs shall be of metallic material. 
(4)  Construction signs. In residential zoning districts, one construction sign with a sign face not exceeding 12 square feet may be placed without a permit on the property where permitted construction work is taking place. In non-residential zoning districts, one construction sign with a sign face not exceeding 64 square feet in sign area may be placed without a permit on the property where permitted construction work is taking place. Construction signs shall not be placed closer than 25 feet from any street curb line, when complying with the requirements of the this section, providing that such signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a building permit for the project the signs pertain to. Such sign may be erected and maintained only during the duration of the construction. 
(5)  Development signs. In single-family residential zoning districts, one 200 square foot development sign may be erected for a single-family development that will contain more than 15 lots. In multiple family zoning districts, one 200 square foot development sign may be permitted. In non-residential zoning districts, one development sign not exceeding 400 square feet of sign area may be permitted for each 100 acres of development. Permits shall be required for development signs and the building official shall approve the placement and duration. 
(6)  Special event signs. Permission may be granted by the building official as a special privilege to civic organizations and other nonprofit organizations to erect signs promoting special events or activities at the locations and times and under the conditions specified by the building official. A permit is required for special event signs. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-18. - Garage sales and garage sale signs. 
(a)  A maximum of two garage sales per year may be conducted at a dwelling address. Each separate garage sale may not exceed three consecutive days in duration. No garage sale shall occur earlier than the sixth day following the conclusion of a prior garage sale on the same property. 
(b)  Garage sale signs may be erected or placed on any residential property in the city, provided the person conducting the garage sale obtains permission for the erection or placement from the owner or occupant of the residential property. 
(c)  Garage sale signs may be placed on the residential property one day in advance of the sale and must be removed within one day following the sale. 
(d)  Garage sale signs cannot be placed closer than 15 feet to the back of the curb or if no curb exists, 15 feet to the edge of the pavement. 
(e)  A garage sale sign shall not exceed three square feet in area. 
(f)  Garage sales are not intended and shall not allow businesses to be operated out of homes. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-19. - Merchandise and other exterior display. 
No person shall place on, or suspend from any building, pole, structure, sidewalk, parkway, driveway or parking area any goods, wares, merchandise or other advertising object or structure for the purpose of advertising such items, other than a sign as defined, regulated and prescribed by this article, except otherwise allowed by ordinance. The placement of advertising material holders and/or advertising boxes that do not meet the definition of a newspaper box in section 26-19 is prohibited. A special sale and display of merchandise outside of the main building located on-premises may be conducted subject to the following: 
(1)  The display of merchandise outside of the main building does not exceed 17 days. 
(2)  All merchandise displayed must be normally sold at the business. 
(3)  No more than four sales events with merchandise displayed outside of the main building can be held in a calendar year. No sales events authorized pursuant to this section shall commence earlier than 60 days after the conclusion of a prior sales event on the same property. 
(4)  Appropriate permits are obtained. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-20. - Temporary outside sales. 
Temporary outside sales as defined by this Code shall be permitted in LR-1 and LR-2 zoning districts subject to the following: 
(1)  When outside merchandise display is located on a private sidewalk, adjacent to a building, a clear unobstructed area of not less than four feet in width shall be provided on the sidewalk for pedestrian access. 
(2)  In no instance shall outside display of merchandise be located within, nor encroach upon, a fire lane, maneuvering aisle, public sidewalk, landscape area, or public street right-of-way, or placed in any location that creates a hazard to traffic. 
(3)  Merchandise shall not be stacked over six feet in height along sidewalks. 
(4)  Outside display of merchandise shall not be located within parking lots except as allowed by section 62-19. Adequate parking and traffic maneuvering areas shall be maintained in the parking lot at all times during the period of the temporary outside display. 
(5)  No permanent outside display of merchandise is permitted and no outdoor merchandise display structures shall be permitted affixed to the exterior of the building or grounds. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-21. - Holiday decorations. 
(a)  Appropriate holiday decorations and displays may be displayed during the period beginning the first day of November of each year and ending the first day of February of the next succeeding year. 
(b)  For other national holidays, appropriate decorations may be displayed starting two weeks prior to the holiday and must be removed by the first Monday following the holiday. 
(c)  Other decorations and displays may be considered signs and are subject to the provisions in the chapter. No permit is required for holiday decorations. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-22. - Grand opening and special sales signs. 
(a)  Permits for banners, balloons and other temporary signs may not be issued for property or businesses located in R1-R6, D1, D2, or M1-M3 zoning districts. 
(b)  A permit may be granted to display flags, banners, balloons and other devices intended to draw attention to the property, business or product for a period of up to 75 days in a calendar year in connection with special sales being conducted by said business. 
(c)  A permit may be granted to display flags, banners, balloons and other devices intended to draw attention to the grand opening of business for a period of up to 30 days within 60 days after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for said business. 
(d)  Such signs and their placement must be approved by the building official. A permit shall be required. 
(e)  Such flags, banners and balloons may be erected and maintained only during the permitted days. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 ; Ord. No. 3521, § 1, 9-11-2018 )  
Sec. 62-23. - Impoundment of signs. 
The following signs shall be considered a public nuisance, and the city may, without notice, remove and impound any of the following signs: 
(1)  Any sign listed under the conditional exceptions of this chapter erected or existing in violation of the requirements of conditional exceptions; 
(2)  Any sign erected or existing that constitutes a traffic hazard in the opinion of the traffic engineer. 
(3)  Any sign the erection of which requires a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(4)  Any sign erected in violation of the general prohibitions of this chapter. 
(5)  Any sign placed on public property or in the public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-24. - Recovery and disposal of impounded signs. 
Impounded signs may be recovered by the owners within 15 days of the date of impoundment by paying a fee as follows: 
(1)  A fee of $5.00 for signs that are 12 feet or less in areas. 
(2)  A fee of $10.00 for signs that are larger than 12 feet in area. 
(3)  Signs not recovered within 15 days of impoundment may be disposed of by the city in any manner it shall elect. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-25. - Prohibited sign materials. 
(a)  Any material not recognized by the building official as approved sign material shall be prohibited. 
(b)  The building official may consider and approve material submitted to be used as sign material, provided adequate data is provided that meets or exceeds the material standards. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-26. - Sign area calculations. 
The area of a sign shall be determined utilizing the dimension examples set forth in Illustration 62-26—Sign Area Calculation Examples. 
Illustration 62-26-Sign Area Calculation Examples 
 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-27. - Variance. 
The board of adjustment is hereby authorized to grant variances to the height, sign area, setback and material regulations of this chapter. In order for the board to grant a variance, it must find the following facts: 
(1)  The requested variance does not violate the intent of this chapter. 
(2)  The requested variance will not adversely affect surrounding properties. 
(3)  The requested variance will not adversely affect public safety. 
(4)  Special conditions exist which are unique to this applicant or property. 
(5)  The sign has not been installed prior to obtaining a permit. 
(6)  A sign installed without a permit must be removed before a sign variance application can be accepted. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-28. - Building address numbers. 
(a)  Building address numbers shall be displayed in accordance with chapter 22, article XI of the Code of Ordinances and shall meet the materials and workmanship requirements of this section. 
(b)  In residential zoning districts building address numbers painted on the curb must be in conformance with section 70-3 of the Code of Ordinances and the numbers shall be white, minimum of three inches in height and centered within a five-inch dark contrasting background. 
(c)  Non-residential building address numbers shall be in conformance with section 38-38 of the Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-29. - Nonconforming signs. 
Any sign legally existing at the time of the passage of this chapter that does not conform in use (other than off-premises signs), location, height or size with the regulations of the zone in which such sign is located, shall be considered a legal nonconforming use or structure and shall be permitted to continue in such status until such time as it is either abandoned or removed by its owner, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Structural alterations, enlargements or re-erection are not permitted. Sign copy may be changed and maintenance and repair may be performed on the structure. 
(2)  Nonconforming signs, which are considered abandoned signs, shall be removed regardless of the owners' intent to make future use of the structure. 
(3)  Any legal nonconforming sign shall be removed if the structure has been allowed to deteriorate to the extent that the cost of repair or maintenance exceeds 50 percent of the original cost of the sign as determined by the building official. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Sec. 62-30. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned sign means a sign structure that has ceased to be used and/or contains obsolete sign copy for a period greater than six months; or a sign structure on which the owner no longer intends to display sign copy. 
Apartment name sign means a sign identifying an apartment building or complex of apartment buildings. 
Awning sign means a sign that is part of, or attached to, an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural projection or cover over a door, window, storefront, or outdoor service area. 
Building elevation means the entire side of a building, from the ground level to the roofline, as viewed perpendicular to the walls on that side of the building. For each commercial occupancy in shopping centers, planned industrial parks or other nonresidential multiple tenant occupancies (other than office buildings), the building elevation shall be calculated as that portion of the building wall that is adjacent to a street or on-site parking area leased by the individual commercial tenant. 
Building line means a line established by zoning provision of the Farmers Branch Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as amended, beyond which no part of a principal building or structure may be erected. 
Building official means the officer or other persons within the city charged with administration and enforcement of the sign ordinance. 
Changeable message sign means an on-premises sign that has changeable text by means of removal and replacement of individual letters or words or by electronic means with letters, words or graphics created by energizing luminaries or other devices. Electronic changeable message sign shall include, but is not limited to, light emitting diodes, incandescent luminaries and liquid quartz displays. 
Commercial speech means any speech or expression that relates solely to economic or business interest of the speaker or its audience. 
Construction sign means a temporary sign identifying the property owner, architect, contractor, engineer, landscape architect, decorator or mortgagee engaged in the design, construction or improvement of the premises on which the sign is located. 
Development sign means a temporary sign related to the promotion of new developments and located on the premises involved in the development. 
Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix and shall also include the painting of signs on any exterior surface. 
Fascia or surface means the surface of a sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign. 
Freestanding sign means a permanent sign which is attached to, or a part of, a completely self-supporting structure which is set in or below the ground surface and is not attached to any building or any other structure. 
Garage sale means a sale of used personal property conducted by a dwelling occupant on the property of the occupant such as used clothing, furniture, lawn care equipment and other items of personal property. 
Garage sale sign means a temporary non-illuminated sign advertising a sale of personal property similar to a garage sale, estate sale, or yard sale, that states or indicates the address, location or direction of the sale. 
Illuminated sign means a sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed toward the sign. 
Institutional sign means a sign located on the premises for the identity of a school, church, hospital or similar public or quasi-public institution. 
Marquee means a permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by a building. 
Marquee sign means a business sign (i) attached to, (ii) painted on, (iii) inscribed on, or (iv) partly or fully supported by and made an integral part of a marquee. 
Monument sign means a low profile freestanding ground mounted sign that is constructed with base and structural materials that match the materials of the main building. 
Noncommercial speech means any and all speech or expression that is not commercial speech. 
Off-premise sign means any sign the content of which does not relate exclusively to the name, location, products, person, accommodations, services or activities of or on the premises on which the sign is located and includes, permits and allows both noncommercial and commercial speech. 
On-premises sign means any sign the content of which relates to the premises on which it is located, referring exclusively to the name, location, products, and persons. Accommodations, services, or activities of or on those premises, and includes, permits and allows both noncommercial as well as commercial speech. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company or business entity or organization of any kind. 
Personal property sale sign means a temporary sign advertising personal property for sale on the premises on which the sign is located. 
Political sign means a sign relating to (i) the election of a person to public office, (ii) a political party, or (iii) a proposition to be voted upon at an election called by a public body. 
Portable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a building or structure and shall include signs painted on or affixed to vehicles or other movable objects and placed or parked so as to draw attention to a product, location, business or service. 
Projecting sign means a sign which projects perpendicular to the building facade, which has one end, attached to a building or other permanent structure. 
Pylon sign means a freestanding sign which consists of a cabinet atop a single support element. The support element must be at least 33 percent as wide as the cabinet top. The support structure must be covered in materials matching the exterior of the primary building. 
Real estate directional sign means a temporary sign directing the public to homes for sale within the city. 
Real estate sign means a temporary sign pertaining to the sale or rental of property and advertising property only for use for which it is legally zoned. 
Roof sign means a sign erected upon, over, or above a roof or building. 
Sign means any letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, marquee sign, design, poster, handbill, placard, pictorial, picture, stroke, stripe, line, trademark, reading matter or illuminated surface, which shall be so constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever, so that the same shall be used for the attraction of the public to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, performance, event, article, machine or merchandise, whatsoever, which are displayed in any manner whatsoever. 
Sign area means the area of the smallest rectangle that would encompass the graphics that makes up the sign. The area of any double-sided or V-shaped sign shall be the area of the largest single face only. The area of a sphere shall be computed as the area of a circle or portion thereof. 
Sign face means the surface upon, against or through which the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural features of a building or sign structure, nonstructural or decorative trim or any area that are separated from the background surface upon which the sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal or border. 
Site means a portion of land and/or building which houses a single activity and the contiguous grounds and parking areas which exclusively service that building, or, any number of activities housed by a single building or multiple buildings which share common egress or ingress from a public street or right-of-way. 
Temporary outside sales means the placement of articles for sale by a business on a private sidewalk or in a private lot serving that business, which are representative of merchandise offered normally for sale inside the business, for temporary periods of time. 
Temporary real estate open sign means a sign not exceeding three square feet in area on which appears only the word "OPEN," the name of the real estate company or homeowner, and a directional arrow. 
Wall sign means a sign (i) attached to, (ii) painted on, or (iii) erected against a wall or parapet wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel or perpendicular to the plane of the wall. Neon tubing attached directly to a wall shall be considered a wall sign. 
Window signs means any sign affixed to or on the inside of a building within five feet of a window and which is visible from the exterior of the building with a message intended to draw attention to a business, product or service provided at the premises. 
( Ord. No. 3247, § 1, 11-19-2013 )  
Chapter 66 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, adopted June 4, 2019, amended Ch. 66 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 66, §§ 66-1—66-56, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1969, §§ 14-1—14-5; Ord. No. 2698, § 2, 11-1-2002; Ord. No. 3053, § 1, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 3360, §§ 1—3, 3-15-2016. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brush means yard waste that is generally too large or otherwise impractical to place in the residential container and includes, but is not limited to, tree and/or bush branches, marsh plants such as cattails and tropical grasses such as bamboo and all other similar plant life, twigs and trimmings. 
Bulk waste means large rubbish items including, but not limited to, household appliance, bicycles, furniture, rugs, mattresses, televisions, tree limbs, fence material and other similar items. 
Director means the city manager or designee. 
Disposable refuse container means plastic or paper bags with a volumetric capacity of not less than 13 gallons nor greater than 39 gallons or cardboard boxes with closed lids which are intended to be removed from the right-of-way and placed into the collection vehicle and not returned to the location where collected. 
Garbage means solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling, and sale of produce and other food products. 
Hotel, inn, motel, rooming houses and boarding houses mean places where the purpose is to furnish food and lodging, or either, to all who apply and pay therefor. 
Premises means business houses, rooming houses, boarding houses, offices, theaters, hotels, motels, inns, restaurants, cafes, eating houses, trailer courts, tourist courts, tourist camps, apartments, hospitals, schools, private residences, vacant lots and all other places within the city where garbage, trash or rubbish accumulates in ordinary quantities. 
Recyclable materials means materials that have been recovered or diverted from the nonhazardous waste stream for purposes of reuse, recycling, or reclamation. Recyclable materials are not solid waste; however, a recyclable material may become solid waste if abandoned or disposed of rather than recycled, at which time the material will become solid waste only with respect to the party actually abandoning or disposing of the material. 
Regular collection day means the day(s) of the week established by the director in conjunction with the city's contracted solid waste collector for the collection of garbage, rubbish, trash, brush, bulk waste, and/or yard waste. 
Rollout container means 35-gallon or 95-gallon cart with functional wheels and closable lid provided by the city or its franchisee. 
Rubbish means non-putrescible solid waste, such as waste wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, leaves, paper, discarded mattresses, wire, glass, and scraps of metal. 
Trash means rubbish such as paper, boxes, grass, shrubs, yard cleanings, yard clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, weeds, hedge trimmings, and tree trunks and tree limbs cut in lengths not exceeding ten feet, and any other non-putrescible material or object which is discarded or thrown away. 
Yard waste means cut grass, leaves, small brush and tree trimmings. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-2. - Solid waste division—Created. 
There is hereby created a solid waste division of the city which is hereby charged with the responsibility for the collection of recyclable materials and garbage, refuse and other waste matter from all dwellings and establishments within the limits of the city. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-3. - Depositing garbage, trash, recyclable materials and other matter on streets, vacant lots and other public or private premises. 
It is unlawful for any person to sweep, throw or deposit any recyclable materials, garbage, trash, dirt, concrete, rocks, stagnant water or dead animals into, upon or along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street or vacant lot, or upon any public or private premises within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be a defense to a violation of this section if the described materials are deposited into a recycling cart or rollout container or in a manner as authorized by section 66-41. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-4. - Depositing recyclable material, trash, garbage, or other waste materials on or in a commercial or business container. 
It is unlawful for any recyclable material, garbage, trash, other waste material, or any injured or dead animal to be deposited, thrown or swept into, on, in or alongside a trash container which is provided for a business or establishment, by any person who is not the owner, operator, occupier, person in control, agent or employee of such business or establishment for which the container is provided. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-5. - Franchise for commercial collection required. 
No person, firm, corporation, or other entity, excluding the city, may use the public streets, alleys, or thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of engaging in the business of collecting or transporting garbage, solid waste, trash, or recyclable materials from commercial and industrial premises within the city without first having obtained a collection permit from the city. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-6. - Application for permit; expiration. 
(a)  To obtain a solid waste and/or recyclable materials collection permit, a person must submit an application on a form provided by the city manager. The applicant must be the person who will own, control, or operate the proposed collection service. 
(b)  The permit application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address and verified signature. 
(2)  The form of business of the applicant, and, if the business is a corporation of association, evidence of the authority of the person signing the application to represent the business. 
(c)  Application for the permit shall be accompanied by a $50.00 non-refundable processing fee. 
(d)  The collection permit expires October 1 of each year and may be renewed by making application as provided in this section. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-7. - Annual fee. 
(a)  The annual fee for the collection permit is an amount equal to ten percent of the gross receipts on all revenues and income collected from any source derived from the operation of the collection of garbage, solid waste, trash, or recyclable materials from commercial or industrial premises within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The permit holder shall remit the annual fee quarterly to the city's finance department, on or before the 30th day of April, July, October, and January, based upon the revenues collected during the previous calendar quarter. 
(c)  The quarterly payment shall be accompanied by an income statement certified by the permit holder acknowledging compliance with this section. 
(d)  Fee payments received after the due date shall be subject to interest at the rate of ten percent per annum until the fees are paid in full. In addition, delinquent fees shall be subject to a late payment penalty of five percent for each month or portion thereof that the fees are outstanding. In no event, however, shall the penalties exceed 25 percent of the total delinquent fees nor shall interest charged exceed the maximum rate allowed by law. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-8. - Requirement to furnish information. 
The books and records of the permit holder shall be open at reasonable times for inspection by the city manager in accordance with the terms of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-9. - Revocation of permit. 
The director may revoke a collection permit for the failure of the holder to provide required information, failure to pay fees or for making false statements on the application or quarterly report. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Secs. 66-10—66-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 66-35. - Frequency and schedule of collection by the city and city contractors. 
The frequency and schedule of residential collection of solid waste and recyclable materials shall be determined by the director. The director has the authority to revise the collection schedule as deemed necessary for holidays or other reasons determined to be in the best interest of the city. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-36. - Duty of owner or occupant to provide containers. 
(a)  Each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any building, house or structure within the corporate limits of the city, for residences, churches, schools, colleges, lodges, commercial businesses and other purposes shall provide and maintain containers of sufficient number and type, as specified in this article, to hold the garbage and trash that will normally accumulate on the premises. 
(b)  Rollout containers provided to a residence by the city or the city's franchisee shall satisfy the requirements of subsection (a). The rollout container provided by the city or the city's franchisee shall remain the property of the city or its franchisee and shall not be removed from the property to where the rollout container was originally delivered without the written consent of the city. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-37. - Use of containers for garbage and trash collection; exception. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), each owner, occupant, tenant and lessee of each dwelling designed for occupancy by either one or two families shall provide or cause to be provided for each dwelling unit or residence at least one disposable refuse container or rollout container. 
(b)  Each owner, occupant, tenant and lessee of each dwelling designed for occupancy by either one or two families on property located within the boundaries of the Planned Development No. 99 Zoning District as described in Exhibits "A" and "B" of Ordinance No. 3429 as enacted on March 7, 2017, shall only use rollout containers for the placement of garbage for collection. 
(c)  Except when placed for collection during the days and times authorized by this article for residences with curb side collection, rollout containers shall be stored in a manner where the rollout container is not visible from the street by placement of the rollout container: 
(1)  Within an enclosed portion of the residence; 
(2)  Behind a privacy fence; or 
(3)  Behind a screening panel located no closer to the street than the farthest portion of the front facade from the street, such screening panel to consist of two panels or walls not less than four feet wide and four feet tall connected in an L-shape and constructed of wood panels or pickets, masonry materials (e.g., stone, brick, or other material consistent with the existing materials of the residence), or other similar opaque materials, but which may not include lattice panels of any material or chain link fencing with plastic or vinyl slat inserts. 
For residences with alley collection, rollout containers shall be removed to a location that is closer to the house than the alley line. 
(d)  Subject to subsection (b) of this section, all garbage placed for collection must be placed in a disposal refuse container or rollout container at the curb for collection. 
(e)  Disposable refuse containers, rollout containers for garbage, and bulk waste shall not be placed for pickup earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day immediately preceding the regular collection day. Rollout containers shall be removed from the point of collection not later than 9:00 a.m. on the day after the regular collection day. Residents with special considerations or physical limitations may be allowed individual exceptions to the time or location materials are placed for pickup with prior written approval obtained from the director. 
(f)  Garbage placed in rollout containers must be contained in disposable refuse containers to prevent the contents from falling out of the container while the container is awaiting collection or when picked up and emptied. 
(g)  Any rollout container containing solid waste and weighing more than 200 pounds will not be serviced. 
(h)  Rollout containers set out for collection shall be placed at least 12 inches from any fence, tree, gas or electric meter, utility pole, rollout container, other large object. Vehicles or trailers shall not be parked in a manner that prevents access to rollout containers, brush piles, or bulk piles. 
(i)  Disposable refuse containers shall be closed and its contents secured to prevent the contents from falling out of the container while the container is awaiting collection or when picked up for collection. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-38. - Accumulation of garbage. 
No owner, lessee, or occupant of any residential unit shall permit the accumulation of any garbage on his or her premises, except in a disposable refuse container or rollout container as defined in section 66-1. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-39. - Use of rollout carts by churches, schools, offices or other establishments. 
Disposable refuse containers and rollout containers may be used by churches, schools, offices or any other establishment if the director finds such use to be practicable, sanitary and not detrimental to the collection of such waste by the city or its franchisee. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-40. - Trash containers; weight; size of piles. 
(a)  If trash is of such nature that it cannot be placed in disposable refuse containers or rollout containers, it shall be placed in bundles or piles. The combined weight of the trash and bundle or container shall not be more than 50 pounds, and, on the day of trash collection, it shall be placed on the curb in front of the building. Tree limbs, tree trunks and hedge cuttings shall not exceed ten feet in length and must be placed at the curb. If the weight of the tree limb(s) or tree stumps are greater than the operational capacity of the collection vehicle or the weight, size, or nature of the material creates an unsafe working condition, the director will request the material be reduced in size, weight, or reconfigured before collection of such materials occurs. Trash, garbage, or other waste materials which exceed the weight and/or size authorized by this section must be transported by the owner or resident to an appropriate facility for recycling or disposal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to place out for collection by the city or any party authorized to collect trash or garbage for the city any trash or garbage which is not in compliance with this article. 
(c)  If wastes or trash is collected by someone other than the city or a person or entity with whom the city has granted a franchise to provide solid waste or recycling collection, such collection shall occur using only containers approved by the director which are designed to prevent water from entering, wind from dispersing the wastes inside, any leakage, the escape of odors, and the entry of rodents and other animals. 
(d)  Rock, waste, building materials and other trash resulting from building and remodeling operations will not be removed from a dwelling by the city or the city's authorized solid waste collector, unless the material is placed in a container of sufficient size and strength to allow for bulky vehicle pickup. Otherwise, such waste shall be removed by the builder, owner or occupant of the building at his own expense. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-41. - Disposal of dead animals. 
Dogs, cats or other dead animals shall not be placed in disposable refuse containers or rollout containers. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-42. - Denial or delay of service. 
The collection of a rollout cart or other container the contents of which includes any corrosive, flammable, explosive, medical or other toxic or hazardous wastes may be delayed or denied until such items or materials are removed. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-43. - Placing garbage refuse in another's rollout cart. 
A person commits an offense if he places refuse in a rollout cart which he neither owns nor was provided by the city or its franchisee, when he does not have the permission of the owner or lessee of said rollout cart. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Secs. 66-44—66-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS 
 
Sec. 66-50. - Duty of owner or occupant to maintain rollout carts for recycling. 
Each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any building, house or structure within the corporate limits of the city, who elects to place for collection recyclable materials shall maintain recycling rollout cart(s) of sufficient number to contain all recyclable materials (other than materials that are bundled and set out for collection pursuant to section 66-53) that are placed for collection in accordance with this article. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-51. - Use of recycling rollout carts for garbage; exception. 
Except as allowed pursuant to section 66-53, each owner, occupant, tenant and lessee of each dwelling designed for occupancy by either one or two families who elects to use curbside or alley collection of recyclable materials shall place all recyclable materials in recycling rollout carts. Only recycling rollout carts as defined by section 66-1 may be used, except in those cases where commercial containers are designated by the city manager for use in apartment, commercial and other areas. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-52. - Residences to use approved recycling rollout carts. 
No collection of recyclable materials by the city or anyone authorized by the city to collect recyclable materials from any dwelling unit designed for use of either one or two families shall occur unless such recyclable materials are contained in recycling rollout carts as defined by section 66-1. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-53. - Recycling rollout carts; weight; size of piles. 
Recyclable materials that are of such volume they cannot be placed in recycling rollout cart shall be placed in bundles. On the day of recyclable material collection, the bundled recyclable material(s) shall be placed next to the recycling rollout cart on the curb if pickup is made from the front of the building, or alongside the alley, or easement, wherever the recyclable material collection is regularly made from the alley or alley easement. Recyclable materials such as large cardboard boxes shall be broken down, flattened, and/or cut up to a size where such materials are capable of being placed in a recycling rollout cart. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 66-54. - Placing recycling rollout carts for collection. 
(a)  If the house, building or premises from which the recyclable materials are to be collected and removed is adjacent to an alley or easement designated for garbage collection, the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of such premises shall place the recycling rollout carts(s) containing recyclable materials adjacent to the alley or easement so designated in a manner that provides easy accessibility to the collector from the outside of any fence or hedge that may surround the premises. If it is not practicable to collect and remove the recycling rollout cart(s) from an alley or easement, or if there is no alley or easement adjacent to the premises, the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of the premises shall place the recycling rollout carts(s) at the curbline, at the houseline so as to be visible from the street or at such point on the premises that the city manager shall find and designate as being the most accessible for collecting and removing. 
(b)  Recycling rollout carts shall not be placed for pickup earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day immediately preceding the day of collection. Recycling rollout carts shall be promptly removed from the point of collection, but no later than 9:00 a.m. on the day after service. Residents with special considerations or physical limitations may be allowed individual exceptions to the time or location recyclable materials are placed for pickup with prior written approval obtained from the city manager. 
(c)  Except when placed for collection during the days and times authorized by subsection (b) of this section, for residences with curb side collection, recycling containers shall be stored no closer to the street than the farthest portion of the front facade from the street. For residences with alley collection, recycling containers shall be removed to a location that is closer to the house than the alley line. 
( Ord. No. 3572 , § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Chapter 70 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Metrocrest Hospital Authority, § 2-131 et seq.; aircraft, ch. 10; numbering of buildings, § 22-661 et seq.; erosion and sedimentation control regulations, § 34-31 et seq.; smoking prohibited in certain public places, § 34-143; quiet zones, § 34-249; parks and recreation, ch. 50. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Repairing vehicles on city property. 
(a)  No person shall repair or perform maintenance on any vehicle upon any public street, alley, park, playground, athletic field or municipal owned parking lot, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency and necessary to move the vehicle. 
(b)  This section does not prohibit such acts as checking air pressure in tires, checking engine oil level, adding oils or other fluids to maintain operating levels that do not require the drainage of fluids, changing flat tires, replacing headlamp bulbs, commercial windshield installation or repairs necessitated by an emergency and necessary to move the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2131, §§ 1, 2, 8-15-1994)  
Sec. 70-2. - Temporary closing of streets for neighborhood block parties and social functions. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to temporarily close a street for a social function or a neighborhood block party, provided that, in his opinion, the closing will not cause a fire, police, traffic or safety hazard or any undue inconvenience to the public. 
(b)  The purpose of this section is to authorize the city manager to temporarily close a street when a request is made by the residents in a block to have or hold social functions in that block. 
(c)  The social function and the temporary closing of the street shall be subject to and under such rules and regulations as the city manager may deem necessary in the preservation of the public safety, health and welfare. 
(Code 1969, § 23-1.1)  
Sec. 70-3. - Attaching signs, symbols, letters, numerals or other markings upon, or spraying, painting upon public rights-of-way, streets, curbs, basements or alleys. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any individual, person, corporation, business, group or other legal entity to attach signs, symbols, letters, numerals or to mark upon, spray, brush, apply or otherwise paint upon any public rights-of-way, streets, curbs, easements or alleys within the city, exempting any entity that has permission of the city through an agreement, contract, or permit to perform such acts. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to employees of the city acting within the scope of their employment. 
(c)  Persons wishing to paint address numbers on public curbs must obtain a permit from the city. To be permitted to paint address numbers on public curbs, any person, business, group or other legal entity must adhere to the following: 
(1)  An application must be filled out and signed. The name, address, and phone number of each individual who does work must be listed on the application. 
(2)  A fee as listed in appendix A must be paid for each application. The fee shall be waived for a nonprofit, tax-exempt group including, but not limited to, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Cub Scouts, Brownies, Camp Fire Girls, Demolays, sports leagues, civic groups, church groups and other recognized nonprofit organizations. 
(3)  The address numbers must be three inches, white in color, centered within a five-inch high red color background. 
(4)  When painting an address at one location, it must be placed at the center of the property. When painting an address at two locations, it must be painted on each side of the driveway. 
(5)  A copy of the document soliciting curb painting must be approved by the city. Prior to placing any numbers on curbs in city rights-of-way, the occupant or owner of the premises must authorize in writing the placing of address numbers on the curb at each location, and such authorization document shall include the following statement printed in 12 point or greater font: 
"Painting address numbers on the curb is optional and not required by the City of Farmers Branch." 
(6)  The person performing the work must have the permit in their possession. Only those persons listed on the permit may perform the work. 
(7)  No permit may be transferred or assigned to another interest without the prior written consent of the city. 
(8)  Unacceptable work must be removed or corrected within ten working days. 
(9)  A permit is terminated yearly on December 31. 
(d)  Any marking, painting or attachment of signs, symbols or numerals legally performed under the provisions of this section shall not be subject to the provisions of other ordinances of the city regulating signs. 
(Ord. No. 2472, §§ 1—4, 8-16-1999)  
Sec. 70-4. - Fishing from or loitering on bridge across Rawhide Creek. 
It is unlawful for any person to fish from or to loiter on the bridge across Rawhide Creek located on Pebble Beach between Valley Hi Circle and Dorado Beach. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 9-14-1987)  
Sec. 70-5. - Standard minimum street rights-of-way. 
(a)  The standard minimum street rights-of-way are established as follows: 
(1)  Four lane undivided: 64-foot minimum right-of-way. 
(2)  Four lane divided: 80-foot minimum right-of-way. 
(3)  Six lane divided: 100-foot minimum right-of-way. 
(4)  Eight lane divided: 130-foot minimum right-of-way. 
(b)  The standard minimum street rights-of-way may be modified on a case-by-case basis, provided that: 
(1)  When development occurs at or near major intersections, additional right-of-way may be required for construction of auxiliary traffic lanes. 
(2)  When a proposed development is projected to generate a large volume of traffic entering the development from a thoroughfare, additional right-of-way may be required in the vicinity of driveways for construction of deceleration lanes or other auxiliary lanes. 
(3)  In developed areas, a lesser right-of-way may be approved when practical in order to minimize impacts on existing adjacent developments. Upon redevelopment, standard rights-of-way will be secured. 
(4)  At locations where the width and number of lanes of a thoroughfare change, the right-of-way width shall be based upon the need to construct safe and efficient pavement transition areas. 
(Ord. No. 2532, §§ 2, 3, 4-17-2000)  
Secs. 70-6—70-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PAVING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, ch. 74. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 70-36—70-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 70-56. - Contiguous to private property; request to city by petition. 
Any person whose property abuts an unpaved alley within the city may petition the city council requesting that the city pave such alley contiguous to their property. 
(Ord. No. 1640A, § 1, 6-21-1986)  
Sec. 70-57. - Procedures for petition submission. 
The petition shall be submitted to the city manager who shall review the petition for compliance with this division. The stages of procedure for submission of the petition to the city council shall be as follows: 
(1)  The petition shall be on a form provided by the city manager and shall contain the signatures of the owners of at least 80 percent of the property and/or 80 percent of the property owners contiguous to the alley, which the petitioners are requesting to have paved. 
(2)  The owners of at least 80 percent of the property and/or 80 percent of the property owners contiguous to the alley must have an existing 15-foot or less utility and/or drainage easement in order to be considered for paving. 
(3)  The owners of at least 80 percent of the property and/or 80 percent of the property owners contiguous to the alley must agree to move all obstructions and encroachments in the easements, with the exception of utility lines and facilities, which shall be removed by the appropriate utility department. This agreement shall be contained in the petition. 
(Ord. No. 1640A, § 2, 6-21-1986)  
Sec. 70-58. - Review of petitions; failure to comply with section 70-57. 
The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to review all petitions submitted pursuant to this division. If a petition is defective for failing to comply with section 70-57, the petition shall be returned to the individual submitting the petition, with an explanation as to the reason for its return. 
(Ord. No. 1640A, § 3, 6-21-1986)  
Sec. 70-59. - Furnishing of easements prior to submission to council. 
After the steps described in sections 70-56—70-58 have been completed and satisfied, the city manager shall furnish alley easements to all of the signers of the petition. All existing utility and/or drainage easements shall be converted into alley easements on a form approved by the city. All alley easements must be executed and returned to the city manager prior to the petition being submitted to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1640A, § 4, 6-21-1986)  
Sec. 70-60. - Submission of petition to council. 
The city manager shall submit the petition to the city council after he determines that it complies with this division. 
(Ord. No. 1640A, § 5, 6-21-1986)  
Sec. 70-61. - Review of plans, specifications and costs of improvements. 
The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to review the plans, specifications and costs for such improvements, taking into account the cost of acquiring the remaining 20 percent of the property contiguous to the alley. 
(Ord. No. 1640A, § 6, 6-21-1986)  
Sec. 70-62. - Costs of improvements to be borne by property owners; waiver. 
The costs of the improvements to the alley shall be borne by the property owners abutting the alley. In consideration of the property owners delivering a fully executed alley easement to the city and removing all encroachments in such easements, the city shall waive all costs with respect to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1640A, § 7, 6-21-1986)  
Sec. 70-63. - Determination of public interest. 
The city shall have the sole discretion in determining whether it is in the public interest to authorize the improvements to the alley. If the owners of at least 80 percent of the property contiguous to the alley fail to submit fully executed easements, as described in section 70-62, or if the city council determines it would not be in the public interest to make improvements to such alleys, the city council shall not authorize the improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1640A, § 8, 6-21-1986)  
Sec. 70-64. - Removal of obstructions and encroachments. 
After the city council authorizes the paving of an alley pursuant to this division, no construction shall begin until the owners of at least 80 percent of the property contiguous to the alley have removed all obstructions and encroachments from the easements. 
(Ord. No. 1640A, § 9, 6-21-1986)  
Secs. 70-65—70-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL STREETS 
 
Sec. 70-86. - Annual evaluation of streets for asphalt overlay. 
The city engineering department shall evaluate the residential streets throughout the city on an annual basis and prepare a list of recommended streets for asphalt overlay for the city council's approval. 
(Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 8-25-1986)  
Sec. 70-87. - Review and selection. 
The city council shall review the streets so recommended and select the streets, if any, to be included in the asphalt overlay program. 
(Ord. No. 1643, § 2, 8-25-1986)  
Sec. 70-88. - Preliminary requirements for contracted work. 
The city shall not let any contract for asphalt overlay of any streets specified in the notice required by section 70-89 until the requirements of section 70-89, and, if applicable, sections 70-90 and 70-91, have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 1643, § 3, 8-25-1986)  
Sec. 70-89. - Publication of notice designating streets; additional contents of notice. 
A notice designating the streets to be overlaid, as determined by the city council, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Such notice shall state that pursuant to this division, 15 percent or more of the owners of property abutting any street, or segment thereof, designated for asphalt overlay may, by petition filed with the city secretary within 15 days of the date of publication of the notice, call for a public hearing before representatives of the city engineering department for the purpose of discussing the costs and procedures for causing the street to be reconstructed with concrete in lieu of asphalt overlay, with the cost of concrete reconstruction, in excess of the costs of asphalt overlay, as estimated by the city engineering department, to be borne by the property owners. 
(Ord. No. 1643, § 4, 8-25-1986)  
Sec. 70-90. - Receipt of petitions requesting concrete reconstruction; hearing; notice. 
Upon receipt of the requisite petitions under section 70-89, the city engineering department shall promptly call and conduct a public hearing for the purposes outlined in section 70-89, and shall mail written notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing to the owners of property abutting the streets, or segments of such streets, or which the requisite petitions have been received. 
(Ord. No. 1643, § 5, 8-25-1986)  
Sec. 70-91. - Overlay program to proceed; exception: mechanics' lien contracts. 
The city may proceed with the asphalt overlay program for any street specified in the notice given pursuant to section 70-89 unless on or before 15 days after any public hearing required by section 70-89, the city shall have received duly executed mechanics' lien contracts, prepared and approved by the city attorney, pursuant to which: 
(1)  Eighty percent of the property owners, representing at least 50 percent of the property (determined on the basis of lineal feet) abutting any such street, or segment thereof, proposed for asphalt overlay; or 
(2)  Fifty percent of property owners, representing 80 percent of the property abutting any such street, or segment of such street; 
agree to pay, on a pro rata basis, determined on the basis of lineal footage of property abutting such street, or segment of such street, their allocable share of all actual costs of reconstruction of the street in excess of the costs of asphalt overlay, as estimated by the city engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 1643, § 6, 8-25-1986)  
Sec. 70-92. - Reconstruction with concrete; costs. 
Upon receipt of the requisite mechanics' lien contract specified in section 70-90 and satisfaction of all the other requirements of this division, the city will reconstruct, with Portland cement concrete, the street, curbs (reconstructed to match the original geometry), drive approaches, subgrade construction, replacement landscaping and required miscellaneous items, with the costs to be borne as follows: 
(1)  By the city, to the extent of the cost, estimated by the city engineering department, of asphalt overlay of such streets, or segment of such streets; 
(2)  By owners of property submitting mechanics' lien contracts pursuant to section 70-91, to the extent of their pro rata share of the costs in excess of the costs specified in subsection (1) of this section; and 
(3)  The balance by assessment, in accordance with the laws of the state, of the remaining owners of property abutting the street, or segment thereof, to be reconstructed. 
(Ord. No. 1643, § 7, 8-25-1986)  
Sec. 70-93. - City rationale for not reconstructing. 
Nothing in this division shall require the city to reconstruct any streets with respect to which, in the reasonable judgment of the city council: 
(1)  The assessed costs of improvements will be equal to or greater than the enhancement of the value of property abutting the improved streets; 
(2)  The city does not have on hand funds sufficient for the funding of costs assessed pursuant to section 70-92(3) pending collection of the assessments; or 
(3)  The city shall not have received payment, in advance, of the full share of costs (as estimated by the city engineering department, subject to adjustment for actual costs expended upon completion of the reconstruction) to be borne and paid by property owners furnishing mechanics' lien contracts pursuant to section 70-92(2). 
(Ord. No. 1643, § 8, 8-25-1986)  
Secs. 70-94—70-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MAINTENANCE OF PARKING AREAS AND PEDESTRIAN WAYS 
 
Sec. 70-126. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine, upon conviction in the municipal court, of not more than $200.00, and each and every day that the prohibited condition remains shall constitute a separate offense. These fines shall be in addition to and accumulative of the provisions for the abatement of the nuisance by correcting of the insufficient maintenance or dangerous condition to persons or property, as well as all other costs provided for by this article. 
(Code 1969, § 17-169)  
Sec. 70-127. - To be maintained; the term "maintenance" defined. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any owner or agent of the owner or any owner or occupant of a premises including, but not limited to, the following: shopping centers, businesses, offices, apartment complex, townhouse complex, condominium complex, hotel, motel, restaurant, private club, clubs, lodges, fraternal organizations, retail establishments, warehouses, manufacturing concerns, etc., which have vehicle use and/or parking areas or pedestrian ways to maintain such vehicle use and/or parking areas and/or pedestrian ways or any part thereof which are liable to endanger persons or property. 
(b)  It shall also be unlawful for any such owner, agent or occupant to fail to maintain such area or ways to such extent that their effective use is unduly restricted. Maintenance shall include, but shall not be limited to, adequate and satisfactory drainage of storm runoff without damage to abutting property; collection and satisfactory disposal of other liquid wastes discharged on the premises; removal of debris, dirt deposits and other foreign material; adequate marking of fire lanes, parking spaces and pedestrian walkways; and preservation of the surface of such parking areas or pedestrian ways. 
(Code 1969, § 17-162) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-128. - Compliance with city directives required. 
It shall be the duty, and it is unlawful to neglect such duty, of any owner or agent of the premises, or any owner or occupant of the premises, as defined in section 70-127, whose effectiveness is restricted by insufficient maintenance or on which such dangerous condition to persons or property exists to fail to perform the maintenance or to correct such dangerous condition within such time as the city may direct as provided in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 17-163)  
Sec. 70-129. - Enforcement of article. 
The city shall enforce the provisions of this article; provided, however, that where a fire hazard exists, the provisions of sections 70-127 and 70-128 shall be enforced by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1969, § 17-164)  
Sec. 70-130. - Notification. 
It shall be the duty of the city to notify the owner or agent of the owner, or any owner or occupant of the premises, as defined in section 70-127, on which such insufficient maintenance has been performed, or on which such dangerous condition to persons or property exists, to perform such maintenance or to correct such dangerous conditions within 30 days. The notice shall be in writing and may be served on the owner or agent of the owner, or any owner or occupant, by handing it to him in person, by United States certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to such owner or agent of the owner, or owner or occupant, at his post office address. If the owner or agent of the owner, or owner or occupant, cannot be found and the certified letter is returned by the United States Postal Service, then by publication as many as two times within ten consecutive days in the official newspaper as adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1969, § 17-165)  
Sec. 70-131. - City to make corrections if owner or occupant fails. 
Upon the failure of the owner, or agent of the owner, or any owner or occupant of the premises, as defined in section 70-127, on which such insufficient maintenance has been performed or on which such dangerous condition to person or property exists to comply with the notice as set forth in section 70-130, or upon the written request and authorization of such owner or agent of the owner, or any owner or occupant of the premises, and acceptance by the city, it shall become the duty of the city to correct such insufficient maintenance or dangerous condition to person or property on the premises as defined in section 70-127 within such time as the city may direct with all costs for the correcting of such insufficient maintenance and/or dangerous condition at the expense of the owner of the property or premises. 
(Code 1969, § 17-166)  
Sec. 70-132. - Warning devices to be installed. 
The city shall cause signs, barricades or such additional warning devices as are required by the circumstances to be installed and maintained if such insufficient maintenance or the dangerous condition to persons or property on the premises, as defined in section 70-127, are in such condition as to make it an immediate danger to life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants or property. Such signs may prohibit the entry into or the occupancy of the facility, parking lot or pedestrian way so judged to be dangerous. It shall be unlawful to remove or deface any such sign, barricade or other warning device installed by order of the city. If the premises as defined in section 70-127 are in such condition as to cause an unusual hazard to the life, limb, property or safety of the public, the city may order the immediate correcting of such dangerous conditions to the extent required to remove the hazard or dangerous condition by the most expeditious means possible. Any costs incurred as a result of actions required by this section shall be collected as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 17-167)  
Sec. 70-133. - Assessment of costs; lien; foreclosure in the event of nonpayment. 
All costs for the correcting of such insufficient maintenance or dangerous conditions to persons or property of such premises, as defined in section 70-127, including, but not limited to, costs for mailing of notice, and/or publication, filing of a statement with the county clerk, bid procedures costs, and/or interest shall be levied, assessed and collected against such premises and/or owner as defined in section 70-127 upon which such insufficient maintenance has been performed or on which such dangerous condition to persons or property is located. If there are any obstructions or other difficulties encountered in the correcting of such insufficient maintenance or dangerous conditions to persons or property on such premises, as defined in section 70-127, such additional costs shall be levied, assessed and collected against such premises and/or owner, as defined in section 70-127, for the actual additional costs resulting from the handling of these obstructions. The costs provided in this section shall be levied, assessed and collected by the city. If any person shall fail to pay the costs so assessed within 30 days after being notified of such costs, the city shall file, with the county clerk, a statement signed by the mayor of such costs. The city shall have a privileged lien on the premises and/or a personal obligation by the owner, second only to tax liens for street improvements to receive the costs so made and ten percent interest on the amount from the date payment is due. For any such costs and interest, suit may be instituted and foreclosure had in the name of the city. The statement so signed by the mayor, or a certified copy of the statement, shall be prima facie proof of the cost expended in such work or improvements. All such costs shall also be the personal obligation of the owner of such property. 
(Code 1969, § 17-168)  
Secs. 70-134—70-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 70-161. - Findings and purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of citizens and visitors; 
(2)  Assist in the management of the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects and associated costs to citizens resulting from the placement of facilities within public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Govern the use and occupancy in public rights-of-way; 
(4)  Conserve and protect the limited physical capacity of public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city; 
(5)  Preserve the physical integrity of the streets, highways, and pedestrian pathways; 
(6)  Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians; 
(7)  Provide a uniform set of standards that will ensure that all facilities within the public rights-of-way are planned and installed in a manner that will provide for safe operation, protection of surrounding facilities, and preservation of the public right-of-way; 
(8)  Identify different entities using the public rights-of-way to prevent interference between them; 
(9)  Assist in approving and scheduling trenching and minimizing street cuts; 
(10)  Protect the aesthetics and appearance of properties where structures and facilities are located and adjacent properties; and 
(11)  Protect the safety, security, appearance, and condition of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 1, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-162. - Authority; scope. 
This chapter applies to all persons that place or own facilities in, on, or over the public rights-of-way, and may be referred to as the "construction in the public rights-of-way ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 2, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-163. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Agreement means any license, consent, franchise, or municipal agreement or other authorization entered into between the city and a person, as allowed by law. 
Certificated telecommunications provider means the same as in Local Government Code, Section 283.002 (2), as amended [any entity that has been granted a certificate from the Texas Public Utility Commission under Chapter 54 of the Texas Utility Code authorizing that entity to provide local exchange telephone service]. 
City means the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
City council means the elected governing body of the City of Farmers Branch. 
City manager means the City Manager of the City of Farmers Branch or the City Manager's designee. 
Emergency or emergencies means a condition that (1) the city determines may pose a danger to life or health or of a significant loss of property; (2) requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities by the person in order to restore service to a customer; or (3) requires closure of major thoroughfares within the city, creating a traffic hazard. 
Facility or facilities mean any tangible item located in, on or over the public rights-of-way used to deliver service including, but not limited to, any and all wires, cables, fibers, pipelines, duct spaces, splice boxes, surface location markers, tracks, tunnels, utilities, vaults, manholes, poles, wires, structures, plant and appurtenances, above ground structures, below ground structures, and all associated physical equipment. 
Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communication network. 
Network provider means a wireless service provider, or a person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs, on behalf of a wireless service provider, network nodes or node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
Person means a natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, contractor, sub contractor, or other entity including certificated telecommunications providers. 
Permit means an official document or certificate issued by the city authorizing performance of a specified activity. 
Provider means a person, including any certificated telecommunications utility and excluding network providers, as defined herein, that delivers telecommunications service within the city to person(s) by way of a network and that places facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way. A provider does not include persons who are authorized by the city to occupy the public rights-of-way in specifically approved routes within the city, unless they also have a municipal consent under this chapter. To the extent allowed by law, provider also means a person that does not deliver telecommunications service within the city, but who uses, constructs or maintains facilities or transmission media within the public rights-of-way. 
Public rights-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement, except as otherwise restricted herein in which the city has an interest. [The term does not include the airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications.] 
Risk manager means the Risk Manager of the City of Farmers Branch. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, excluding utility poles, street light poles, and equipment necessary for public safety related to the use of the public right-of-way. 
Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 3, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 3457 , § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-164. - Municipal agreement required. 
(a)  Any person, except a certificated telecommunications provider or network provider, prior to placing, reconstructing, or altering facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way, must obtain a separate agreement from the city the maximum term of which shall be five years. The city manager shall have the authority to negotiate and sign agreements required by this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided herein, any person seeking to place facilities on, in, or over the public rights-of-way, shall first file an application for a permit with the city and upon approval shall abide by the terms and provisions of this chapter and lawful conditions of the permit. 
(c)  A person or entity who enters an agreement with the city pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall, not later than October 1 of each year during the term of the agreement, pay to the city the annual fee as set forth in appendix "A" "fee schedule" of this Code that is in effect on the effective date of the agreement; provided, however, the initial fee shall be prorated from the effective date of the agreement to the immediately following September 30. Such annual fee shall be in addition to the payment of any permit fees related to the initial construction or subsequent repair, replacement, or removal of the facilities placed in the city's right-of-way pursuant to the agreement as may be required by other provisions of this Code. In the event an agreement for use of the city's right-of-way pursuant to subsection (a) of this section provides for a term of greater than two years, the city manager shall be authorized to discount the amount of the annual fee by amount not to exceed ten percent if the person or entity pays upon the effective date of the agreement the fees that would become due for all years occurring during the entire term of the agreement. The owner of a public elementary and/or secondary school, including a charter school, shall be exempt from payment of the fee established by this subsection (c) if: 
(1)  The facilities being installed within the city's right-of-way are owned by the owner of the public elementary and/or secondary school; and 
(2)  The facilities are used to facilitate communications or transfer of data solely between or among buildings owned or leased by the owner of the public elementary of secondary school. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 4, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 3202, § 1, 11-6-2012; Ord. No. 3457 , § 2, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 70-165. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager shall administer and enforce compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  A person shall report information related to the physical occupancy of the public rights-of-way required by this chapter in the form and manner prescribed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 5, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-166. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. No construction or installation of facilities may begin within the public rights-of-way without a construction permit issued by the city, except as provided herein. 
(b)  Registration requirement. 
(1)  In order for the city to know which persons own facilities and structures in the city's public rights-of-way, each person shall register with the city and provide the following information at a minimum: 
a.  Name of the person who owns existing/proposed facilities and structures. 
b.  Current name, address, and telephone number(s) of a contact who is available 24 hours per day that has: 
1.  Binding and decision making authority; or 
2.  Ability to contact a person that has binding and decision making authority. 
(2)  Each person shall update, at least annually, and keep current his/her registration with the city at all times. 
(3)  Registration shall be a prerequisite to issuance of a permit. 
(c)  Work exempt from permit. 
(1)  A permit shall not be required for the following: 
a.  Installation of facilities necessary to initiate service to a customer's property that meets the following criteria: 
1.  Existing facilities shall be within 200 feet of said customer's property. 
2.  New facility shall be placed in the rear utility easement, if it exists and is available, of a customer receiving new service. If a rear utility easement is not available, the facility may be placed in the public right-of-way. 
3.  The new facility does not require: 
(i)  Cutting of a street, alley, driveway, or sidewalk pavement; or 
(ii)  Boring and jacking; or 
(iii)  Trenching and digging to a depth greater than 36 inches. Trenching and digging shall be performed manually without mechanized equipment for depths greater than 18 inches (i.e.—only by shovel, pick, sharpshooter, or other hand tool); or 
(iv)  Placement of a facility or structure larger than 12 inches in diameter and 34 inches in height; or 
(v)  Installation of new poles. 
b.  Repair, replacement, or maintenance of existing facilities or installation of new facilities that is not an expansion or enlargement and does not require: 
1.  Boring or jacking; 
2.  Cutting of street, alley, driveway, or sidewalk pavement; 
3.  Closing part or all of a street, alley, or driveway; 
4.  Boring, trenching, and digging to a depth greater than 36 inches. Said trenching and digging shall be performed manually without mechanized equipment for depths greater than 18 inches (i.e.—only by shovel, pick, sharpshooter, or other hand tool). Said repair, replacement, or maintenance shall be limited to the use of existing foundations, conduit, and utility poles. 
c.  Repair, replacement, or maintenance of existing network nodes and related equipment, provided such equipment is installed in accordance with any necessary permit(s) issued in accordance with Article V of this chapter, and pursuant to Chapter 284 of the Local Government Code and Article V, "Network Providers" of this chapter. 
(2)  Exemption from the permit requirements of this chapter shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of the city. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to enforce the terms of the permit and, in instances of non-compliance may take appropriate action to bring the person into compliance with the terms therein. 
(d)  Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the person shall first file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished by the city for that purpose. Every such application shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the work to be performed by the permit for which application is made. 
(2)  Identify the owner of the facility (as listed in the registration requirement) and the contractor(s) who will be performing work described in the application. 
(3)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the proposed work. 
(4)  Indicate the type of excavation and/or construction to be performed. 
(5)  Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, specifications and other data required by this chapter. 
(6)  Be signed by the person, or the person's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give other data and information as may be required by the city. 
(e)  Submittal documents. 
(1)  Plans, specifications, engineering calculations, diagrams, or other data shall constitute submittal documents and shall be submitted in three sets with application for a permit. The city reserves the right to require that the plans be sealed by a professional engineer when structural or hydraulic design of the facility, or the construction of the facility, is determined by the city as necessary to preserve and protect water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and other drainage structures, streets, bridges, and traffic signals/appurtenances or protect public health, safety, and welfare. 
(2)  Plans and specifications shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this chapter and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The city reserves the right to establish criteria and require said plans to contain sufficient detail as to protect surrounding city facilities and landscaped areas and ensure the safety and well being of the community. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to require that plans be drawn to scale based on the existing site conditions. 
(f)  Permit issuance. 
(1)  The city shall review the application, plans, specifications, computations, and other data filed by a person for a permit. If the city finds that the work described in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith conform to the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent laws and ordinances, the city shall issue a permit therefor to the person. 
(2)  When the city issues the permit where plans are required, the city shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications "released for construction". Such permitted plans and specification shall not be changed, modified, or altered without authorization from the city, and all work regulated by this chapter shall be done in accordance with the permitted plans. 
(3)  One set of permitted plans and specifications shall be returned to the person, and said set or multiple copies thereof shall be kept on the site(s) of the work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. 
(g)  Expiration. 
(1)  Every permit issued by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 60 days from the date of such permit. 
(2)  Any person holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the person is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The city may extend the time for action by the person for a period not exceeding 180 days on written request by the person showing that circumstances beyond the control of the person have prevented action from being taken. 
(h)  Denial. 
(1)  The city may deny a permit to any person that has failed to remedy non-compliance of a prior permit or is presently not in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city; to any person if the city determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public; when necessary to protect the public rights-of-way and its current use; and to any person as to whom there exists grounds for the revocation of a permit as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  The city shall notify the person by written, electronic, or facsimile communication of the basis for permit denial. 
(i)  Revocation. 
(1)  If any of the provisions of this chapter are not followed, the city may revoke a permit. 
(2)  If a person has not complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter in work done pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may be denied or additional terms required. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 6, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 3457 , § 2, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 70-167. - Appeals. 
(a)  A person may appeal a decision rendered by the city engineer pursuant to this chapter to the city manager. Such appeal shall be taken within 15 days after the city engineer has rendered a decision by filing a written request with the city manager. 
(b)  A person may appeal a decision by the city manager to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken within 15 days after the city manager has rendered the decision, by filing with the city secretary a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
(c)  The city shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal by the city council. Notice of the meeting shall be posted in accordance with state law. At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by attorney, or by agent. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 7, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-168. - Bond requirement. 
(a)  The person shall, unless otherwise provided for herein, provide the city with a performance bond. 
(b)  Person shall, prior to the beginning of excavation or construction, file an annual surety bond which will be valid each year construction will occur through one full year after the completion of the construction from a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas in the amount of the estimated amount of the cost to restore the right-of-way for the work anticipated to be done that year, in the event the person leaves a job site in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete, unsafe, or other provisions as required by the city. 
(c)  Any person may meet the above requirements with a current agreement with the city that adequately provides for insurance or bonds or provides an indemnity in favor of the city. 
(d)  If the person submits documentation, in a form acceptable to the city manager, that shows that the person has adequate financial assurances to cover actions in the public right-of-way, the city may waive the above requirements. If the person's financial condition is no longer adequate to comply with the requirements of this section, the person shall immediately notify the city and shall obtain the bond. In no instance shall the requirements be waived if the person has less than $20,000,000 in assets. If the city determines independently that the financial condition of the person has changed and does not meet the requirements outlined in this section, the city reserves the right to require the person to obtain a bond. 
(e)  Should the city reasonably determine, within one year from the date of the completion of the work, that the pavement, curb, storm sewer, city utilities, landscaping, or irrigation system requires additional restoration to meet city specified standards, the person shall perform such additional restoration work to the satisfaction of the city, subject to all city remedies as provided herein; provided, however, should additional restoration be necessitated that is caused by parties other than the person, the person shall not be required to complete the additional restoration. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 8, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-169. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  The person, at his own expense, shall purchase, maintain, and keep in force such liability insurance as will protect him from claims set forth below which may arise out of or result from the person's operations under the permit, whether such operations be by himself or by any agent, contractor, subcontractor or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them, or by anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable: 
(1)  Workers' compensation claims; 
(2)  Claims for damages because of bodily injury, occupational sickness or disease or death of his employees, and claims insured by usual bodily injury liability coverage; 
(3)  Claims for damages because of bodily injury, sickness or disease, or death of any person other than his employees, and claims insured by usual bodily injury liability coverage; and 
(4)  Claims for damages because of bodily injury to or destruction of tangible property, including loss of use resulting therefrom. 
(b)  To satisfy the insurance requirements outlined in this chapter, the city may accept: 
(1)  Certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas or letters written by the person in those instances where the State of Texas does not issue such letters of self insurance as allowed by law, which provide the same coverage as required herein. 
a.  For the city to accept such letters, the person must demonstrate by written information in a manner satisfactory to the city manager that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city, based on financial information requested by and furnished to the city. 
b.  The person shall meet the requirements in the amounts set in the city's current insurance requirements on file with the risk manager. 
c.  If the person's financial condition is no longer adequate to comply with the requirements of this section, the person shall immediately notify the city. 
d.  If the city determines independently that the financial condition of the person have changed and does not meet the requirements outlined in this section, the city reserves the right to require the person to secure liability insurance pursuant to the section below. 
(2)  Copies of a certificate of liability insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section. 
a.  The city may request the deletion, revision or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations, or exclusions, unless the policy provisions are established by a law or regulation binding the city, the person, or the underwriter. 
b.  The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the city determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry require adjustment of the coverage. Should the insurance requirements be updated, the city will provide notice of the changes to the person. 
(c)  An insurance certificate shall contain the following required provisions: 
(1)  Name the City of Farmers Branch and its officers, employees, board and commission members, and elected representatives as additional insureds for all applicable coverage; 
(2)  Provide for 30 days' notice to the city for cancellation, non-renewal, or material change; and 
(3)  Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the city manager by certified mail. 
(d)  Any person may meet the above requirements with a current agreement with the city that adequately provides for insurance or bonds or provides an indemnity in favor of the city. 
(e)  All insurance companies shall be rated A+ VI or better by A.M. Best or A or better by Standard and Poor's. The insurance shall be issued in the standard form approved by the Texas State Board of Insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas. 
(f)  An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the person and the city. The insurance shall be the primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. 
(g)  The policy clause "other insurance" shall not apply to the city if the city is an insured under the policy. 
(h)  The person shall pay premiums and assessments. A company that issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a person must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 9, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-170. - Damage to facilities. 
(a)  City facilities. Should the person damage city facilities in the public rights-of-way, the person shall cease construction and notify the city immediately. The person may continue only after a determination by the city. Should the city deem repairs necessary, such repairs shall be remedied at the expense of the person. Continuance of the construction shall not commence again until authorized by the city. 
(b)  Non-city owned facilities. Should non-city owned facilities be damaged, the person shall notify the owner of such facilities and the city immediately of such damage. The city may require cessation of work. Cessation of work will be dependent on the extent and nature of the damage. If the damage warrants cessation of work, the person who has caused the damage may continue construction only after authorization by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 10, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-171. - Relocation and removal of facilities. 
(a)  General. Upon written notice from the city, the person shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of its facility that is in the public rights-of-way whenever the city has determined that removal, relocation, change or alteration is necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation of a governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way. The city shall give the person written notice on when the facilities must be relocated, removed, altered or changed which at no time shall be greater than 120 calendar days unless the city grants an extension(s) in writing. The person shall work with the city to develop a schedule for relocation, removal, alteration or change, giving consideration to the availability of public rights-of-way and sufficient information from the city that identifies the nature and location of the governmental public improvement; the city shall approve such schedule in writing. If the person fails to properly relocate its facilities within the timeframe prescribed in this section, the person who caused the delay shall be liable for any and all damages incurred by the city by such failure to relocate facilities. 
(b)  Recovery of cost. This section shall not be construed to prevent agreements with person's other than the city to recover the cost of relocation or removal from other persons using the public rights-of-way that initiate the request for relocation or removal for purposes other than those stated above. 
(c)  Aerial facilities. Persons shall temporarily remove, raise, or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures when requested by the city. The party or parties requesting and benefiting from the temporary rearrangements shall meet with all affected persons no later than 15 days in advance of the requested move and shall pay the expense of these temporary rearrangements. Persons may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting temporary move. Should the facilities not be relocated in 15 days, they shall be relocated as soon as practicable thereafter. 
(d)  Emergency alteration, relocation, or removal. If the city determines that emergency conditions exist, as defined in this chapter, and require immediate alteration, relocation, or removal of facilities, a person shall alter, relocate, or remove the person's facilities as soon as possible in a timeframe prescribed by the city, taking into account the nature and extent of the emergency. If the person, after notice fails or refuses to act or if circumstances require that the city act immediately, the city may alter, relocate, or remove the facility. If the person fails or refuses to act, the person shall be required to pay the costs incurred by the city in relocating the facility. Alteration, relocation, or removal of a person's facilities conducted by the city pursuant to this subsection shall not subject the city to pay compensation to the person nor shall the city incur liability for any damages. 
(e)  Removal or relocation by the city. When the city does work in the public rights-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a person's facilities to protect such facilities, the city shall notify the person as early as is reasonably possible. If the person and the city agree that it is in the interest of both parties that the city does the work to maintain, support, or move the person's facilities to protect such facilities, the costs associated therewith will be billed to that person and must be paid within 45 days from the date of the city invoice. 
(f)  Abandoned facilities. 
(1)  A person that is no longer providing service within the city may be required to remove the above ground and aerial facilities within 12 months from the public rights-of-way unless the city receives written notice that said facilities will be used within 24 months. 
a.  The person may request extension(s) to this provision by filing a written notice to the city manager outlining the reason for the extension(s). 
b.  If the request for an extension(s) is denied by the city manager, the person may appeal to the city council by filing a written request with the city secretary. The city shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal by the city council. Notice of the meeting shall be posted in accordance with state law. At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by attorney, or by agent. 
c.  Decisions made by the city council shall be final. 
(2)  If the person has not removed all facilities from the public rights-of-way within 12 months following the cessation of the provision of service within the city or unless an extension has been granted as provided in this chapter, the city may deem all of the person's facilities remaining in the public rights-of-way abandoned and, at the city's sole option: 
a.  Take possession of and title to such property; or 
b.  Take any and all legal action necessary to compel the person to remove such facilities. 
(3)  Removal of facilities under this subsection is subject to restoration requirements as outlined in this chapter. 
(4)  Removal of a person's facilities conducted by the city pursuant to this subsection shall not subject the city to pay compensation to the person nor shall the city incur liability for any damages. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 11, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-172. - Repairs by city. 
Notwithstanding emergencies, as provided in this chapter, after written notification by the city, and a person fails to perform any repairs or replacement work in a reasonable amount of time in a timeframe prescribed by the city, taking into account the nature and extent of the repairs or replacement work, the city may immediately repair such portion of the public right-of-way as may have been disturbed by the person, its contractors, or agents. Upon failure of a person to perform any such repair or replacement work and upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the person will reimburse the city for all costs so incurred within 45 days from the date of the city invoice. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, administrative costs, cost of having city personnel present, equipment rental, repair and replacement costs, and the cost of contractors, if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 12, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-173. - Construction obligations. 
(a)  Intent. The provisions of this section establish requirements and procedures for use of the right-of-way and are not intended to determine or limit the ability of a user of the right-of-way to seek compensation from a third party. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  A person shall apply for a permit and receive authorization prior to the installation and maintenance of a facility within the public rights-of-way, except as provided herein. No construction or installation of facilities may begin within the public rights-of-way without a construction permit issued by the city, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(2)  The person shall prominently post notice at the area the permit that was issued by the city in a manner that protects the permit from damage due to weather. 
(3)  Notice to property owners, abutting property owners, and occupants. 
a.  When practical, notification to the property owner and abutting property owner of any undeveloped property adjacent to the public rights-of-way shall be made at least two business days prior to the commencement of work, except as otherwise provided herein. In the event that the property owner cannot be located, the person shall contact the city, which will satisfy the notification requirement. 
b.  No notice is required for installation, maintenance, repair, or replacement of facilities that do not require a permit as outlined in this chapter. 
c.  A person must notify the owner/occupant of single-family dwellings or the building manager of any other building of proposed work on or adjacent to their property at least two business days prior to the commencement of the work, unless the proposed work is an emergency as defined in this chapter. Emergency notification shall be provided as soon as practicable. 
(4)  All construction shall conform to North Central Texas Council of Government (NCTCOG) Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, unless otherwise provided on the plans authorized by the city. 
(5)  The public rights-of-way must not be impaired in any manner that obstructs the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters and other waterways without prior authorization from the city. Facilities shall not be installed in locations where facilities would obstruct, restrict, or inhibit the flow of storm water. 
(6)  All construction sites are subject to hazardous material guidelines for data collection; disposal, handling, release, and treatment of hazardous material; site remediation; and worker safety and training. Should hazardous materials be discovered on site or if hazardous materials are introduced to the permit area, the city shall be notified immediately. 
(7)  When construction requires pumping water or mud, the water or mud must be contained in accordance with city, state and federal laws. 
(8)  Private vehicles, exclusive of equipment used to complete the work, may not park within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading and unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless otherwise specifically authorized by the permit. 
(9)  The person shall maintain a clean work site. All debris, excavated material not used in the backfill, or other material not essential to the work being performed shall be removed from the site daily, unless otherwise authorized by the city. All excavation shall be protected from the public. Excavated material that is not used in the backfill shall be removed on the day of excavation. The city manager may grant extensions to this provision. 
(10)  Storage of materials on areas not included in the permit issued by the city shall be prohibited, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
(1)  The city shall have the first right to place its utilities within the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to: 
a.  Lay sewer, water, and other pipe lines or cable and conduits; 
b.  Do underground and overhead work; 
c.  Restructure or change city-owned aerial facilities, in, across, along, over, or under a public street, alley or public rights-of-way occupied by existing facilities; and 
d.  Change the curb, sidewalks, medians, grade of streets and alleys, or to do other public improvements within the public right-of-way. 
(2)  The person shall not locate its facilities within the public rights-of-way until the city has reserved the necessary area for future city-owned facilities. 
(3)  The city may authorize the horizontal and vertical location of person proposed facilities in or over the public rights-of-way among users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the public health and safety considerations of each user type, and to the extent there is limited space available for additional uses, may limit new uses, as allowed under state and federal law. If the city determines that the proposed facility cannot be placed within a right-of-way without adversely affecting the integrity of an existing or future facility owned by the city, the city shall have the right to deny the installation of a new or replacement facility within the said right-of-way and may provide assistance in identifying alternative locations for the said facility. 
(4)  In those areas where the existing facilities are underground or where there are no existing above ground facilities, except street lights and associated wires and structures necessary for traffic or fire safety, a person shall be required to place facilities underground within the public right-of-way. 
(5)  In those areas where the existing facilities are above ground, a person may place the facilities above ground and installation of such facilities shall follow these criteria: 
a.  If the proposed facilities are wires or cables, said aerial facilities shall be installed on existing poles. Installation of a single new pole shall be permitted to provide service to an individual property. 
b.  The facility shall not block sidewalks, pedestrian pathways, or vehicular access to utility easements; 
c.  The facility shall not inhibit the placement of a sidewalk or pathway where sidewalks or pathways presently do not exist. 
d.  The facility shall not inhibit or obstruct drainage. 
e.  The facility shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic; obstruct pedestrian or motorist visibility of other pedestrians, other motorists, or other objects in the public rights-of-way, including traffic control devices. 
f.  The facility shall not be placed in or directly adjacent to city parks or medians unless authorized by the city council. 
g.  Landscaping and/or screening for any above ground facility shall conform to the landscaping requirements as outlined in this chapter. 
(6)  In addition to other requirements provided in this chapter, the city shall have final authorization on the location of the said facility. If the city determines that the facility will have a detrimental effect on the area due to noise, appearance, or incompatibility with the area, or will be a hazard, which may include, but is not limited to, obstructing visibility, then the city shall require that the facility be located at another location. 
(d)  Placement requirements for the installation of structures in public rights-of-way. 
(1)  The city has obtained public rights-of-way for streets, bridges, traffic signs and signals, sidewalks, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer pipes, and other city related purposes. Historically, the city's limited rights-of-way have been made available for the installation of private utility poles, wires, cables, and pipes to serve property owners within the city. The city will consider allowing structures within the public rights-of-way when the placement does not: 
a.  Adversely affect neighborhood appearance; or 
b.  Restrict to an unacceptable level the use of the public rights-of-way by the city; or 
c.  Reduce property values. 
(2)  General requirements. When placing structures within the public rights-of-way, the person shall comply with the following general requirements: 
a.  Placement of structure, including the foundation and required landscaping shall not: 
1.  Inhibit access to existing city facilities, which may include, but are not limited to, streets, bridges, traffic signs, signals, and signal boxes, sidewalks, pedestrian pathways, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, and storm sewer pipes; and 
2.  Be within a 25-foot clear sight triangle at intersections; and 
3.  Be within a 25-foot clear sight triangle at driveways excepting structures along streets that have a maximum 36 inches in height and 18 inches in diameter and structures that have a maximum height of 36 inches unless otherwise specifically authorized by the city; and 
4.  Be placed above water lines and appurtenances; and 
5.  Be placed above sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and appurtenances unless specifically authorized by the city; and 
6.  Block sidewalks, pedestrian pathways, or vehicular access to utility easements; and 
7.  Inhibit the placement of a sidewalk or pathway where sidewalks or pathways presently do not exist; and 
8.  Inhibit vehicular access to utility easements; and 
9.  Be placed in, directly adjacent to, or otherwise adversely impact the character, view, or appearance of city parks or medians unless authorized by the city council. 
b.  Placement of structure shall: 
1.  Be a minimum of three feet from the back of curbs, water meters, water valves, sanitary sewer cleanouts, manholes, and other facilities; and 
2.  Be a minimum of ten feet from fire hydrants; and 
3.  Be a permanent color such that attention is not drawn to the structure. If the structure is plastic, the color shall be impregnated into the plastic. If the structure is metal, the color shall be factory anodized or baked onto the metal. Field painting on initial installation of the structure is not permitted. 
4.  Be installed in areas that minimize the obtrusiveness of the structure. 
(i)  The person may be required to screen the structure by utilizing existing landscaping, hardscape, or fencing. 
(ii)  If the existing landscaping is insufficient to provide screening or if no landscaping exists, the city may require that the structure be screened with authorized landscaping or hardscape to reduce the visual impact of the structure. Such hardscape or landscape shall be compatible with the existing landscaping and hardscape materials in the vicinity. 
(iii)  Subsections (i) and (ii) above shall not apply to structures having maximum dimensions of 18 inches × 18 inches × 36 inches that are located in the rear utility easement. For the purposes of this section, a rear utility easement shall be defined as the utility easement parallel and behind the generally recognized entrance to the building. 
(iv)  The city manager may consider granting a waiver to the screening requirement if the person applies for an exception. Such application shall be made in writing. 
(3)  Specific requirements. In addition to the general requirements identified above, the person shall conform to the following specific requirements when placing structures 18 inches x 18 inches x 36 inches or smaller: 
a.  If the structure serves only one property, said structure must be placed in the utility easement immediately adjacent to or on the property being served as close to the extension of the property line as possible. The structure shall not be placed on an adjacent property unless authorized by the city. 
b.  If the structure provides service to two adjacent properties, the structure shall be placed in the utility easement as close to the extension of the property line as possible. 
c.  The structure must be placed in a rear utility or alley easement, if it exists. For the purposes of this section, a rear utility easement shall be defined as the utility easement parallel and behind the generally recognized entrance to the building. In the event that no rear utility or alley easement exists or is available adjacent to the property being served, the structure may be placed in other existing utility easements on the property. If there are no other existing or available utility easements on the property, the structure may be placed in the street right-of-way. 
d.  For properties that are located on street corners, the structure shall be placed in the utility easement in the generally recognized side street behind the extension of the front of the building. 
(4)  In addition to the general requirements identified above, the person shall conform to the following specific requirements when placing structures larger than 18 inches × 18 inches × 36 inches but not to exceed 24 inches deep by 65 inches high by 60 inches wide: 
a.  The structure must be placed in a rear alley or utility easement as close to the extension of the property line as possible unless, in the determination of the city, that another location is appropriate. In the event that no rear utility or alley easement exists or is available, the structure may be placed in public right-of-way of the streets, with first consideration given to the public right-of-way of side streets, followed by public right-of-way of undivided streets, then public right-of-way of divided streets. 
b.  A person may not place more than one structure within 300 feet of another structure in the rear public right-of-way, except those 18 inches × 18 inches × 36 inches and smaller unless the city manager has granted an exception. 
c.  A person may not place more than one structure within 1,000 feet of another structure in the public right-of-way in front of the generally recognized entrance to the building, except those 18 inches × 18 inches × 36 inches and smaller unless the city manager has granted an exception. 
d.  For placement of structures on corner properties, the structure shall be placed behind the generally recognized front yard setback. 
e.  A person may replace a structure existing at the time of adoption of this chapter with a like structure, whose total dimensions do not exceed 125 percent of the total volume of the original structure. 
(5)  The city manager may grant minor deviations to the aforementioned placement and maximum dimension requirements for the installation of structures in public rights-of-way, including utility easements and alleys, provided that the intent of the requirements is achieved. The city manager may also consider specific requests from the property owner(s) being served or from property owner(s) adjacent to the property being served. The city manager reserves the right to forward such requests for deviations to these requirements to the city council for consideration and final determination. 
(6)  The public rights-of-way, including utility easements and alleys, generally will not accommodate structures larger than 24 inches deep x 65 inches high by 60 inches wide. In certain unique circumstances, the public right-of-way may accommodate a structure that exceeds the maximum dimensions. The city manager is authorized to consider requests for placement of structures in such locations consistent with the requirements of this chapter. Specific conditions that are consistent with the intent of the requirements of the ordinance may be placed on structures placed under this provision. 
(e)  Locates. 
(1)  Of city facilities. 
a.  Prior to any construction or installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way and utility easements, the city's water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, traffic signal conduits, and irrigation lines shall be located in the field by the appropriate city personnel. It is the sole responsibility of the person to contact the city and obtain a locate of city facilities. 
b.  The person shall designate a representative that will be present at the time each city facility is located and the appropriate city personnel shall sign on the permit that each facility has been located. Requests for locates shall be made not less than two business days in advance. 
c.  When the city locates its facilities, the location shall identify the approximate horizontal location of the facilities. The person shall be responsible for field verification of all actual locations of the facilities and shall exercise extraordinary care when working in the vicinity of these facilities to avoid damaging them. The city shall not be liable for any damage to its facilities as a result of the locates and the person shall be liable for damages as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Of non-city owned facilities. 
a.  From time to time, the city may request identification of the specific location of person's facilities. The person shall respond to such request within two business days of the receipt of the request. In the event the person fails to provide the necessary information, and damage is caused to person's facilities as a direct result of withholding said information, the person shall hold the city harmless from all liability, damage, cost, or expense resulting from any city action in this regard unless such damage was caused solely by the negligence or willful misconduct of the city or its agents. 
b.  In addition to providing the location of person's facilities, the person shall be responsible to contact all other users of the public rights-of-way, either individually or through a state-sponsored third party one-call system, for on-the-ground locations of all non-city lines prior to construction, reconstruction, maintenance, operations, and repair of person's facilities. 
(f)  Construction in the rights-of-way. 
(1)  The city may establish conditions to minimize any such interference with the use of public and private property and may include requirements for trenchless construction, traffic control, and construction hours. 
(2)  Trenchless construction. Trenchless construction shall be required when installing facilities under driveways, streets, trees and landscaped areas within the City of Farmers Branch and when such use is practical. The city shall consider exceptions to this requirement on a case-by-case basis. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property. A person shall follow all construction directions given by the city in order to minimize any such interference. 
(3)  Traffic control. 
a.  Traffic control and barricading is the responsibility of the person performing the work and must conform to the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
b.  In order to maintain the highest possible level of traffic flow through areas involving lane closures and to ensure the safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, as well as for those working, the following requirements will apply when streets are closed: 
1.  The person shall provide the traffic barricade plan to the city inspector prior to the closing of the street; 
2.  The person shall provide sufficient number of workers on site so that flagging and directing of traffic is conducted at all times during the closure; 
3.  No more than one lane of a two-lane street may be closed at a time unless otherwise authorized by the city; 
4.  For streets with four or more lanes, no more than one lane in either travel direction shall be closed at a time without specific authorization from the city. 
5.  The trenches shall be covered with a steel plate at the end of each workday to allow the street to be opened to traffic unless otherwise authorized by the city; 
6.  The length of open trench shall not exceed that which can be closed within one day or shall not pose a danger to pedestrians, vehicular traffic, or existing utilities. 
(4)  Construction hours. 
a.  Except in emergencies, construction on weekends and holidays, regardless of the hour, shall be prohibited without prior written permission of the city. Requests for permission to work on weekends, holidays, or during hours other than those listed below must be submitted not less than two business days prior to the desired date and time of the proposed work. The person will be responsible for any and all costs including overtime, associated with city employees being at the work site during hours other than those listed below. 
b.  Boring and excavation operations in the public rights-of-way shall only take place between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., without prior permission from the city, which may include the city engineer or his designee. 
c.  No lanes on thoroughfares shall be blocked from 6:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, without prior permission from the city, which may include the city engineer or his designee. 
(5)  Boring and excavation. 
a.  No public rights-of-way shall be encumbered by construction, maintenance, removal, restoration, or repair by a person for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute such work. 
b.  All borings shall be made with traceable and steerable boring or tunneling equipment. 
c.  All bores eight inches in diameter or greater shall have pressure grouting in the void between the borehole and the conduit within the bore. Refer to exhibit "A" following this section. 
d.  Where trenches cross streets, the following provisions apply: 
1.  The width of pavement to be removed from a trench shall be a minimum of three feet wider than the trench width and the edge of the trench shall be a minimum of 12 inches from the edge of the street pavement or curb. Refer to exhibit "B" following this section. 
2.  Pavement shall be saw cut the full depth of the pavement prior to removal. The saw cut shall not be closer than three feet to an existing joint in the pavement. If a saw cut is to be closer than three feet, then the pavement shall be removed and replaced to the existing joint. 
3.  The person shall place temporary pavement repairs that will allow for safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic within two business days. Permanent new pavement shall be placed within 14 working days after the installation of the facilities with concrete that attains a compressive strength of 3,000 p.s.i. within 72 hours. The concrete shall be covered with a steel plate, which shall not be removed until the required strength is attained. If the width of the new concrete is too great to be covered with a steel plate, then a concrete that attains a compressive strength of 3,000 p.s.i. within 24 hours must be used and the street shall not be re-opened to traffic until the required strength has been attained. 
(6)  Inspections. The person shall make the work site available for inspection at all times during the performance of and upon completion of the work. The city may issue a stop-work order to the person for any work that violates the terms of the permit, other applicable standards, conditions, codes, or poses a threat to the life, health, safety, or well being of the public. The order shall state that failure to correct the non-conformance will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within 72 hours after issuance of the stop-work order, the person shall present proof to the city that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the city may revoke the permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(g)  Restoration of the rights-of-way. 
(1)  Manner and extent. The city shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and extent of the restoration of public rights-of-way. Property affected by the construction must be restored to a condition that is at least equal to the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work. 
(2)  Deadline for relocation or replacement. Relocation or replacement of all existing items such as, but not limited to, signs, trees, ground cover, and landscaping shall be replaced as soon as is reasonably possible, but in no instance more than 21 days after the completion of the work. 
a.  The 21-day period shall be extended for days that the person is unable to perform the work due to unfavorable weather conditions. 
b.  In the event the restoration is scheduled to take longer than 21 days for any other reason, the city may grant permission to exceed 21 days. If the city determines the delay in restoring and maintaining the public rights-of-way after such excavations and/or repairs have been made to be unreasonable, the city shall have the right to restore or repair the same. 
c.  If the person fails or refuses to act, the person shall be required to pay the costs incurred by the city in restoring the public right-of-way. 
d.  Restoration of the public right-of-way conducted by the city pursuant to this subsection shall not subject the city to pay compensation to the person nor shall the city incur liability for any damages. 
e.  In the event the city determines that person's use of any of city's public rights-of-way as set forth in this chapter pose an immediate danger to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public, the city shall have the right to restore or repair the same and shall require the person to pay the city reasonable costs incurred regarding same. 
f.  Backfilling and leveling of excavations and disturbed areas are to be done within 24 hours of completing the work for which the permit was issued. All soil beneath sidewalks, street pavement, and behind curbs is to be compacted in conformance with the NCTCOG Standards Specifications for Public Works Construction prior to the placement of new pavement. 
(3)  Irrigation, landscaping and tree trimming. 
a.  Irrigation. 
1.  Unless otherwise provided in writing by the city, the person shall keep all irrigation systems operational throughout construction. Any damage to irrigation systems shall be repaired by a licensed irrigator within two business days unless approved by the city. The person shall replace, in like kind and quality, any vegetation, including grass, ground cover, shrubs, trees, and flowers lost due to inoperable irrigation systems that result from any action of the person within 45 days after completion of the work. 
2.  The person may be required to install a new irrigation system or an extension of the existing irrigation system if the facility is placed so that the existing or surrounding landscaping cannot be serviced by the existing irrigation system. The person shall coordinate with the owner of the system when installing or extending irrigation systems. 
3.  A person shall not be required to install irrigation system in locations where irrigation currently does not exist. 
b.  Landscaping. 
1.  Any disturbed landscaped areas are to be restored. 
2.  Landscaping shall be restored using appropriate methods and quality to that which was existing prior to construction. 
3.  The city shall consider exceptions or reasonable alternatives to this requirement. 
c.  Tree trimming. 
1.  No trees shall be trimmed or removed without the approval of the city, except in emergency as provided herein. The person shall be liable for the cost of replacing any tree damaged or removed without the city's approval. Upon approval by the city, the person may trim trees in or over the public rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use, and maintenance of its facilities. All trimmings shall be performed in accordance with American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 1995 standards for tree care operations. The cost of such trimming will be the responsibility of the person. 
2.  The person shall remove any tree-trimmings within one business day of trimming for routine work. No trimmings shall be left on any paved surfaces. Should the person fail to remove such trimmings, the city may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the person shall promptly reimburse the city within 45 days for all costs incurred as a result of removing said trimmings. 
3.  Except as provided herein, for tree trimming completed during an emergency, the trimmings shall be removed as soon as practicable after the cessation of the emergency. The person shall advise the city of the schedule for removing said trimmings. Nothing herein shall prevent the city and the person from developing a program to trim trees and remove trimmings during emergency situations. 
4.  The person shall notify the occupant of the property prior to cutting any limbs from the trees except during emergencies. Any notice provided to inform occupants of tree trimming shall prominently state that the said trimming will be performed with no charge. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 13, 9-9-2002) 
 
BORE 
 
OPEN CUT TRENCH  
Sec. 70-174. - Improperly installed facilities. 
(a)  Any person doing work in the public right-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain facilities. 
(b)  The person shall be remedy any installation, repair, upgrade, or maintenance work that meets the definition of an emergency, per section 70-163, immediately. If the person fails to act, the city has the right to act immediately. The costs associated therewith will be billed to the person that owns the facility and must be paid within 45 days from the date of the city invoice 
(c)  Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if: 
(1)  The facilities do not meet the requirements of this chapter or any other applicable city codes; or 
(2)  The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices; or 
(3)  The facilities are not located in the proper place at the time of construction in accordance with construction plans submitted to the city and any directions provided by the city. 
(4)  Should the city determine that facility has been improperly installed because the facility has met one or more of the above criteria, the city shall notify the person by mail, electronic communication or facsimile that he shall, at his own expense, bring the said facility into compliance with this section and other provisions of this chapter within seven days unless otherwise permitted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 14, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-175. - Incomplete installation or construction of facilities. 
(a)  If the permit for which a facility was issued has expired prior to the completion of installation or construction of the facility and an extension has not been authorized by the city, the facility may be considered incomplete. 
(b)  A person that fails to complete installation or construction of facilities within the public right-of-way shall be in violation of this chapter. If the person does not complete the installation within six months the city will deem the facilities no longer in service as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  If the person's permit is expired and additional time is necessary to complete the installation of the facility, the person must apply for a new permit in accordance with this chapter. 
(d)  If the person's permit is unexpired and additional time is necessary to complete the installation of the facility, the person may request an extension of the permit in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 15, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-176. - Emergencies. 
(a)  A person may excavate the pavement of a street or public right-of-way without first complying with city requirements only under emergency conditions as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall be notified as soon as practicable regarding work performed under emergency conditions and the person shall apply for the necessary permits and fulfill all of the requirements necessary to achieve full compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 16, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-177. - Transfers. 
(a)  Non-certificated providers. 
(1)  Any rights or privileges that a person has by or through this or other city ordinances which are in the public rights-of-way, shall not be sold, resold, assigned, transferred or conveyed by the person, either separately or collectively, to any other person, without written notice to the city and the prior written approval of the city by ordinance or resolution, subject to any requirements or limitations imposed by federal law. The city's approval may be based upon the transferee providing adequate information to the city that it has the ability to perform and comply with the obligations and requirements of this chapter. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Should a person sell, assign, transfer, convey or otherwise dispose of any of its rights or interests, including such person's network, or attempt to do so, without the city's prior consent, the city may revoke the person's agreement, in which event all rights and interest of the person under it agreement with the city shall cease. 
(2)  Any transfer in violation of this section shall be null and void and unenforceable. Any change of control of person shall constitute a transfer under this section. However, such a change in control shall not void the person's agreement as to the transferee, unless and until the city has given notice that such a change in control necessitates compliance with this section. If the person does not initiate compliance with this section within 30 days after the above notice has been given by the city, the person's agreement shall be null and unenforceable as to the transferee. 
(3)  There shall be a rebuttable presumption of a change of control of the person upon a change of 15 percent or greater in the ownership of such person. Such a change in control shall be deemed a transfer that requires consent of the city. 
(4)  A mortgage or other pledge of assets to a bank or lending institution in a bona fide lending transaction shall not be considered an assignment or transfer. 
(5)  Notwithstanding anything else in this section, if the city has not authorized or denied a request to transfer under this section within 120 days of written notice of such request from the person to the city, it shall be deemed authorized. Such time frame may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties. 
(b)  Certificated telecommunications providers. A certificated telecommunications provider that has transferred ownership or control of a provider's business shall provide the city with notice of transfer and current point of contact information within a time as specified by law. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 17, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-178. - Notices. 
Unless otherwise provided herein or by other prevailing codes, all notices to the city shall be made in writing and mailed via certified mail to the following address: 
Office of the City Secretary 
City of Farmers Branch 
Farmers Branch, Texas 75381 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 18, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-179. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Within 120 days of completion of each new permitted segment of person's facility, the person shall supply the city with a complete set of drawings of record for the segment in a format used in the ordinary course of the person's business, but excluding customer specific, proprietary or confidential information and as reasonably prescribed by the city, and as allowed by law. If the construction complied with the engineering plans submitted to the city as required in this chapter, the engineering plans as approved by the city shall satisfy this requirement. 
(b)  When possible, the person shall provide the drawings of record in an electronic format specified by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 19, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-180. - Reservation of police powers. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions of this chapter and subject to applicable law, a person's physical occupation of the public rights-of-way is subject to police power regulation of the city in the management of its public right-of-way in connection with the expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of facilities in the public right-of-way, pursuant to the city's rights as a custodian of public property. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to exercise police power regulations in the management of all persons within the public rights-of-way as provided by federal and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 20, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-181. - Unauthorized use of the public rights-of-way. 
(a)  To the extent allowed by applicable law, the city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person from using the public rights-of-way unless the city has consented to such use in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person using the public rights-of-way without a permit in accordance with this chapter shall be held to be in violation of this chapter and will be subject to any penalties the city may assess, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 21, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-182. - Violation of article. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Performs, authorizes, directs, or supervises construction without a valid permit issued under this chapter; or 
(2)  Violates any provision of this chapter; or 
(3)  Fails to comply with restriction or requirements of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter; or 
(4)  Fails to comply with an order or regulation of the city issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  This chapter may be enforced by civil court action in accordance with state or federal law, in addition to any other remedies, civil or criminal, the city has for violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Prior to the initiation of civil or criminal enforcement litigation, a person who has violated a provision of this chapter must be given the opportunity to correct the violation within the timeframe specified in this chapter or by the city. This section does not prohibit the city from taking enforcement action as to past or present violations of this chapter, notwithstanding their correction. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day or portion thereof that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 22, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-183. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Except as to certificated telecommunications providers, each person placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses, and expenses (i) for the repair, replacement, or restoration of city's property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or found to be defective as a result of the person's acts or omissions, (ii) from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for (a) damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but not limited to the person, its agents, officers, employees and subcontractors, city's agents, officers, and employees, and third parties); and/or (b) death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person (including, but not limited to the agents, officers and employees of the person, person's subcontractors and city, and third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful act or omissions of the person, its agents, employees and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the sole negligence of the city, its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors. 
(c)  The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the city and are not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any person or entity. 
(d)  A person that is a certificated telecommunications provider as defined in Chapter 283 of the Texas Local Government Code, or a network provider as defined in Chapter 284 of the Local Government Code, as amended, shall provide to the city the indemnity provided in Section 283.057, Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
(e)  The provisions of this clause are solely for the benefit of the city and are not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 23, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 3457 , § 2, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 70-184. - Confidentiality. 
Any materials or documents pertaining to this chapter are subject to the Texas Public Information Act, the federal Freedom of Information Act, and other applicable federal and state law. To the extent the city determines that any requested information is excepted from public disclosure under Texas Public Information Act, the Freedom of Information Act, and other applicable federal or state law, it will seek a ruling from the applicable governing agency and will not be required to take any further action to have the requested information declared confidential. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 25, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-185. - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to, and accumulation of all penalties, the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any and all violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 26, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-186. - Governing law. 
This chapter shall be construed in accordance with the city code(s) and ordinance(s) in effect on the date of passage of this chapter to the extent that such code(s) and ordinance(s) are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas, subject to the city's ongoing authority to adopt reasonable regulations to manage its public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 27, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 70-187. - Effective date. 
This chapter takes effect from and after its passage. Not earlier than six months from the effective date, staff will conduct a review of the ordinance and report to the city council the impact/effectiveness of the provisions contained herein as applied to the city and/or other persons in the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2625, § 28, 9-9-2002)  
Secs. 70-188, 70-189. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NETWORK PROVIDERS 
 
Sec. 70-190. - Authority required/nonexclusive use. 
A network provider must provide evidence that the network provider has acquired all required authorization pursuant to state law, including, but not limited to, permission to use a utility pole or city service pole, prior to obtaining a permit from the city to use public right-of-way. The network provider's right to use and occupy the public right-of-way shall not be exclusive, and the city shall have the right to exercise its police powers and manage its public right-of-way, based on the Texas Local Gov't Code Chapter 284 and all other state or federal laws. 
( Ord. No. 3457 , § 2, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 70-191. - Transfer and notice. 
A network provider shall notify the right-of-way manager of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or control of network provider's business within 30 days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A network provider shall also maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the right-of-way manager at all times during which the network provider uses the right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 3457 , § 2, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 70-192. - Fees. 
(a)  Exemptions. Network providers are exempted from all fees, other than those specifically provided for in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Network provider fees. 
(1)  Annual network node rate. Network providers shall pay the city an annual network node rate for each location for which network provider has obtained permit(s) for the installation of network nodes, regardless of whether or not a network provider installs network nodes in the public right-of-way. The amount of the annual network rate shall be set in city's fee schedule. The annual network node public right-of-way rate payment for the first year at any location ("initial annual network node payment") begins accruing when the permit is issued and is due 30 days after network provider obtains a permit to install or collocate a network node at the location. The initial annual network node payment shall be pro-rated for the months remaining in the calendar year after the permit issuance date. 
(2)  Subsequent years annual network node rate due date. The annual network node public right-of-way rate for every year after the initial annual network node payment shall be paid in advance on or before December 31 of each calendar year for each network node in the public right-of-way for the next calendar year period. 
(3)  Annual network node rate adjustment. the city may adjust the annual network node public right-of-way rate by an amount equal to one-half the annual change in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for Texas, as published by the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics. The city shall provide written notice to each network provider of the new rate, and the rate shall apply to the first payment due to the municipality on or after the 60th day following that notice. 
(4)  Annual collocation on service pole attachment fee. Network provider shall pay the city annually $20.00 for each network node permitted to be collocated on a city service pole for each location for which network provider has entered into an agreement with the city to collocate a network node on a city service pole, regardless of whether or not a network provider collocates a network node on a service pole. This fee is due 30 days after network provider obtains a permit to install a network node on the city service pole. The initial annual collocation on service pole attachment fee payment shall be pro-rated for the months remaining in the calendar year after the permit issuance date. The annual collocation on service pole attachment fee for every year after the initial payment shall be paid in advance on or before December 31 of each calendar year for each network node in the public right-of-way for the next calendar year period. 
(5)  Monthly transport fee. To the extent a network provider has transport facilities permitted from the network nodes in the public right-of-way it shall pay the city a monthly transport facilities fee on a quarterly basis, in the amount set in the city's fee schedule, as adopted in Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances, which begins accruing when the permit is issued. This transport facility fee is in addition to any annual network node public right-of-way rate payment required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.053. 
(6)  Application and permit fees. Network provider shall pay the city the application and permit fees set forth in the city's master fee schedule contemporaneously with the submittal of the application for the permits. 
( Ord. No. 3457 , § 2, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 70-193. - Indemnity. 
A network provider shall indemnify the city as specified by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.057, as may be amended. 
( Ord. No. 3457 , § 2, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 70-194. - Compliance with design manual. 
A network provider shall comply with the city's Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support Poles, as amended. Any applications submitted for installation of network nodes, node support poles and related equipment, the plans and specifications of which do not comply with the design manual, will not be approved. 
( Ord. No. 3457 , § 2, 8-15-2017)  
Sec. 70-195. - Certificates of operation. 
As part of the application process for the installation of network nodes, the network provider must certify that the proposed network node will be placed into active commercial service by or for a network provider no later than the 60th day after the date the construction and final testing of the network node is completed. 
An updated certification of active service must be submitted annually, by no later than December 31, with or prior to payment of the applicable annual fee(s). 
If the network provider is not in active commercial service for a period in excess of 60 consecutive days, the equipment will be deemed abandoned and the permit will be revoked. The network provider will be required, within 90 days from notification from the city, to remove the equipment at the network provider's sole expense. 
( Ord. No. 3457 , § 2, 8-15-2017)  
Chapter 74 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Numbering of buildings, § 22-661 et seq.; erosion and sedimentation control regulations, § 34-31 et seq.; flood damage prevention, § 42-31 et seq.; paving alleys and residential streets, § 70-36 et seq. 
State Law reference— Subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The subdivision regulations of the city are not printed in the Code, but are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city.  
Chapter 78 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Property taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.01 et seq.; local taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 301.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 78-1—78-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Property taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.01 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-31. - Penalty for delinquent taxes. 
Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Texas Property Tax Code §§ 33.07, 33.08 and 33.11 an additional penalty on delinquent taxes for tax years 2008 and subsequent years in the amount of 20 percent of the delinquent tax, penalty and interest shall be incurred if tax becomes delinquent: 
(1)  On or after February 1 of a year but not later than May 1 of that year and remains delinquent on July 1 of the year in which the tax becomes delinquent. 
(2)  On or after June 1 under V.T.C.A., Texas Tax Code §§ 26.07(F), 26.15(E), 31.03, 31.031, 31.032, or 31.04. 
(3)  On February 1 of a year and remains delinquent on the 60th day thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1768, § 4, 4-18-1988; Ord. No. 3009, § 1, 12-16-2008) 
State Law reference— Authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.07.  
Sec. 78-32. - Property tax certificate fee. 
The fee for a property tax certificate is set at an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code per tax certificate issued. 
(Ord. No. 1734, § 1, 9-21-1987)  
Secs. 78-33—78-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTIONS 
 
Sec. 78-56. - Generally. 
Pursuant to the Texas Constitution and V.T.C.A., Property Tax Code § 11.13, the City Council of Farmers Branch, Texas, does hereby exempt from ad valorem taxation 20 percent, but not less than $5,000.00 of the appraised value of the residence homestead for 1994 tax year and future years. 
(Ord. No. 3058, § 1, 10-6-2009)  
Sec. 78-57. - Exemption for individuals sixty-five or older. 
Pursuant to the Texas Constitution and V.T.C.A., Property Tax Code § 11.13(d), $80,000.00 of the appraised value of the residence homestead of an individual who is 65 years of age, or older, shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes beginning tax year 2020 and continuing thereafter, provided such person qualifies and makes application for the exemption in accordance with the Texas Property Tax Code. 
(Ord. No. 3058, § 1, 10-6-2009; Ord. No. 3621 , § 1, 1-7-2020)  
Sec. 78-58. - Exemption for disabled persons. 
Pursuant to the Texas Constitution and V.T.C.A., Property Tax Code § 11.13(d), $60,000.00 of the appraised value of the residence homestead of an individual who is disabled shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation beginning tax year 1994 and continuing thereafter, provided such person qualifies for and makes application for the exemption in accordance with the Texas Property Tax Code. 
(Ord. No. 3058, § 1, 10-6-2009)  
Secs. 78-59—78-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 78-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City manager means the city manager of the city or such person as is specifically designated by the city manager. 
Consideration means the cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
Hotel means any building, or buildings, in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodginghouses, inns, roominghouses, or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but the term "hotel" shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
Monthly period means the regular calendar months of the year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel or short-term rental if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession or right to use or possess extends for a period of less than 30 days. 
Occupant means anyone, who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess, any room in a hotel or short-term rental if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room or rooms or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel or short-term rental. 
Short-term rental means any single-family residence leased or rented for a period of 30 consecutive days or less. 
(Ord. No. 1209, § 1, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 9-19-1983; Ord. No. 1752, §§ 1—5, 1-18-1988; Ord. No. 1839, §§ 1—4, 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2142, § 1, 11-7-1994; Ord. No. 2460, § 1, 3-15-1999; Ord. No. 3583 , § 1(A), (B), 7-23-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 78-77. - Levy of tax; rate; exceptions. 
There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel or short-term rental where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day. Such tax shall be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel or short-term rental, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1209, § 2, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 9-19-1983; Ord. No. 1752, §§ 1—5, 1-18-1988; Ord. No. 1839, §§ 1—4, 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2142, § 2, 11-7-1994; Ord. No. 2460, § 2, 3-15-1999; Ord. No. 3583 , § 1(C), 7-23-2019) 
State Law reference— Authority and requirements, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq.  
Sec. 78-78. - Disposition of revenue. 
The revenue derived from this tax will only be used for the purposes authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq., as the city council may direct and authorize. 
(Ord. No. 1209, § 3, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 9-19-1983; Ord. No. 1752, §§ 1—5, 1-18-1988; Ord. No. 1839, §§ 1—4, 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2142, § 3, 11-7-1994; Ord. No. 2460, § 3, 3-15-1999) 
State Law reference— Use of tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101 et seq.  
Sec. 78-79. - Collection. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel, motel or short-term rental shall collect the tax imposed in section 78-77 for the city; provided, however, that failure of an operator, manager, management company or controller of any hotel, motel or short-term rental to collect or make payment of the full amount of such tax owed to the city places the responsibility for the full amount of such tax owed to the city upon the person owning the hotel, motel or short-term rental, or its successor or assignee, which shall include any person acquiring ownership through foreclosure or any other legal means. 
(b)  Every person collecting the subject tax is hereby authorized to deduct and withhold from the person's payment to the city, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, one percent of the amount of tax collected and required to be reported to the city. 
(c)  Every person collecting the subject tax shall forfeit the one percent reimbursement for failure to pay the tax or to file reports as required by this article. 
(d)  Upon the sale of a hotel, motel or short-term rental, the purchaser of the hotel, motel or short-term rental, or other successors in interest to the hotel, motel or short-term rental, shall withhold from the purchase price an amount sufficient to pay to the city the full amount of all collected but unpaid hotel/motel occupancy taxes owed to the city. Upon payment of such taxes to the city, the tax collector shall deliver a certificate of the paid hotel/motel occupancy tax. The purchaser of a hotel, motel or short-term rental or other successors in interest to a hotel, motel or short-term rental who fails to withhold the full amount of hotel/motel tax collected but unpaid to the city out of the purchase price, as required by this section, is liable for the amount required to be withheld. 
(e)  If a person forecloses upon a hotel, motel or short-term rental which has collected hotel/motel occupancy taxes that have not been paid to the city, responsibility for the payment of the full amount of such collected but unpaid taxes shall be that of the person foreclosing upon the hotel, motel or short-term rental. 
(Ord. No. 1209, § 4, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 9-19-1983; Ord. No. 1752, §§ 1—5, 1-18-1988; Ord. No. 1839, §§ 1—4, 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2142, § 4, 11-7-1994; Ord. No. 2460, § 4, 3-15-1999; Ord. No. 3583 , § 1(D), 7-23-2019)  
Sec. 78-80. - Reports. 
On the last day of the month following each monthly period, every person required in section 78-79 to collect the tax imposed in section 78-77, shall file a report with the city showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding month, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information as the city manager may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. 
(Ord. No. 1209, § 5, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 9-19-1983; Ord. No. 1752, §§ 1—5, 1-18-1988; Ord. No. 1839, §§ 1—4, 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2142, § 5, 11-7-1994; Ord. No. 2460, § 5, 3-15-1999)  
Sec. 78-81. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in section 78-77, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable the city manager to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article, and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1209, § 6, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 9-19-1983; Ord. No. 1752, §§ 1—5, 1-18-1988; Ord. No. 1839, §§ 1—4, 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2142, § 6, 11-7-1994; Ord. No. 2460, § 6, 3-15-1999)  
Sec. 78-82. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed in section 78-77, shall fail to file a report as required in section 78-80, shall fail to pay to the city the tax as imposed in section 78-77, when such payment is due, shall fail to withhold an amount from the purchase price to satisfy outstanding hotel/motel occupancy taxes collected but unpaid to the city when purchasing or acquiring an interest in a hotel, motel or short-term rental, or shall file a false report, or any person who forecloses upon any hotel, motel or short-term rental which has collected but not paid to the city the full amount of hotel/motel tax, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this article within the time required shall be charged five percent of the amount due as a penalty, and after the first 30 days shall be charged an additional ten percent of such tax; provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten percent per annum beginning 60 days from the date due. 
(b)  The municipal attorney or other attorney acting for the city may bring suit against a person who is required to collect the tax imposed and pay the collections over to the city and who has failed to file a tax report or pay the tax when due to collect the tax not paid or to enjoin the person from operating a hotel or short-term rental in the municipality until the tax is paid or the report filed, as applicable, as provided by the court's order. In addition to the amount of any tax owed, this person is liable to the city for the city's reasonable attorney's fees and a penalty equal to 15 percent of the total amount of the tax owed. 
(Ord. No. 1209, § 7, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 9-19-1983; Ord. No. 1752, §§ 1—5, 1-18-1988; Ord. No. 1839, §§ 1—4, 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2142, § 7, 11-7-1994; Ord. No. 2460, § 7, 3-15-1999; Ord. No. 3583 , § 1(E), 7-23-2019)  
Sec. 78-83. - Collection fee. 
The city may retain five percent of the gross amount of the hotel/motel occupancy tax collected to cover the cost of the collection duties. 
(Ord. No. 1209, § 8, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 9-19-1983; Ord. No. 1752, §§ 1—5, 1-18-1988; Ord. No. 1839, §§ 1—4, 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2142, § 8, 11-7-1994; Ord. No. 2460, § 8, 3-15-1999)  
Sec. 78-84. - Fee for certificate. 
A certificate of the paid hotel/motel occupancy tax shall not be issued by the city's tax collector unless a fee in an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code has been paid to the city for such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1209, § 9, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 9-19-1983; Ord. No. 1752, §§ 1—5, 1-18-1988; Ord. No. 1839, §§ 1—4, 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2142, § 9, 11-7-1994; Ord. No. 2460, § 9, 3-15-1999)  
Secs. 78-85—78-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SALES AND USE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The city adopted the one percent sales tax by referendum on December 9, 1967. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Sales and use tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 78-116. - Telecommunications services exemption repealed. 
Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210, the Local Sales and Use Tax Act, the application of the exemption provided by the Local Sales and Use Tax Act for telecommunication services sold within the city is hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1682, § 2, 3-9-1987) 
State Law reference— Telecommunications exemption, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210.  
Sec. 78-117. - Tax on residential use of gas and electricity. 
(a)  Imposed. A tax is hereby authorized and imposed on all receipts from residential use of gas and electricity within the City of Farmers Branch, Texas, as is provided for by state law. 
(b)  Exemption repealed. The application of the exemption provided for in § 321.105, Tax Code, V.A.T.C.S., is hereby repealed by the city as authorized by § 321.105 thereof. 
(c)  Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the State of Texas. 
(d)  Notice requirement. The city secretary shall forward to the Comptroller of the State of Texas by United States Registered or Certified Mail a copy of Ordinance No. 2732 along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's vote on the ordinance. 
(e)  Tax cumulative. This section shall be and is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of the city and this section shall not operate to repeal or affect any of such other ordinances. The tax provided for hereunder shall not serve as an offset to, be in lieu of or in any way reduce any amount payable to the city pursuant to any franchise, street use ordinance, charter provision, statute or, without limitation by the foregoing enumeration, otherwise payable by any provider of gas or electricity within the city; it being the express intent hereof that all such obligations, impositions and agreements of every kind and nature shall remain in full force and effect without reduction or limitation hereby. 
(f)  Liberally construed. This section is to be liberally construed to achieve its remedial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2732, §§ 2—4, 8-18-2003)  
Chapter 82 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Junked, wrecked, abandoned vehicles, § 34-201 et seq.; noise regulations, § 34-246 et seq.; noises involving loading vehicles, § 34-250; loudspeakers, sound trucks, etc., § 34-252; littering from passenger vehicles, etc., § 34-326 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 82-1. - Traffic control devices generally. 
(a)  Authority to install traffic control devices. The director of public works is authorized by the city council to place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter to make effective the provisions of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and he is authorized to make a study of and determine the intersections where particular hazards exist, and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection. He is authorized to erect and maintain such traffic control devices at such hazardous intersections so as to regulate the traffic in an attempt to prevent traffic hazards, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(b)  Manual and specifications for traffic control devices. All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highway commission of the state or resolutions adopted by the city council. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of the state law or this ordinance shall be the official traffic control devices, signs and signals. 
(c)  Obedience to official traffic control devices. The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device, sign or signal applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or under state law, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under state law. 
(Ord. No. 253, §§ 1—3, 10-3-1960; Ord. No. 901, §§ 2—4, 12-6-1971)  
Sec. 82-2. - Erection of traffic control devices for emergencies or hazardous conditions. 
Whenever the traffic engineer of the city shall determine that an emergency or hazardous condition exists and upon the basis of an engineering investigation that there is an immediate need to regulate the operation of vehicles upon the streets, alleys, or highways within the city limits, and upon the erection of traffic control devices providing notice of traffic regulations, it shall be unlawful to violate the restrictions of such traffic control devices. Any traffic control devices erected in accordance with this section which are not authorized by an ordinance passed by the city council within 45 days of the erection of such regulatory device shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2216, §§ 1, 2, 10-9-1995)  
Sec. 82-3. - School bus signal lights. 
(a)  Required. All school buses used for the transportation of school children within the corporate limits of the city, when owned and operated by any school district or when privately owned, shall be equipped with flashing warning signal lights to warn the operators of other vehicles of the presence of such school buses when stopped to allow school children to alight from or board the school bus. All such warning signal lights must be in an operative condition at all times. 
(b)  Placement. The warning lights used shall be mounted on the front of the bus at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable and shall display simultaneously, flashing white or amber lights or any shade of color between white and amber. The signal lights used to display such warning to the rear shall be mounted at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable and shall show simultaneously flashing amber or red lights or any shade of color between amber and red. These warning lights shall be visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions. 
(c)  Use. The flashing warning lights must be in use on all buses when they are stopped or are being stopped on a public street, highway or other thoroughfare for the purpose of permitting school children to board or alight from the school bus. 
(d)  Applicability. Every school district, its officers and employees and every person employed under a contract with a school district and all individuals operating private school buses shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 294, §§ 1—4, 8-28-1961)  
Sec. 82-4. - Penalty. 
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 901, § 5, 12-6-1971)  
Secs. 82-5—82-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 82-21. - Bicycle traffic prohibited on certain public streets. 
It is unlawful for any person to ride or otherwise propel a bicycle along and/or upon Marsh Lane between Valley View Lane and Brookhaven Club Drive between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 8-2-1976)  
Sec. 82-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3466 , § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 2017, repealed § 82-22, which pertained to use of wireless communication devices while driving, and derived from Ord. No. 3274, § 1, 3-18-2014.  
Secs. 82-23—82-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SPEED LIMITS 
 
Sec. 82-31. - General reasonable and prudent speed. 
(a)  No person shall drive, as defined by state law, a motor vehicle, a motorcycle, bicycle, motor-driven cycle, motor-assisted cycle, or any other vehicle of any kind upon a public street, alley, highway, or parkway within the corporate limits of the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances then existing. Except where a special hazard exists that requires lower speeds for compliance with subsection (b) of this section, no person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle or other vehicle on any street within the city at a greater speed than 30 miles per hour, unless otherwise provided by subsequent sections of this division, and any speed in excess of 30 miles per hour, unless otherwise provided by subsequent sections of this division, shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and is unlawful. 
(b)  No person shall drive a vehicle upon a public street or a public alley within the corporation limits of the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 1, 9-18-1978)  
Sec. 82-32. - Speed limit on alleys. 
(a)  The word "alley," as used in this section, shall mean any narrow street or public way, not to exceed 20 feet in width, where passage is primarily for the convenience of the owners of property abutting thereon and for the convenience of those who serve the abutting owners of property. 
(b)  Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made as authorized by the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.356, the prima facie speed limit of ten miles per hour for vehicles is determined and declared to be reasonable and safe on all alleys or parts thereof in the city and the rate of ten miles per hour is hereby fixed as the speed limit for vehicles traveling upon such alleys or parts thereof. 
(c)  The city manager or designee is hereby authorized to have speed limit signs erected, constructed and placed at such points along alleys so that travelers will be reasonably notified of such speed. 
(Code 1969, § 23-1.2(a); Ord. No. 1210, § 6, 9-18-1978)  
Sec. 82-33. - Speed on streets under construction, maintenance or repair. 
(a)  When, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, it is necessary that the speed limit on any street, highway, or alley within the city, because of the maintenance, construction or repair of such street, highway or alley or portion thereof, be reduced, the city manager or designee shall have the authority to erect signs at the beginning, end and other portions where such street, highway or alley is under maintenance, construction and/or repair limiting the speed to the maximum speed determined by the city manager or designee. It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive any motor vehicle within such posted area at a speed in excess of such speed, such speed limit hereby being deemed to be the prima facie evidence of reasonable and prudent maximum speed at which a vehicle may travel on such portions of such street, highway or alley under construction, maintenance or repair. 
(b)  The city manager or designee is hereby authorized to have speed limit signs erected, constructed and placed at such points along such highways, streets or alleys or portions thereof under construction, maintenance or repair so that travelers will be reasonably notified of such speed. 
(Ord. No. 1210, §§ 7, 8, 9-18-1978) 
_____ 
Sec. 82-34. - Speed limits on certain public streets. 
Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made as authorized by the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.353, the following prima facie speed limits hereafter indicated for vehicles are determined and declared to be reasonable and safe; and such speed limits are hereby fixed at the rate of speed indicated for vehicles traveling upon the named public streets and highways, or parts thereof, of the city, such speed limit to be in force and effect unless otherwise limited as prescribed by the provisions of this chapter. The streets and highways regulated, and the maximum prima facie speed limits thereof, are as follows: 
Street 	Extent 	Speed 
Limit 
(mph) 
Austell Parkway 	From Valley View Lane to Maydelle Lane 	20 
Cooks Creek Place 		20 
Dallas Parkway, southbound lanes 	Entire length inside the city limits 	40 
Denton Drive 	From the north city limit line to the south city limit line 	35 
Heritage Circle 		20 
Interstate Highway 35 E 	From the north city limits line to the south city limits line 	As set forth in compliance with the speed limits set by the State of Texas pursuant to the Texas Transportation Code. 
Interstate Highway 35, east service road 	From the north city limits line to the south city limits line 	As set forth in compliance with the speed limits set by the State of Texas pursuant to the Texas Transportation Code. 
Interstate Highway 35, west service road 	From the north city limits line to the south city limits line 	As set forth in compliance with the speed limits set by the State of Texas pursuant to the Texas Transportation Code. 
Interstate Highway 35 E, express lanes 	From the north city limits line to the south city limits line 	As set forth in compliance with the speed limits set by the State of Texas pursuant to the Texas Transportation Code. 
Interstate Highway 635 	From the west city limits line to the east city limits line 	As set forth in compliance with the speed limits set by the State of Texas pursuant to the Texas Transportation Code. 
Interstate Highway 635, north and south service roads 	From the west city limits line to the east city limits line 	As set forth in compliance with the speed limits set by the State of Texas pursuant to the Texas Transportation Code. 
Inwood Road 	From the south city limits line to the north city limits line 	40 
Joanna Drive 	From Heartside Place to Old North Road 	20 
Josey Lane 	From the south city limits line to the north city limits line 	35 
Luna Road 	From the south right-of-way line of Royal Lane to the north right-of-way line of Valley View Lane 	45 
Luna Road 	From the north right-of-way line of Valley View Lane to the north right-of-way line of Keenan Bridge Road 	45 
Marsh Lane 	From the south city limits line to the north city limits line 	35 
Maybrook Drive 	From Webb Chapel Road to Medical Center Drive 	20 
Maydelle Lane 	From Josey Lane to Austell Parkway 	20 
Medical Center Drive 	From Webb Chapel Road to dead end 	20 
Midway Road 	From Interstate Highway 635 to Spring Valley Road 	35 
Millwood Drive 	From Josey Lane to Farmers Branch Lane 	20 
Old North Road 	From Heartside Drive to Webb Chapel Road 	20 
Rawhide Drive 	From Valley View Lane to William Dodson Parkway 	20 
Royal Lane 	From the east right-of-way line of Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railroad to Luna Road 	40 
Royal Lane 	From Luna Road to the west city limits line 	40 
Senlac Drive 	From Valley View Lane to Valwood Parkway 	40 
Spring Valley Lane 	Entire length 	20 
Shoredale Lane 	From Hollandale Lane to Fyke Road 	20 
Spring Valley Road 	From the centerline of Dallas Parkway to the east right-of-way line of Midway Road 	40 
Tanglewood Drive 	From the centerline of Brookhaven Club Drive to the west curbline of Marsh Lane 	20 
Valley View Lane 	From the west city limits line at the Elm Fork of the Trinity River to the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railroad tracks 	45 
Valley View Lane 	From the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railroad to the east city limits line 	35 
Valwood Parkway 	From Josey Lane to the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railroad 	35 
Valwood Parkway 	From Josey Lane to IH35E north bound service road 	30 
Valwood Parkway 	From the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railroad to west city limits line 	40 
Veronica Road 	From Webb Chapel to Maydelle Lane 	20 
Webb Chapel 	From the north city limits line to the south city limits line 	35 
 
(Ord. No. 823, § 1, 10-6-1969; Ord. No. 1206, 9-5-1978; Ord. No. 1210, § 2, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1213, § 1, 11-6-1978; Ord. No. 1221, § 1, 11-20-1978; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 8-4-1980; Ord. No. 1334, § 1, 11-17-1980; Ord. No. 1339, § 1, 3-9-1981; Ord. No. 1407, § 1, 10-18-1982; Ord. No. 1481, 12-19-1983; Ord. No. 1546, § 1, 1-7-1985; Ord. No. 1645, § 1, 8-18-1986; Ord. No. 1657, § 1, 10-6-1986; Ord. No. 1730, § 1, 9-21-1987; Ord. No. 1767, § 1, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 1806, § 1, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1812, § 1, 2-6-1989; Ord. No. 1897, § 1, 7-23-1990; Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 9-17-1990; Ord. No. 1920, § 1, 1-7-1991; Ord. No. 2068, § 1, 8-16-1993; Ord. No. 2146, §§ 1, 3, 11-7-1994; Ord. No. 2600, §§ 5, 6, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 2906, § 1, 2-19-2007; Ord. No. 3375 , § 1, 6-7-2016; Ord. No. 3507, § 1, 6-19-2018 ; Ord. No. 3533 , § 1, 10-1-2018) 
_____ 
Secs. 82-35—82-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ONE-WAY STREETS 
 
Sec. 82-51. - One-way streets designated. 
(a)  Upon those streets and roads and portions of streets and roads described and enumerated in this section, vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated, when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and established at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  The city manager or designee shall place or cause to be placed and maintained signs giving notice of the one-way designation of such streets, and no regulation shall be effective until such signs are in place. The signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
_____
(c)  Street schedule is as follows: 
Street 	Extent 	 Travel 
Direction 
Alpha Link 	From its intersection with Alpha Road for a distance of 100 feet south 	Northerly 
East Frontage Road of Interstate Highway 35 E 	From the south city limits line to the north city limits line 	Northerly 
West Frontage Road of Interstate Highway 35 E 	From the north city limits line to the south city limits line 	Southerly 
Inwood Road 	From Alpha Road to Interstate Highway 635 	Southerly 
Rawhide Drive 	From Valley View Lane to Pepperwood Street 	
 
(Ord. No. 823, § 1, 10-6-1969; Ord. No. 841, § 1, 3-18-1970; Ord. No. 949, § 1, 2-5-1973; Ord. No. 1568, § 1, 5-6-1985; Ord. No. 2121, § 1, 5-23-1994; Ord. No. 1998, § 1, 9-14-1992)  
Secs. 82-52—82-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 82-61. - U-turns prohibited. 
(a)  Except for governmental vehicles, utility vehicles and emergency vehicles, it shall be unlawful for any person to turn a vehicle on the following streets so as to proceed in the opposite direction (make a U-turn on): 
Street 	  Direction 	Location 
Beltwood Parkway 	Eastbound 	At the meridian opening approximately 300 feet east of Midway Road 
Josey Lane 	Both Directions 	At Cookscreek Place, between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
Marsh Lane 	Northbound 	At Wooded Creek Drive 
Marsh Lane 	Northbound 	At Pebble Beach Drive 
Royal Lane 	Both directions 	At all median openings between the east city limit line and the west city limit line; between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. 
Spring Valley Road 	Both directions 	At Arborview Road 
Spring Valley Road 	Eastbound 	At Proton Road 
Valley View Lane 	Eastbound 	At Alpha Road 
Valley View Lane 	Eastbound 	At Brookhaven College entrance 
Valley View Lane 	Eastbound 	At Crestpark Drive 
Valley View Lane 	Westbound 	At Dennis Lane 
Valley View Lane 	Westbound 	At Denton Drive 
Valley View Lane 	Westbound 	Between the west right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 35 E to the east right-of-way line of Branch View Lane 
Valley View Lane 	Westbound 	At the median opening 210 feet west of Rossford Street 
Valley View Lane 	Both Directions 	At Tom Field Road 
Valley View Lane 	Eastbound 	At median opening approximate l,300 feet east of Marsh Lane 
Valley View Lane 	Eastbound 	At median opening approximately 400 feet east of Marsh Lane 
Valley View Lane 	Eastbound 	At median opening approximately 600 feet east of Marsh Lane 
 
(b)  The public works department shall install and maintain the appropriate signs prohibiting such unlawful U-turn movements. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 4-4-1983; Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 10-17-1983; Ord. No. 1494, § 1, 5-7-1984; Ord. No. 1695, § 1, 6-1-1987; Ord. No. 1807, § 1, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1997, § 1, 9-14-1992; Ord. No. 2025, § 1, 2-15-1993; Ord. No. 2026, § 1, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 2116, § 1, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 2236, § 1, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 2556, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-2000; Ord. No. 2593, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 2618, § 1, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 2842, § 1, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 2866, § 1, 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 2906, § 2, 2-19-2007; Ord. No. 3158, § 1, 10-3-2011) 
_____ 
Sec. 82-62. - Left turns prohibited. 
(a)  Except for governmental vehicles, utility vehicles and emergency vehicles, it shall be unlawful for any person to turn a vehicle left at the following intersections: 
From 	Onto 
Eastbound Beltwood Parkway 	At the median opening located approximately 300 feet east of Midway Road 
Eastbound Parkside Center Drive 	Midway Road 
Eastbound Valley View Lane at the median opening located at 1399Valley View Lane 	Community Collection Center driveway 
Westbound Valley View Lane 	Denton Drive 
Fore Circle (a private drive) 	Oakbrook Parkway 
Eastbound commercial driveway approximately 100 feet south of the intersection of Josey Lane at Wintergreen Road 	Northbound Josey Lane 
Westbound commercial driveway approximately 40 feet north of the intersection of Josey Lane at Cooks Creek Place 	Southbound Josey Lane 
Northbound Ford Road at Farmers Branch Lane from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., and on southbound Denton Drive at Farmers Branch Lane from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., weekdays only. 
 
(b)  The public works department shall install and maintain appropriate signs prohibiting such unlawful left turn movements. 
(Ord. No. 1853, § 1, 11-20-1989; Ord. No. 2496, §§ 1, 2, 8-16-1999; Ord. No. 2025, § 1, 2-15-1993; Ord. No. 2556, § 1, 7-24-2000; Ord. No. 2656, § 1, 2-18-2002; Ord. No. 2763, § 1, 4-5-2004; Ord. No. 3084, § 1, 6-15-2010)  
Secs. 82-63—82-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - STOP AND YIELD 
 
Sec. 82-71. - Operation of vehicle at stop intersection. 
(a)  Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by a stop sign as authorized by this division. 
(b)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a motor vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. 
(Ord. No. 1381, § 1, 6-28-1981)  
Sec. 82-72. - Installation of signs. 
(a)  Every stop sign shall conform to the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as adopted by the state highway commission. 
(b)  Every stop sign shall be located at or as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk thereat, or if none, at the nearest line of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1381, § 3, 6-28-1981)  
Sec. 82-73. - Stop sign locations. 
The following locations are hereby identified as stop intersections and the installation of stop signs is hereby authorized in order to properly and clearly mark these intersections as stop intersections: 
Stop sign controlled: 
Northbound approach of Ablon Drive at Fyke Road. 
Westbound approach of Albemarle Drive at Bee Street. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Albemarle Drive at Valwood Parkway. 
Southbound approach of Alfred Circle at Valley View Lane. 
Southbound approach of Alpha Link at Valley View Lane. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Alpha Road and Inwood Road. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Alpha Road and Welch Road. 
Westbound approach of Amber Lane at Birchlawn Drive. 
Three-way (all-way) stop at the intersection of Amber Lane and Ivanwood Lane. 
Eastbound approach of Amber Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Southbound approach of Amsterdam Road at Myra Lane. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Apple Valley Drive at Pebble Beach Drive. 
Northeastbound approach of Apple Valley Drive at Tanglewood Drive. 
Southbound Arborview at Spring Valley Road. 
Northbound approach of Austell Parkway at Valley View Lane. 
Westbound approach of Avenel Drive at Bee Street. 
Northbound approach of Road B of Farmers Branch Office Park at the T intersection with McEwen Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Bay Meadows Circle at Josey Lane. 
Southbound approach of Bee Street at Farmers Branch Lane. 
Northbound approach of Bee Street at Bill Moses Parkway. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Bee Street at Brandywine Drive. 
Northbound approach of Bee Street at Valwood Parkway. 
Eastbound approach to the intersection of Belfield Drive and Castleton Drive. 
Southbound approach of Belfield Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Northbound and southbound traffic in the median opening of Belfield Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Eastbound approach of Beltwood Parkway at Beltwood Parkway West. 
Westbound approach of Beltwood Parkway at Midway Road. 
Eastbound approach of Beltwood Parkway North at Beltwood Parkway East. 
Eastbound approach of Beltwood Parkway at Beltwood Parkway North. 
Southbound approach of Beltwood Parkway North at Beltwood Parkway. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Beltwood Parkway South at Gillis Road. 
Eastbound approach of Bergen Lane at Cochise Lane. 
Northbound approach of Berrymeade Drive at Rolling Knoll Drive. 
Southbound approach of Beta Drive at Alpha Road. 
Northbound approach of Beta Drive at Sigma Road. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Bevann Drive at Mitchwin Road. 
Westbound approach of Bevann Drive at Templeton Trail. 
Westbound approach of Birchlawn Drive at Dennis Lane. 
Four-way stop sign at the intersection of Birchlawn Drive and Longmeade Drive. 
Southbound approach of Birchlawn Drive at Richland Avenue. 
Northbound approach of Birchlawn Drive at Valwood Parkway. 
Southbound approach of Birchlawn Drive at Valwood Parkway. 
Northeastbound approach of Blue Lake Circle at McEwen Drive. 
Northwestbound approach of Blue Lake Circle at McEwen Drive. 
Northbound approach of Blue Trace Lane at Pennystone Drive. 
Westbound approach of Blue Trace Lane at Pennystone Drive. 
Southbound approach of Braemar Drive at Golfing Green Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Branch View Lane at Interstate Highway 35 E. 
Southbound approach of Branch View Lane at Valley View Lane. 
Westbound approach of Brandywine Drive at Bee Street. 
Northeastbound approach of Brandywine Drive at Josey Lane. 
Northwestbound approach of Braemar Drive at Brookhaven Club Drive. 
Northeastbound approach of Briarbrook Drive at Golfing Green Drive. 
Westbound approach of Brincrest Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Southbound approach of Brisbane Avenue at Myra Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Brockway Drive at Castleton Drive. 
Northeastbound approach of Brockway Drive at Crestmoor Drive. 
The westbound approach of Brockway Drive at Shahan Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Brookhaven Club Drive at Southern Pines Drive. 
Westbound approach of Brookhaven Club Drive at Southern Pines Drive. 
Northbound approach of Brookhollow Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Westbound approach of Brookhollow Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Southeastbound approach of Brookline Drive at Woodhaven Drive. 
Westbound approach of Buttonwood Drive at Bee Street. 
Westbound approach of Cameo Lane at Ivanwood Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Cameo Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Westbound approach of Candlewick Lane at Heartside Place. 
Eastbound approach of Candlewick Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Eastbound approach of Carrick Street at Denton Drive. 
Westbound approach of Carrick Street at Interstate Highway 35 E. 
Westbound approach of Castleton Drive at Belfield Drive. 
Westbound approach of Cedar Lane at Glad Acres Drive. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Challaburton Drive at Cherrydale Drive. 
Southbound approach of Challaburton Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Eastbound approach of Chaparral Drive at Mitchwin Road. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Chaparral Drive at Templeton Trail. 
Eastbound approach to the intersection of Chapel Drive and Webb Chapel Road. 
All-way (three-way) stop at the intersection of Chapelview Road and Veronica Road. 
Southbound approach of Charlie Bird Parkway at Bill Moses Parkway. 
Northbound approach of Charlie Bird Parkway at Bill Moses Parkway. 
Northbound approach of Charlie Bird Parkway at Pepperwood Street. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Charcoal Lane at Josey Lane. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Charcoal Lane at Lillard Lane. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Charcoal Lane at Longmeade Drive. 
Southeastbound approach of Charcoal Lane at Rawhide Parkway. 
Westbound approach of Chatsworth Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Northbound approach of Chellen Drive at Bevann Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Chellen Drive at Marsh Lane. 
Southwestbound approach of Cherry Hill Drive at Tanglewood Drive. 
Northbound approach of Cherry Hill Drive at Tanglewood Drive. 
Southeastbound approach of Cherrydale Drive at Belfield Drive. 
Northwestbound approach of Cherrydale Drive at Glenside Drive. 
Westbound approach of Christian Parkway at Ford Road. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Cloverdale Lane at Templeton Trail. 
Northeastbound approach of Clubway Lane at Kerr Trail. 
Westbound approach of Clubway Lane at Pennystone Drive. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Clubway Lane and Rosser Road. 
Northbound approach of Cochise Lane at Fyke Road. 
Southbound approach of Cochise Lane at Windmill Lane. 
Westbound approach of Colchester Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Westbound approach of Collingwood Drive at Bee Street. 
Westbound approach of Cookscreek Place at Josey Lane. 
Northbound approach of Coral Harbour Circle at Pebble Beach Drive. 
Southbound approach of Courtdale Drive at Cloverdale Lane. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Courtdale Drive at Janlyn Lane. 
Eastbound approach of Courtdale Drive at Marsh Lane. 
Northbound approach of Courtyard Circle at Golfing Green Drive. 
Northbound approach of Courtyard Place at Golfing Green Drive. 
Northbound approach of Crestmoor Drive at Longmeade Drive. 
Westbound approach of Crestpark Drive at Marsh Lane. 
Northbound approach of Crestpark Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Crestpark Drive and Wilddale Drive. 
Westbound approach of Crown Drive at Luna Road. 
Eastbound approach of Crown Drive at Mathis Avenue. 
Southbound approach of Cypress Point Drive at Pebble Beach Drive. 
Northeastbound approach of Damascus Way at Eunice Street. 
Westbound approach of Damascus Way at Webb Chapel Road. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Danny Lane at Ford Road. 
Eastbound lane of Danny Lane at Tom Field Road. 
Southbound approach of Demetra Drive at Bill Moses Parkway. 
Northbound approach of Dennis Lane at Fyke Road. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Dennis Lane and Mark Twain Drive. 
North & Southbound approaches of Denton Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Southbound approach of Dex Drive at Nall Road. 
Westbound approach of Distribution Way at Denton Road. 
Northbound approach of Distribution Way at Valwood Parkway. 
Eastbound lane of Dixiana Street at Tom Field Road. 
Westbound approach of Dixiana Street at Epps Field Road. 
Southeastbound approach of Dorado Beach Drive at Pebble Beach Drive. 
Westbound approach of Emeline Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Northbound approach of Enterprise Drive at Belt Line Road. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Enterprise Drive at Garden Brook Drive. 
Southwestbound approach of Enterprise Drive at Oakbrook Parkway. 
Eastbound lane of Epps Field at Tom Field Road. 
Southbound approach of Epps Field Road at Leta Mae Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Eric Lane at Austell Parkway. 
Westbound approach of Eric Lane at Josey Lane. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Eric Lane and Veronica Road. 
Eastbound approach of Eric Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Northwestbound approach of Ermine Way at Golfing Green Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Ermine Way at Onyx Lane. 
Northwestbound approach of Esterbrook Drive at Golfing Green Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Esterbrook Drive at Onyx Lane. 
Northbound approach of Eunice Street at Brincrest Drive. 
Southbound approach of Eunice Street at Myra Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Farmers Branch Lane at Denton Drive. 
Westbound approach of Farmers Branch Lane at Interstate Highway 35 E. 
Northbound approach of Ferrell Avenue at Crown Drive. 
Southbound approach of Ferrell Avenue at Royal Lane. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Ford Road at Farmers Branch Lane. 
Northbound approach of Forestdale Lane at Fyke Road. 
Southbound approach of Forestdale Lane at Rollingdale Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Fruitland Avenue at Bee Street. 
Westbound approach of Fruitland Avenue at Denton Drive. 
Southbound approach of Gamma Road at Alpha Road. 
Northbound approach of Gamma Road at Sigma Road. 
Eastbound approach of Garden Brook Drive at Marsh Lane. 
Westbound approach of Garden Brook Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Northbound approach of Gatwick Place (easterly end) at Oakbrook Parkway. 
Northwestbound approach of Gatwick Place (westerly end) at Oakbrook Parkway. 
Eastbound approach of George Street at Cedar Lane. 
Southbound approach of George Street at Cedar Lane. 
Northbound approach of Gillis Road at Beltwood Parkway North. 
Southbound approach of Gillis Road at Spring Valley Road. 
Eastbound approach of Glad Acres Drive at Cedar Lane. 
Southbound approach of Glad Acres Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Eastbound approach of Glengold Drive at Southern Pines Drive. 
Westbound approach of Glenside Drive at Cinco Street. 
Eastbound approach of Glenside Drive at Las Campanas. 
Northbound approach of Glenside Drive at Longmeade Drive. 
Southwestbound approach of Glenside Drive at Meadow Green Drive. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Glenside Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Goldendale Drive and Ridgeoak Way. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of the easterly end of Golfing Green Drive and Brookhaven Club Drive. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of the westerly end of Golfing Green Drive and Brookhaven Club Drive. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Golfing Green Drive at Longmeade Drive. 
Northbound approach of Goodland Street at Havenhurst Drive. 
Westbound approach of Golfing Green Drive at Tom Field Road. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Goodland Street at Valley View Lane. 
Southbound approach of Goodwater Street at Havenhurst Street. 
Northbound approach of Goodwater Street at Richland Avenue. 
Westbound approach of Green Acres Terrace at Golfing Green Drive. 
Eastbound lane of Greenhurst Drive at Dennis Lane. 
Westbound approach of Greenhurst Drive at Bee Street. 
Northbound approach of Greenview Boulevard at Alpha Road. 
Southbound approach of Greenview Boulevard at McEwen Drive. 
Northbound approach of Hague Drive at Fyke Road. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Havenhurst Street at Bee Street. 
Westbound approach of Havenhurst Street at Branch View Lane. 
Eastbound approach of Havenhurst Street at Dennis Lane. 
Eastbound approach of Havenhurst Street at Denton Drive. 
Westbound approach of Havenhurst Street at Denton Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Havenhurst Street at Interstate Highway 35 E. 
Westbound approach of Havenhurst Street at Interstate Highway 35 E. 
Northeastbound approach of Hearthstone Drive at Josey Lane. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Heartside Place and Amber Lane. 
Northbound approach of Heartside Place at Fyke Road. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Heartside Place and Hollandale Lane. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Heartside Place at Joanna Drive. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Heartside Place at Josey Lane. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Heartside Place and Longmeade Drive. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Heartside Place and Mark Twain Drive. 
Southbound approach of Heartside Place at Rawhide Parkway. 
Northbound approach of Heritage Circle at Cookscreek Place. 
Westbound approach of Heritage Circle at Josey Lane. 
Southbound approach of Hermitage Street at Wicker Avenue. 
Eastbound approach of Highland Meadow at Gatwick Place. 
Southbound approach of Highland Meadow at Gatwick Place. 
Northbound approach of Holbrook Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Hollandale Lane and Dennis Lane. 
Westbound approach of Hollandale Lane at Josey Lane. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Hollandale Lane and Shoredale Lane. 
Eastbound approach of Hollandale Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
All-way (four-way) stop at the intersection of Hutton Drive and Diplomat Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Hutton Court at Hutton Drive. 
Northbound approach of Hutton Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Eastbound approach of International Parkway at Dallas Parkway. 
Westbound approach of International Parkway at Inwood Road. 
Westbound approach of the service road of Interstate Highway 635 at Welch Road. 
Southeastbound approach of Inwood Road at North Dallas Parkway. 
Northbound approach of Ivanwood Drive at Valwood Parkway. 
Westbound approach of Janlyn Lane at Templeton Trail. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Janwood Lane at Josey Lane. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Janwood Lane at Lillard Lane. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Janwood Lane at Longmeade Drive. 
Southbound approach of Janwood Lane at Rawhide Parkway. 
Eastbound approach of Janwood Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Eastbound approach of Jett Street at Denton Drive. 
Westbound approach of Jett Street at Interstate Highway 35 E. 
Westbound approach of JoAnna Drive at Dennis Lane. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of JoAnna Drive and Old North Road. 
Northbound approach of Juniper Cove at Pebble Beach Drive. 
Southeastbound approach of Keenan Bridge Road at Valley View Lane. 
Northbound approach of the easterly most portion of Kerr Trail at Valley View Lane. 
Northbound approach of the westerly most portion of Kerr Trail at Valley View Lane. 
The approach to the intersection of Keyport Drive at Morningstar Lane. 
Northbound approach of Keyport Drive at Ridgeoak Way. 
Northbound approach of Lago Vista East at Mira Lago Boulevard. 
Westbound approach of Lakeway Boulevard at Luna Road. 
Eastbound approach of Lakeway Boulevard at Senlac Drive. 
Westbound approach of Lakeway Boulevard at Mercer Crossing Boulevard. 
Eastbound approach of Lakeway Boulevard at Mercer Crossing Boulevard. 
Eastbound approach of La Kenta Circle at Southern Pines Drive. 
Westbound approach of Langland Road at Gillis Road. 
Eastbound approach of Langland Road at Inwood Road. 
Northbound approach of Las Campanas Drive at Glenside Drive. 
Northbound approach of Las Campanas Drive at Las Campanas Drive. 
Southbound approach of Las Campanas Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Lavita Lane at Austell Parkway. 
Westbound approach of Lavita Lane at Josey Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Lavita Lane at Veronica Road. 
Eastbound approach of Lavita Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Westbound lane of Leta Mae Circle at Tom Field Road. 
Eastbound lane of Leta Mae Lane at Tom Field Road. 
Northbound approach of Lillard Lane at Amber Lane. 
Southeastbound approach of Lillard Lane at Rawhide Parkway. 
Westbound approach of Lineville Drive at Harrisburg Circle. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Lineville Drive at Wilmington Drive. 
Southwestbound approach of Littlecrest Drive at Josey Lane. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Littlecrest Drive and Longmeade Drive. 
Northbound approach to Longmeade Drive at Castleton Drive. 
Northbound approach to Longmeade Drive at Challaburton Drive. 
Northwestbound approach of Longmeade Drive at Dennis Lane. 
Northbound and southbound approaches to Longmeade Drive at Emeline Drive. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Longmeade Drive at Golfing Green Drive. 
Northbound approach to Longmeade Drive at Mountcastle Drive. 
Southbound approach to Longmeade Drive at Shahan Drive. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Longmeade Drive at Shahan Drive. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Longmeade Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Northbound approach to Longmeade Drive at Winterhaven Drive. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Luna Road at Royal Lane. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Luna Road at Valley View Lane. 
Northbound approach of Mapledale Drive at Ridgeoak Way. 
Eastbound lane of Marietta Drive at Tom Field Road. 
Westbound approach of Marietta Drive at Epps Field Road. 
Northbound approach of Mark Twain Drive at Hollandale Lane. 
Eastbound approach of Mark Twain Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Southbound approach of Mathis Avenue at Royal Lane. 
Westbound approach of Maybrook Drive at Josey Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Maydelle Lane at Josey Lane. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Maydelle Lane and Veronica Road. 
The eastbound and westbound approaches of Rollingdale Lane at Forestdale Lane. 
Westbound approach of Meadow Green Drive at Josey Lane. 
Westbound approach of Medical Center Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches to Medical Parkway at Medical Parkway North. 
Southbound approach of Medical Parkway at 111635 service road. 
Southbound approach of Mercer Crossing Boulevard at Lakeway Boulevard. 
Northbound approach of Metro Boulevard at Villa Creek Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Millwood Drive at Josey Lane. 
Northbound approach to the intersection of Millwood Drive at Farmers Branch Lane. 
Westbound approach of Mira Lago Boulevard at Lago Vista West. 
Southbound approach of Mitchwin Road at Janlyn Lane. 
Northbound approach of Mitchwin Road at Valley View Lane. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Montvale Drive at Fieldale Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Montvale Drive at Josey Lane. 
Three-way stop at the intersection of Morningstar Lane and Morningstar Circle. 
Northbound approach of Morningstar Lane at Ridgeoak Way. 
Three-way stop at the intersection of Morningstar Lane and Shadyridge Lane. 
East and westbound lane of Mount View Drive at Tom Field Road. 
Westbound approach of Mount View Drive at Epps Field Road. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Mountcastle Drive at Cherrydale Drive. 
Southbound approach of Mountcastle Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Eastbound approach of Myra Lane at Templeton Trail. 
Westbound approach of Myra Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of McEwen Drive at Alpha Road. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of McEwen Drive at Midway Road. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of McEwen Drive and Welch Road. 
Westbound approach of Nall Road at Welch Road. 
Southbound approach of Nestle Street at Valley View Lane. 
Southbound approach of Neutron Road at Alpha Road. 
Northbound approach of Neutron Road at Sigma Road. 
Northbound approach of Nicholson Road at Valley View Lane. 
Three-way stop at the intersection of Nix Road and Fyke Road. 
Northeastbound approach of Oakbrook Parkway at Garden Brook Drive. 
Westbound approach of Oakbrook Parkway at Webb Chapel Road. 
Westbound approach of Old North Road at Dennis Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Old North Road at Heartside Place. 
Eastbound approach of Old North Road at Webb Chapel Road. 
Westbound approach of Olin Road at Welch Road. 
Southbound approach of Omega Road at Alpha Road. 
Northbound approach of Omega Road at Sigma Road. 
Southbound approach of Onyx Lane at Glenside Drive. 
Northbound approach of Onyx Lane at Golfing Green Drive. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Onyx Lane at Longmeade Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Overland Drive at Josey Lane. 
Eastbound approach of Oxfordshire Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Eastbound approach of Palmdale Circle at Southern Pines Drive. 
Northbound approach of Park Bridge Boulevard at Parkside Center Boulevard. 
Northbound approach of Park Lake Court at Oakbrook Parkway. 
Eastbound approach of Parkside Center Boulevard at Midway Road. 
Northbound approach of Parkside Center Boulevard at Spring Valley Road. 
Eastbound approach of Pebble Beach Drive at Marsh Lane. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Pebble Beach Drive at Southern Pines Drive. 
Westbound approach of Pebble Beach Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Pennystone Drive at Crestpark Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Pennystone Drive at Crestpark Drive. 
Southbound approach of Pennystone Drive at Ridgeoak Way. 
Westbound approach of Pepperwood Street at Bee Street. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Phyllis Lane at Austell Parkway. 
Westbound approach of Phyllis Lane at Veronica Road. 
Eastbound approach of Phyllis Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Eastbound approach of Pike Street at Denton Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Pike Street at Denton Drive. 
Westbound approach of Pike Street at Interstate Highway 35 E. 
Eastbound approach of Pike Street at Rossford Street. 
Southbound approach of Pine Tree Circle at Dorado Beach Drive. 
Southwestbound approach of Pine Valley Drive at Tanglewood Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Pinehurst Circle at Prestwick Circle. 
Southbound approach of Prestwick Circle at Brookhaven Club Drive. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Primrose Lane at Austell Parkway. 
Westbound approach of Primrose Lane at Veronica Road. 
Eastbound approach of Primrose Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Westbound approach of Proton Road at Midway Road. 
Southbound approach of Proton Road at Spring Valley Road. 
Northbound approach of Pyramid Drive at Amber Lane. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Pyramid Drive at Josey Lane. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Pyramid Drive at Longmeade Drive. 
Southbound approach of Pyramid Drive at Rawhide Parkway. 
Southwestbound approach of Queens Chapel Road at Old North Road. 
Eastbound approach of Queens Chapel Road at Webb Chapel Road. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Randy Lane at Austell Parkway. 
Westbound approach of Randy Lane at Josey Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Randy Lane at Veronica Road. 
Eastbound approach of Randy Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Northbound approach of Rawhide Parkway at Brookhaven Club Drive. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Rawhide Parkway at Josey Lane. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Rawhide Parkway and Longmeade Drive. 
Westbound approach of Rawhide Drive at Pepperwood Street. 
Westbound approach of Rawhide Parkway at Tom Field Road. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Rawhide Parkway at Webb Chapel Road. 
Eastbound approach of Reedcroft Drive at Bay Meadows Circle. 
Eastbound approach of Reedcroft Drive at Josey Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Richland Avenue at Bee Street. 
Westbound approach of Richland Avenue at Denton Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Richland Avenue at Pyramid Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Ridgeoak Way at Marsh Lane. 
Northeastbound approach of Ridgeoak Way at Rosser Road. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Ridgeoak Way and Templeton Trail. 
Eastbound approach of Rockmartin Drive at Mitchwin Road. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Rockmartin Drive at Templeton Trail. 
Northeastbound approach of Rolling Knoll Drive at Brookhaven Club Drive. 
Southwestbound approach of Rolling Knoll Circle at Brookhaven Club Drive. 
The eastbound approach of McEwen Drive at its eastern terminus, a parking lot addressed as 4825 LBJ Freeway. 
Eastbound approach of Rollingdale Lane at Shoredale Lane. 
Northbound approach of Rosser Road at Valley View Lane. 
Northbound approach of Rossford Street at Havenhurst Street. 
Southwestbound approach of Rossford Street at Denton Drive. 
Northbound approach of Rossford Street at Valley View Lane. 
Southbound approach of Rossford Street at Valley View Lane. 
Westbound approach of Rugby Lane at Bee Street. 
Westbound approach of Sable Street at Rossford Street. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Selma Lane at Austell Parkway. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Selma Lane at Josey Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Selma Lane at Veronica Road. 
Eastbound approach of Selma Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Senlac Drive and Diplomat Drive. 
Southbound approach of Senlac Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Northbound approach of Shadyridge Lane at Ridgeoak Way. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Shahan Drive at Cherrydale Drive. 
Northbound approach of Shahan Drive at Longmeade Drive. 
Southbound approach of Shahan Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Northbound approach of Shoredale Lane at Fyke Road. 
Westbound approach of Sigma Road at Midway Road. 
Eastbound approach of Sigma Road at Welch Road. 
Eastbound approach of Simonton Road at Inwood Road. 
Westbound approach of Simonton Road at Midway Road. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Simonton Road and Welch Road. 
Northwestbound approach of Sinbad Trail at Golfing Green Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Sinbad Trail at Onyx Lane. 
Westbound approach of South Sunbeck Circle at Josey Lane. 
Southbound approach of Southern Pines Drive at Brookhaven Club Drive. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Spring Valley Lane and Albemarle Drive. 
Westbound approach of Spring Valley Lane at Denton Road. 
Eastbound approach of Springlake Road at Interstate Highway 35 E. 
Westbound approach of Springlake Road at Valley Branch Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Springvale Lane at Bee Street. 
Eastbound approach of Springvale Lane at Josey Lane. 
Westbound approach of Spur Trail at Webb Chapel Road. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Squire Place at Bee Street. 
Eastbound lane of Squire Place at Dennis Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Squire Place at Denton Drive. 
Westbound approach of Squire Place at Interstate Highway 35 E. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Stardust Lane at Josey Lane. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Stardust Lane at Longmeade Drive. 
Southbound approach of Stardust Lane at Richland Avenue. 
Northbound approach of Stardust Lane at Valwood Parkway. 
Westbound approach of North Sunbeck Circle at Josey Lane. 
Northeastbound and southwestbound approaches of Sundown Trail at Josey Lane. 
Northeastbound approach of Sundown Trail at Longmeade Drive. 
Southbound approach of Sundown Trail at Richland Avenue. 
Northbound approach of Sunglow Lane at Ridgeoak Way. 
Northbound approach of Sunrose Lane at Fyke Road. 
Southeastbound approach of Tamerisk Lane (northerly end) at Cypress Point Drive. 
Southeastbound approach of Tamerisk Lane (southerly end) at Cypress Point Drive. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Tanglewood Drive at Brookhaven Club Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Tanglewood Drive at Marsh Lane. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Tanglewood Drive at Pebble Beach Drive. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Teekskill Place at Candlewick Lane. 
Northbound approach of Templeton Trail at Valley View Lane. 
Southbound approach of Tom Field Road at Farmers Branch Lane. 
Northbound approach of Tom Field Road at Richland Avenue. 
Westbound approach of Topaz Lane at Ivanwood Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Topaz Lane at Webb Chapel Road. 
Eastbound approach of Towerwood Drive at Enterprise Drive. 
Westbound approach of Towerwood Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Northbound approach of Treeview Lane at Veronica Road. 
Northbound approach of Trend Drive at Belt Line Road. 
Southbound approach of Trend Drive at Garden Brook Drive. 
Four-way stop at the intersection of Valley Hi Circle and Pebble Beach Drive. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Valwood Parkway at Albemarle Drive. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Valwood Parkway at Bee Street. 
Southbound approach of Valwood Circle at Valwood Parkway. 
Northbound approach of Venture Drive at Belt Line Road. 
Southbound approach of Venture Drive at Garden Brook Drive. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Verbick Street at Rossford Street. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Veronica Road at Valley View Lane. 
Eastbound approach of Veronica Road at Webb Chapel Road. 
Westbound approach of Villa Creek Drive at Ford Road. 
Eastbound approach of Villa Creek Drive at Josey Lane. 
Southeastbound lane of Wasina Drive at Dennis Lane. 
Southbound approach of Welch Road at Interstate Highway 635. 
Northbound approach of Welch Road at Langland Road. 
Eastbound approach of Whitemarsh Circle at Southern Pines Drive. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Wicker Avenue at Bee Street. 
Southeastbound lane of Wicker Avenue at Dennis Lane. 
Northwestbound approach of Wilddale Drive at Blue Trace Lane. 
Northwestbound and southeastbound approaches of Wilddale Drive at Clubway Lane. 
Southeastbound approach of Wilddale Drive at Ridgeoak Way. 
Northbound approach of William Dodson Parkway at Valley View Lane. 
Northbound approach of Wilmington Drive at Golfing Green Drive. 
Northbound and southbound approaches of Wilmington Drive at Valley View Lane. 
Eastbound and westbound approaches of Windmill Lane at Cochise Lane. 
Westbound approach of Windmill Lane at Heartside Lane. 
Westbound approach of Winterhaven Drive at Webb Chapel Road. 
Eastbound approach of Wood Manor Circle at Josey Lane. 
Northeastbound approach of Woodhaven Drive at Golfing Green Drive. 
Northeastbound approach of Woodhaven Court at Woodhaven Drive. 
Southbound approach of William Dodson Parkway at City Hall Plaza. 
Westbound approach of Colchester Drive at Mount Castle Drive. 
Westbound approach of Chatsworth Drive at Mount Castle Drive. 
Eastbound approach of Academy Lane at Senlac Drive. 
Westbound approach of Academy Lane at Hutton Drive. 
(Ord. No. 1381, § 2, 6-28-1981; Ord. No. 1431-A, § 1, 2-7-1983; Ord. No. 1466, § 1, 10-17-1983; Ord. No. 1518, § 1, 9-17-1984; Ord. No. 1572, § 1, 5-6-1985; Ord. No. 1574, § 1, 5-6-1985; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 4-7-1986; Ord. No. 1656, § 1, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 1690, § 1, 4-20-1987; Ord. No. 1693, § 1, 5-18-1987; Ord. No. 1728, §§ 1, 2, 9-21-1987; Ord. No. 1774, § 1, 6-20-1988; Ord. No. 1783, § 1, 8-1-1988; Ord. No. 1793, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-1988; Ord. No. 1847, § 1, 11-6-1989; Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 2067, §§ 1, 2, 8-16-1993; Ord. No. 2128, § 1, 7-11-1994; Ord. No. 2141, § 1, 10-3-1994; Ord. No. 2172, § 1, 4-3-1995; Ord. No. 2175, §§ 1, 2, 4-17-1995; Ord. No. 2237, § 1, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 2282, § 1, 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 2287, § 12-2-1996; Ord. No. 2291, § 1, 12-16-1996; Ord. No. 2429, § 2, 10-19-1998; Ord. No. 2514, § 1, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 2557, § 1, 7-24-2000; Ord. No. 2569, § 1, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 2596, § 1, 4-16-2000; Ord. No. 2575, § 1, 11-6-2000; Ord. No. 2600, §§ 2, 3, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 2636, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 4-15-2002; Ord. No. 2666, § 1, 5-20-2002; Ord. No. 2690, § 1, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2718, § 1, 5-6-2003; Ord. No. 2728, § 1, 7-14-2003; Ord. No. 2730, § 1, 8-4-2003; Ord. No. 2899, § 1, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 8-21-2007; Ord. No. 2945, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 2998, § 1, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 3035, § 1, 7-14-2009; Ord. No. 3108, §§ 1, 2, 11-2-2010; Ord. No. 3112, § 1, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 3282, § 1, 6-17-2014 ; Ord. No. 3342 , § 1, 9-1-2015; Ord. No. 3375 , § 2, 6-7-2016)  
Sec. 82-74. - Yield intersections. 
(a)  Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by a yield sign as authorized by this section. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to such yield sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another street so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided, however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield right-of-way. 
(b)  The following locations are hereby identified as yield intersections, and the installation of yield signs is hereby authorized to properly and clearly mark these intersections as yield intersections: 
Street 	Direction 	Intersection 
Alpha Link 	Northbound 	At Alpha Road 
Arawak Place 	Southeastbound 	At Pine Tree Circle 
Hearthstone Drive 	Southwestbound 	At Wasina Drive 
Parkside Center Boulevard 	Westbound and southbound 	At the traffic circle. 
Pepperwood Street 	Eastbound and westbound 	William Dodson Parkway 
Valley View Lane, median opening 	Northbound traffic from Templeton Trail 	At the intersection of Valley View Lane and Templeton Trail 
Wooded Creek Drive 	Westbound 	At the T with North-South Wooded Creek Drive 
 
(Ord. No. 1382, §§ 1, 2, 6-28-1982; Ord. No. 1810, § 1, 1-16-1989; Ord. No. 1881, § 1, 4-16-1990; Ord. No. 2428, § 1, 10-19-1998; Ord. No. 2596, § 2, 4-16-2000; Ord. No. 2600, § 4, 5-7-2001)  
Secs. 82-75—82-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PARKING 
 
Sec. 82-91. - Parking in alleys. 
(a)  It is hereby prohibited and it shall be an unlawful violation of this section and an offense for any person to park or stop for five minutes or longer or allow any stopping or parking of any vehicle or for any person to obstruct or allow to be obstructed any alley in the city. Any parked or stopped vehicle or any obstruction in any alley shall be prima facie evidence of the unlawful violation of this section. 
(b)  Any officer of the police department of the city is hereby authorized to remove any vehicle parked, stopped or standing in or on any portion of a public street or an alley in violation of this chapter or the state traffic laws or when, in the opinion of the officer, the vehicle or obstruction constitutes a hazard, or interferes with the normal flow of traffic, or a normal function of a governmental agency, or by reason of a catastrophe, emergency or unusual circumstance, or the safety of the vehicle or other vehicles or the public is imperiled. 
(Code 1969, § 23-1.2(b), (c); Ord. No. 886, §§ 2, 3, 8-2-1971)  
Sec. 82-92. - Parking on unimproved surfaces. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Corner lot means a residential property located at the intersection or confluence of two or more streets such that public street rights-of-way are directly adjacent to at least two contiguous sides of the lot. 
Driveway means the primary improved or unimproved parking surface which provides egress and ingress from a garage, carport or off-street parking area to an adjacent street or alley. 
Front yard means the area from the front face of a residential structure to the front property line or street right-of-way line, or when a structure does not exist, the area defined as a front yard by the zoning ordinance. 
Improved parking surface means an area used for the parking or storage of vehicles that is overlaid or otherwise paved with concrete, asphalt, paving stones or other hard-surfaced durable material approved by the building official. 
Rear yard means the area from the rear face of a residential structure to the rear property line, or when no structure exists, the area defined as a rear yard by the zoning ordinance. 
Side yard means the area from the side of a residential structure to the side property line, or when no structure exists, the area defined as a side yard by the zoning ordinance. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn or moved upon a street, highway, waterway or airway, and shall include any automobile, bus, truck, tractor, motorhouse, farm machinery, motorcycles, scooters, mopeds, all-terrain vehicles, boats, aircraft, recreational vehicles, golf carts, go-carts, trailers, fifth-wheel trailer, camper, camper shells, wheeled towing frames, semitractor trailers, truck beds mounted on chassis and mobile homes. This definition does not include nonmotorized bicycles, small engine lawn mowers and devices of similar scale. 
(b)  Regulations. 
(1)  Parking on unimproved surfaces restricted. A person commits an offense if the person causes, suffers, permits or allows: 
a.  The parking or storage of any vehicle within a front yard of a residential single-family, townhouse, duplex lot or tract, upon any surface other than an improved surface; or 
b.  The parking or storage of any vehicle within a residential side yard or the residential rear yard of a corner lot, of a residential single-family, duplex or townhouse lot or tract, upon any surface other than an improved surface unless otherwise concealed from view from all public street rights-of-way by: 
1.  A solid, opaque screening fence or wall at least six feet in height; 
2.  Vegetation consisting of a solid hedgerow of evergreen shrubs, or trees and shrubs, providing full screening from the ground to a minimum height of six feet; 
3.  Any combination of subsections (b)(1)b.1 and b.2 of this section that effectively conceals the vehicle from view and accomplishes the required screening height; or 
4.  Any other form of compatible and appropriate screening as so determined by the building official. 
(2)  No driveway or improved parking surface shall cover more than 67 percent of a residential front yard, as defined in subsection (a) of this section or as defined in Ordinance No. 769, as amended. 
(3)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for parking or storing vehicles in an unimproved driveway if an existing residence is served by a driveway which does not constitute an improved parking surface at the time the ordinance from which this section is derived is enacted; however, at such time that the existing residence is completely rebuilt, or improvements to the same real property constitute 50 percent or more of the property's total assessed value, compliance with this section shall be required. 
(4)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for parking or storing vehicles on an unimproved surface or in an unconcealed or unscreened manner if the vehicles are parked in the rear yard and the rear yard is not a corner lot or directly adjacent to a public street right-of-way. 
(c)  Maintenance. All improved parking surfaces shall be maintained in good and safe condition and be free of holes, cracks or other failures that may affect the use, safety, appearance or drainage of the surface or of the adjoining property. 
(d)  Appeals. If it is determined that a vehicle is parked or stored upon property in violation of any of the provisions of this section, the owner, occupant or person responsible for the property shall have ten days, from receipt of notice, in which to file an appeal to the zoning board of adjustment by filing a request in writing for a hearing with the building official. In the event of an appeal, the zoning board of adjustment shall review the determination of the building official and shall have, by majority vote, jurisdiction to: 
(1)  Uphold the determination of the building official; 
(2)  Approve alternative paving materials where such materials are demonstrated to meet or exceed the requirements of concrete, asphalt or other approved paving material; 
(3)  Approve alternative screening materials where such materials are demonstrated to meet or exceed the requirements of this section; 
(4)  Allow a reasonable length of time, not to exceed a maximum of 24 months, in which to comply with the paving requirements of this section; or 
(5)  Upon the vote of no less than three-fourths of the members of the zoning board of adjustment voting at a meeting, grant a variance, to a requirement under this subsection where it is determined that, due to peculiarities of the property, such as shape or restricted area, literal enforcement of this subsection would result in an unnecessary hardship. 
Notification of the appeal shall be sent, by first class mail, to all property owners within 200 feet of the subject property at least ten days prior to the date of the appeal hearing. A sign giving notice of the appeal shall be posted by the city on the subject property at least ten days prior to the date of the appeal hearing and be maintained on the property until after the hearing. There shall be a $10.00 fee for appeals of the provisions of this section until January 1, 1992, at which time the fee shall be the normal fee as set by other ordinance for appeals to the zoning board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 1868-B, §§ 1—4, 2-19-1990)  
Sec. 82-93. - Angle parking. 
It shall be lawful for any legally licensed driver or operator to angle park any motor vehicle in the following streets or portions of streets: 
Bevann Drive, 3500 block, in the circular cul-de-sac. 
Kerr Place, 13200 block, in the circular cul-de-sac. 
Shoreland Lane, in the widened curve abutted by properties at numbers 14222, 14226, 14232 and 14236, vehicles less than 20 feet only. 
(Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 8-7-1978; Ord. No. 1947, § 1, 8-5-1991; Ord. No. 3179, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 82-94. - Disabled parking. 
(a)  Spaces designated. The city engineer and persons who own or control property used for parking are hereby authorized to designate one or more parking spaces or parking areas for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons as those terms are defined in the V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 681.001, and pursuant to such statute. 
(b)  Signs. The city engineer and persons who own or control property used for parking shall designate the space or area by posting in a conspicuous place signs that conform with the design and posting requirements of the V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.002, as follows: 
(1)  The sign shall be nonmovable. 
(2)  The sign shall be permanently mounted on the top of a pole that sits at least five feet in height above the ground. 
(3)  The sign shall reflect a profile view of a wheelchair with an occupant in white on a blue background. 
(4)  The size of the sign shall be 12 inches wide by 18 inches high. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Parking spaces shall be at least 14 feet wide by 21 feet long. 
(c)  Compliance with state statutes. All requirements of the V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.001 et seq., are to be complied with by the parties posting such signs relative to designation of parking spaces for the disabled and the posting of such signs. 
(d)  Vehicle identification. All vehicles parking in designated parking spaces shall display the identification issued by the state department of highways and public transportation pursuant to the V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.004. 
(e)  Offenses. A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Is neither temporarily or permanently disabled nor transporting a temporarily or permanently disabled person and parks a vehicle with such special device or displaying a temporarily disabled person identification card in any parking space or parking area designated specifically for the disabled. 
(2)  Parks a vehicle neither displaying the special device nor displaying a temporarily disabled person identification card in a parking space or parking area designated specifically for the disabled. 
(3)  Parks a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks an access or curb ramp or any other architectural improvement designed to aid the disabled. 
(Ord. No. 1364, §§ 1—5, 11-2-1981; Ord. No. 2751, § 1, 12-15-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2751, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2003, deleted subsection (5), which pertained to the requirement for a penalty notification sign. 
_____ 
Sec. 82-95. - No parking zones. 
(a)  Definition. The term "stand," as used in this section, specifically includes but is not limited to the halting of any vehicle for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or any merchandise or supplies. 
(b)  Specific streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle except in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control officer or traffic control device on the following streets or portions of streets: 
Street 	Description 	Time of Day 
Albemarle Drive 	Both sides, 30 feet east from the stop sign at its intersection with Bee Street 	All times 
Alpha Road 	North side, from a point 316 feet west of the centerline of Inwood Road to a point 508 feet west of the centerline of Inwood Road as measured along the north curbline of Alpha Road 	All times 
Alpha Road 	South side, from a point 497 feet west of the centerline of Inwood Road to a point 545 feet west of the centerline of Inwood Road as measured along the south curbline of Alpha Road 	All times 
Amber Lane 	From the west curb of Heartside Place to 50 feet west of the centerline of Pyramid Drive, and eastbound Amber Lane from the east curb of Pyramid Drive to 150 feet east of the centerline of Pyramid Drive on school days 	During school zone hours 
Amsterdam Road (except for school buses) 	From 190 feet south of Ridgeoak Way to 88 feet south of Ridgeoak Way 	During school zone hours 
Avenel Drive 	Both sides, 30 feet east from the stop sign at its intersection with Bee Street 	All times 
Bee Street 	West side, from Valley View Lane to the north 182 feet 	All times 
Bee Street 	East side, from the northern intersection with Springvale Lane to its southern intersection with Valwood Parkway 	All times 
Beltwood Parkway North 	North side, from approximately 450 feet west of Beltwood Parkway East for an approximate distance of 300 feet west 	All times 
Beltwood Parkway North 	South side, from approximately 450 feet west of Beltwood Parkway East for an approximate distance of 350 feet west 	All times 
Beltwood Parkway East 	East side, from approximately 450 feet west of Beltwood Parkway East for an approximate distance of 100 feet north 	All times 
Beltwood Parkway East 	West side, 170 feet from its intersection with Beltwood Parkway North to a distance of 315 feet south 	All times 
Beltwood Parkway East 	West side, 440 feet from its intersection with Beltwood Parkway North to a distance of 587 feet south 	All times 
Beltwood Parkway South 	South side, from approximately 450 feet west of Beltwood Parkway East for an approximate distance of 100 feet west 	All times 
Beltwood Parkway North 	North side, from approximately 300 feet east of Beltwood Parkway West for an approximate distance of 220 feet east 	11:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Collinwood Drive 	Both sides, 30 feet east from the stop sign at its intersection with Bee Street 	All times 
Commerce Street 	Both sides, from its northern intersection with Mercer Parkway to its southern intersection with IH635 Frontage Road 	All times 
Cookscreek Place 	Both sides from Josey Lane for an approximatedistance of 525 feet east 	All times 
Damascus Way 	North and south side, from its intersection with the east curb line of Webb Chapel Road to 225 feet east 	All times 
Davis Lane 	On both sides from its northern terminus to Keenan Bridge 	All times 
Dennis Lane 	West side, from 100 feet north of the intersection with Longmeade Drive to 100 feet south of Longmeade Drive 	All times 
Dennis Lane 	Northbound, for 1,050 feet north of its intersection with Valley View Lane 	All times 
Dennis Lane (except for school buses) 	Southbound, 400 feet north of Havenhurst to 250 feet south of Richland on school days 	8:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and from 3:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. 
Dennis Lane 	West side, between Valley View Lane and Havenhurst Drive, approximately 894 feet 	All times 
Dennis Lane 	West side of Havenhurst Drive for a distance of 50 feet north 	All times 
Dennis Lane 	East side from approximately 50 feet north of the north curb of its east intersection of Longmeade Drive 	All times 
Dennis Lane 	East side from approximately 220 feet north of the north curb of its east intersection of Longmeade Drive to approximately 340 feet north of the intersection of Longmeade Drive 	All times 
Dennis Lane 	East side from approximately 443 feet north of the north curb of its east intersection of Longmeade Drive to approximately 564 feet north of the intersection of Longmeade Drive 	All times 
Denton Drive 	West side, from the centerline of Sable Street north 158 feet 	All times 
Diplomat Court 	Along the median 	All times 
Distribution Way 	Northbound (east) side from approximately 400 feet south of Valwood Parkway for approximately 500 feet south 	All times 
East Beltwood Parkway 	West side from its intersection with North Beltwood Parkway to the north city limit line 	All times 
Enterprise Drive 	East side, from the back of the curb on Belt Line Road to 650 feet south 	All times 
Ford Road 	East side, from Interstate Highway 635 westbound service road to Christian Parkway 	All times 
Fyke Road 	Eastbound, adjacent to 2730 Fyke Road, for approximately 360 feet 	All times 
Galleria Place 	East side of Galleria Place approximately 75 feet southeast of its intersection with Galleria Circle 	All times 
Gillis Road 	Either side, from Spring Valley Road north to Beltwood Parkway South 	All times 
Golfing Green Drive 	Either side, from approximately 300 feet north of the east intersection of Brookhaven Club Drive and Golfing Green Drive to approximately 400 feet north of the east intersection of Brookhaven Club Drive and Golfing Green Drive 	All times 
Golfing Green Drive 	West side, from its point of intersection with Ermine Way to a point 300 feet south on the west side of Golfing Green Drive 	All times 
Golfing Green Drive 	East side from approximately 287 feet north of the north curb of its east intersection with Brookhaven Club Drive to approximately 540 feet north of the intersection of Brookhaven Club Drive 	All times 
Golfing Green Drive 	West side from approximately 295 feet north of the north curb from its west intersection of Brookhaven Club Drive to approximately 518 feet north of the intersection of Brookhaven Club Drive 	All times 
Havenhurst Street 	North side, from the point of Havenhurst Street's intersection with Denton Road to the point of Havenhurst Street's intersection with the east service road of Interstate Highway 35 	All times 
Havenhurst Street 	South side, from the west right-of-way of Dennis Lane west 323 feet 	All times 
Hotel Road 	Both sides from its intersection with Mira Lago Boulevard to its intersection with Interstate Highway 635 (LBJ Freeway), but applicable only to vehicles with a gross vehicle weight greater than 14,000 pounds when active loading or unloading of personal property into or out of the vehicle from or to an adjacent property is not occurring 	All times 
International Parkway 	Both sides, between Inwood Road and the Dallas North Tollway access road 	All times 
Interstate Highway 35 East 	East service road, from the north right-of-way line of Carrick Street to the south right-of-way line of Valley View Lane 	All times 
Josey Lane 	East or west side, from the point of its intersection with L.B.J. Freeway, Interstate Highway 635 North, to the point of the intersection of Josey Lane and Valley View Lane 	All times 
Josey Lane 	Either side, from the point of its intersection with the north curbline of Rawhide Parkway to the point of its intersection with the south curbline of Valwood Parkway 	All times 
Josey Lane 	Either side, from the point of its intersection with the south curbline of Valwood Parkway to the point of its intersection with the south right-of-way of Fyke Road 	All times 
Keenan Bridge Road 	On both sides from Valley View Lane to approximately 50 feet west of Davis Lane 	All times 
Lago Vista East 	Both sides from its intersection with Mira Lago Boulevard to its intersection with Lago Vista West, but applicable only to vehicles with a gross vehicle weight greater than 14,000 pounds when active loading or unloading of personal property into or out of the vehicle from or to an adjacent property is not occurring 	All times 
Lago Vista West 	Both sides from its intersection with Mira Lago Boulevard to its intersection with Lago Vista East, but applicable only to vehicles with a gross vehicle weight greater than 14,000 pounds when active loading or unloading of personal property into or out of the vehicle from or to an adjacent property is not occurring 	All times 
Langland Road 	Westbound, for approximately 70 feet east of its intersection with Gillis Road and from Welch Road to Inwood Road 	All times 
Longmeade Drive 	Between Dennis Lane and Stardust Lane 	All times 
Longmeade Drive 	Both sides from approximately 100 feet east of its intersection with Golfing Green Drive to approximately 400 feet east of its intersection with Golfing Green Drive 	All times 
Maybrook Drive 	North or south side, from the point of its intersection with Webb Chapel Road westward to the point of the intersection of Maybrook Drive and Josey Lane 	All times 
McEwen Drive 	Both sides, from Alpha Road to Greenview Boulevard 	All times 
McEwen Drive 	Both sides, from Blue Lake Circle to Greenview Boulevard and on Blue Lake Circle from McEwen Drive to a point 350 feet southerly and westerly of McEwen Drive. These prohibitions shall not apply on Saturdays and Sundays to the north and east sides of McEwen Drive from Blue Lake Circle to a point 440 feet east of Greenview Boulevard 	All times, except as noted 
McEwen Road 	Eastbound, for approximately 700 feet east of its intersection with Midway Road 	All times 
McEwen 	Westbound (north) side from Midway Road 275 feet east 	All times 
Millwood Drive 	From the intersection of Josey Lane to the intersection of Farmers Branch Lane 	All times 
Mira Lago Boulevard 	Both sides for its entire length, but applicable only to vehicles with a gross vehicle weight greater than 14,000 pounds when active loading or unloading of personal property into or out of the vehicle from or to an adjacent property is not occurring 	All times 
Morningstar Lane 	South side, from 89.0 feet east of the centerline of Shadyridge Lane, for a distance of 412.0 feet to a point 15 feet east of the centerline of Morningstar Circle 	All times 
Mount View Drive 	North side, from the northwest center point of the radius at its intersection with Wilmington Drive to a distance of 64 feet west 	All times 
Old North Road 	Eastbound, at Dutch Village Park from 135 feet south of JoAnna Drive to a point 345 feet south of JoAnna Drive 	12:00 midnight to 5:00 a.m. 
Omega Road 	Southbound from 380 feet north of Alpha Road for a distance of 240 feet north 	All times 
Parkside Center Boulevard 	Entire length 	All times 
Proton Road 	Northbound, southbound, eastbound, and westbound from its intersection with Midway Road to its intersection with Spring Valley Road, except on the east side of Proton Road from 1,500 feet north of Spring Valley Road for a distance of 150 feet, where parking will be permitted from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on weekdays 	All times, except as noted 
Reedcroft Drive 	From the intersection of Josey Lane to the intersection of Bay Meadows Circle 	All times 
Richland Avenue 	South side, from the east intersection of Goodwater Street to the west intersection Dennis Lane 	All times 
Richland Avenue 	North side, from the east intersection of Dennis Lane to the west intersection with Birchlawn Drive 	All times 
Richland Street 	South side, from the point of its intersection with the east side of Goodwater Street to the point of its intersection with the west side of Birchlawn Street 	All times 
Ridgeoak Way 	From 147 feet east of Amsterdam Road to its intersection with Templeton Trail 	During school zone hours 
Road B of Farmers Branch Office Park 	From its intersection with McEwen Road to Road A of Farmers Branch Office Park 	All times 
Royal Lane 	North side, from Luna Road east to the west right-of-way of the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railroad 	All times 
Rugby Lane 	Both sides, 30 feet east from the stop sign at its intersection with Bee Street 	All times 
Simonton Road 	South side, from its radius return on Welch to 186 feet east 	All times 
Simonton Road 	South side, from back of curb on Welch Road to 1950 feet east 	All times 
Templeton Trail (except for school buses) 	West side from its intersection with Cloverdale Drive to 165 feet south of Ridgeoak Way 	During school zone hours 
Tom Field Road 	Northbound, from its intersection with Farmers Branch Lane to Mount View Drive and from 30 feet south of Marietta Drive to Valley View Lane 	All times 
Trend Drive 	East side, 700 feet from its intersection with Belt Line Road south 	All times 
Valley Branch Lane 	Either side, from Springlake Road to Valley Branch Circle within 30 feet of any driveway 	All times 
Valley View Lane 	North side, from Marsh Lane to Crestpark Drive 	All times 
Valley View Lane 	Westbound, from the intersection of Webb Chapel Road to Mount Castle Drive 	4:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. weekdays, Monday through Friday, excluding holidays 
Valwood Circle 	East side, from the point of its intersection with Valwood Parkway northward a distance of 136 feet to the point of beginning of a cul-de-sac 	All times 
Valwood Parkway 	Between Interstate Highway 35 E and Bee Street 	All times 
Valwood Parkway 	Between Josey Lane and Dennis Lane 	All times 
Valwood Parkway 	North and south side bridge span over Cooks Creek, located between Josey Lane and Albemarle Drive 	All times 
Venture Drive 	East side from approximately 155 feet north of the north curb of its east intersection with Gardenbrook Drive to approximately 263 feet north of the intersection of Gardenbrook Drive 	All times 
Venture Drive 	East side from approximately 398 feet north of the north curb from its west intersection of Gardenbrook Drive to approximately 506 feet north of the intersection of Gardenbrook Drive 	All times 
Venture Drive 	East side from approximately 663 feet north of the north curb from its west intersection of Gardenbrook Drive to approximately 777 feet north of the intersection of Gardenbrook Drive 	All times 
Veronica Road 	East side, from the southeast corner of Primrose Lane to the northeast corner of Eric Lane 	All times 
Vintage Street 	Between Goodland Street and Bee Street 	All times 
Wilmington Drive 	West side, from the northwest center point of the radius at its intersection with Mount View Drive to a distance of 62 feet north 	All times 
Wooded Creek Drive 	North side, from its point of intersection with Marsh Lane to a point 200 feet east as measured along the north curbline of Wooded Creek Drive 	All times 
 
(c)  Appropriate signs prohibiting parking at the places and during the times consistent with this section shall be installed and maintained by city forces. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined a sum not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 661, § 1, 2-6-1967; Ord. No. 801, §§ 1, 2, 5-27-1969; Ord. No. 831, § 1, 11-2-1969; Ord. No. 834, §§ 1, 2, 12-15-1969; Ord. No. 862, § 1, 10-19-1970; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 12-21-1970; Ord. No. 874, § 1, 3-1-1971; Ord. No. 883, § 1, 6-28-1971; Ord. No. 914, §§ 1, 2, 4-3-1972; Ord. No. 936, §§ 1, 2, 10-2-1972; Ord. No. 972, § 1, 10-1-1973; Ord. No. 981, §§ 1, 2, 11-19-1973; Ord. No. 982, § 1, 11-19-1973; Ord. No. 1137, § 1, 4-18-1977; Ord. No. 1222, § 1, 12-4-1978; Ord. No. 1417, § I, 12-6-1982; Ord. No. 1497, § I, 5-7-1984; Ord. No. 1502, § I, 6-4-1984; Ord. No. 1503, § I, 6-4-1984; Ord. No. 1516, § 1, 10-8-1984; Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 10-8-1984; Ord. No. 1539, § 1, 12-17-1984; Ord. No. 1621, § 1, 2-17-1986; Ord. No. 1630, § 1, 4-7-1986; Ord. No. 1727, § 1, 9-21-1987; Ord. No. 1731, § 1, 9-21-1987; Ord. No. 1737, § 1, 11-2-1987; Ord. No. 1742, § 1, 12-7-1987; Ord. No. 1762, § 1, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 1801, §§ 2, 3, 11-7-1988; Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 1951, § 1, 9-23-1991; Ord. No. 2020, § 1, 1-4-1993; Ord. No. 2086, § 1, 9-9-1993; Ord. No. 2110, § 1, 4-18-1994; Ord. No. 2302, §§ 1, 2, 3-3-1997; Ord. No. 2388, § 1, 5-18-1998; Ord. No. 2432, § 1, 10-19-1998; Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 12-7-1998; Ord. No. 2440, § 1, 12-7-1998; Ord. No. 2456, § 1, 2-1-1999; Ord. No. 2516, § 1, 11-15-1999; Ord. No. 2517, § 1, 11-15-1999; Ord. No. 2572, § 1, 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 2592, § 1, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 2616; § 1, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 2642; § 1, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 2657, § 1, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2660, § 1, 4-1-2002; Ord. No. 2725, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 2834, § 1, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 2865, § 1, 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 2867, § 1, 7-17-2006; Ord. No. 2874, § 1, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 2887, § 1, 10-2-2006; Ord. No. 2899, § 2, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 2956, § 1, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 2979, § 1, 6-3-2008; Ord. No. 3077, § 1, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 3106, § 1, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 3168, § 1, 12-6-2011; Ord. No. 3192, § 1, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 3208, § 1, 11-6-2012; Ord. No. 3224, § 1, 4-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 3243, § 1, 9-17-2013 ; Ord. No. 3256, §§ 1—4, 2-18-2014 ; Ord. No. 3295, § 1, 8-19-2014 ; Ord. No. 3309, §§ 1—3, 10-6-2014 ; Ord. No. 3342 , § 2, 9-1-2015; Ord. No. 3366, § 1, 5-17-2016 ; Ord. No. 3475 , § 1, 10-17-2017; Ord. No. 3543 , § 1, 11-6-2018; Ord. No. 3592 , §§ 1, 2, 9-17-2019; Ord. No. 3637 , § 1, 6-9-2020; Ord. No. 3639 , § 1, 6-9-2020) 
_____ 
Sec. 82-96. - Weekend parking allowed. 
(a)  Vehicle parking is hereby allowed on Saturdays and Sundays on the following streets: 
Street 	Description 	Time of Day 
Parkside Center Boulevard 	West side of the north/south section of Parkside Center Boulevard, beginning 40 feet north of traffic circle, and continuing for approximately 67 feet north 	9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
 
(b)  The public works department shall install and maintain appropriate signs allowing parking on the weekends during the designated time periods. 
(Ord. No. 2454, §§ 1, 2, 1-11-1999)  
Sec. 82-97. - Measures to reduce urban blight and safety hazards caused by motor vehicle parking on certain residential streets. 
The city public works director, upon direction of the city council, is authorized to implement any one or more of the following actions regarding the parking of motor vehicles on public streets in residential neighborhoods to address pedestrian and vehicle safety, traffic conditions, urban blight, and neighborhood property aesthetics based on citizen complaints and/or city staff investigation and recommendation: 
(1)  Prohibit parking on one or both sides of the public street. 
(2)  Prohibit continuous parking of a motor vehicle on the street for more than 48 hours. 
(3)  Restrict parking to residents and require vehicle parking permits. 
(4)  Restrict number of vehicles per household that may be parked on the public street. 
(5)  Prohibit parking of motor vehicles overnight or during certain posted hours. 
(6)  Limit the number of vehicles that may be parked or stored on, or contiguous to a residential lot to less than five vehicles. 
( Ord. No. 3253, § 1, 12-17-2013 )  
Secs. 82-98—82-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - SCHOOL ZONES 
 
Sec. 82-121. - Signs to designate school traffic zones. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to designate such locations as school traffic zones with appropriate street markings and signs and is authorized to erect signs to give motorists reasonable notice of the regulations contained in section 82-122. For purposes of this division, a school traffic zone is that area in which the streets and public ways derive a peculiar character, in terms of the periodic presence of children in abnormally large numbers, by reason of the proximity of a school. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 5, 9-18-1978)  
Sec. 82-122. - Speed limits in school zones. 
(a)  Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made as authorized by the provisions of the Texas Transportation Code, the prima facie speed limits indicated in this section for vehicles are hereby determined and declared to be reasonable and safe, and such speed limits are hereby fixed for vehicles traveling upon the following named streets and highways, or parts thereof, on school days and during the hours either: 
(1)  Described on official school zone speed limit signs located at such zones; 
(2)  When school zone signs bearing a flashing amber light and located at such zones are in operation; or 
(3)  During the hours as determined by the traffic engineer. 
The locations of school zones described in subsection (b) are approximate and the exact locations are determined by the placement of official traffic control devices. 
_____
(b)  The location of school zones and the prima facie speed limit for school zones are as follows: 
Street 	Location 	Speed 
Limit 
(mph) 
Amber Lane 	From the intersection of Amber Lane and Birchlawn Drive to the intersection of Amber Lane and Heartside Place 	20 
Amsterdam Road 	From the north right-of-way line of Myra Lane at its intersection with Amsterdam Road to the north right-of-way line of Cloverdale Lane at its intersection with Amsterdam Road 	20 
Birchlawn Drive 	From the intersection of Valwood Parkway and Birchlawn Drive to a point which is 72 feet south to the intersection of Amber Lane and Birchlawn Drive 	20 
Dennis Lane 	From 150 feet south of the intersection of Valwood Parkway and Dennis Lane south and west to 76 feet north of the intersection of Longmeade Drive and Dennis Lane 	20 
Dennis Lane 	From 17 feet south of the intersection of Greenhurst Drive and Dennis Lane south to 15 feet north of the intersection of Havenhurst Street and Dennis Lane 	20 
Farmers Branch Lane 	From the west right-of-way line of Josey Lane westward to a point which is 185 feet west of the west right-of-way line of Josey Lane 	20 
Fyke Road 	From the intersection of Webb Chapel Road to 70 feet west of Cochise Lane 	20 
Havenhurst Drive 	From the intersection of Dennis Lane to the intersection of Goodland Street 	20 
Heartside Place 	From a point which is 236 feet south of the intersection of Amber Lane and Heartside Place to the intersection of Valwood Parkway and Heartside Place 	20 
Hollandale Lane 	From the intersection of Josey Lane to the intersection of Shoredale Lane 	20 
Josey Lane 	From the intersection of Fyke Road and Josey Lane to a point which is 125 feet south of the intersection of Rollingdale Lane and Josey Lane 	20 
Josey Lane 	From 160 feet north of the intersection of Maydelle Lane and Josey Lane south to the point on Josey Lane 71 feet south of the intersection of Millwood Drive 	20 
Josey Lane 	From the intersection of Sundown Trail and Josey Lane to the intersection of Hearthstone Drive and Josey Lane 	20 
Josey Lane 	From 210 feet south of Meadow Green Drive to 80 feet southeast of Charcoal Lane 	20 
Myra Lane 	From the west right-of-way line of Templeton Trail at its intersection with Myra Lane to the east right-of-way line of Brisbane Avenue at its intersection with Myra Lane 	20 
Richland Avenue 	From the east right-of-way line of Goodwater Street to a point which is 125 feet west of the intersection of Pyramid Drive and Richland Avenue 	20 
Ridgeoak Way 	From approximately 500 feet east of Templeton Trail to the east right-of-way line of Amsterdam Road 	20 
Templeton Trail 	From the intersection of Cloverdale Lane and Templeton Trail to Myra Lane 	20 
Tom Field Road 	From a point approximately 145 feet south of the south curbline of Golfing Green Drive, north through the intersection of Richland Avenue and Tom Field Road 	20 
Valley View Lane 	From a point 360 feet east of the intersection of Valley View Lane and Brookhollow Drive, east to a point 50 feet east of the intersection of Valley View Lane and Templeton Trail 	20 
Valley View Lane 	From a point 360 feet east of the intersection of Valley View Lane and Brookhollow Drive, west to a point 140 feet west of the intersection of Valley View Lane and Templeton Trail 	20 
Valwood Parkway 	From the intersection of Stardust Lane to the intersection of Ivanwood Drive 	20 
Webb Chapel Road 	From a point 275 feet north of the intersection of Pebble Beach Drive and Webb Chapel Road, north to the northern city limits line which crosses Webb Chapel Road at the south right-of-way line of Gateway Avenue 	20 
Webb Chapel Road 	From a point 250 feet south of the intersection of Pebble Beach Drive and Webb Chapel Road, north to the northern city limits line which crosses Webb Chapel Road at the south right-of-way line of Gateway Avenue 	20 
 
(Ord. No. 1206, 9-5-1978; Ord. No. 1210, § 3, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1377, § 1, 8-2-1982; Ord. No. 1597, § 1, 10-21-1985; Ord. No. 1646, § 2, 8-18-1986; Ord. No. 1660, §§ 1, 2, 10-20-1986; Ord. No. 1675, §§ 1, 2, 2-2-1987; Ord. No. 1676, §§ 1, 2, 2-2-1987; Ord. No. 1722, §§ 1, 2, 9-14-1987; Ord. No. 1754, § 1, 1-18-1988; Ord. No. 1952, §§ 1, 2, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 2010, §§ 1, 2, 12-7-1992; Ord. No. 2247, §§ 1, 2, 2-5-1996; Ord. No. 2562, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2654, §§ 1, 2, 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 2899, § 3, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 2938, § 1, 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2945, § 3, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 3533 , §§ 2, 3, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 82-123. - One-way streets in school zones. 
Upon those streets and parts of streets described in this section, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction, when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and established at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. These streets shall be deemed one-way in the direction indicated in this section and in the time limits set forth as specified by signs on school days for purposes of this division. A school is defined as an institution for teaching children. 
Street 	Extent 	 Direction 
Amsterdam Road 	From Myra Lane to Cloverdale Lane 	North only 
Richland Street 	From Tom Field Street to Goodwater Street 	West only 
Ridgeoak Way 	From Amsterdam Road to Templeton Trail 	East only 
Templeton Trail 	From Myra Lane to Ridgeoak Way 	South only 
 
(Ord. No. 1206, 9-5-1978; Ord. No. 1210, § 4, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1998, § 1, 9-14-1992; Ord. No. 3220, § 1, 3-5-2013 ) 
_____ 
Secs. 82-124—82-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OVERSIZED VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 82-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motor vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, which is self-propelled and that has over two axles or a motor vehicle that has two axles that is combined with a trailer that exceeds 18 feet in length. 
The following constitute exemptions from the definition of motor vehicle and are not included within the purview of this article: 
(1)  All motor vehicles owned or used by governmental entities, including federal, state and local entities. 
(2)  Motor vehicles used as passenger buses. 
(3)  Wreckers. 
(4)  Motor vehicles used by public and private utilities. 
(5)  Motor homes. 
Prohibited area means all of the public streets located between the most easterly right-of-way line of Denton Drive on the west, except for Distribution Way and Valwood Drive between its intersection with Denton Drive to its intersection with the most easterly right-of-way line of Distribution Way extended, the south city limits line on the south, the most westerly right-of-way line of Midway Road on the east and the north city limits line on the north. 
Trailer means every vehicle over 18 feet in length, with or without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
The following constitute exemptions from the definition of trailer and are not included within the purview of this article: 
(1)  Boat trailer. 
(2)  Mobile home as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.201 that does not exceed 55 feet in length in combination with a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 1, 8-20-1984) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 82-202. - Driving, parking, stopping or standing prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop, stand, or drive a motor vehicle within a prohibited area. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 8-20-1984)  
Sec. 82-203. - Defenses to alleged violations. 
The following shall constitute defenses to alleged violations of section 82-202: 
(1)  The motor vehicle was traveling to or from the servicing of a business, a lot or a residence within the prohibited area. 
(2)  The motor vehicle was traveling to or from its legal domicile which legal domicile is located within the prohibited area, except motor vehicles covered by subsection (3) of this section. 
(3)  Motor vehicles legally domiciled within the area located between Garden Brook Drive, Beltline Road, Webb Chapel Road and Marsh Lane that travel on Beltline Road, Garden Brook Drive, Towerwood Drive, Enterprise Drive, Trend Drive and Venture Drive. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 3, 8-20-1984)  
Sec. 82-204. - Location presumption of violation. 
Parties parking, stopping, standing or driving motor vehicles within the prohibited area shall be presumed to be in violation of section 82-202 which presumption is a rebuttable presumption. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 4, 8-20-1984)  
Sec. 82-205. - Signage. 
The director of public works is hereby directed to place signs at appropriate places throughout the prohibited area which signs shall state the following: "No Thru Vehicles Over Two Axles or Trailers Over 18 feet." 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 5, 8-20-1984)  
Secs. 82-206—82-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARKING, LOADING AND UNLOADING 
 
Sec. 82-221. - Parking in residential areas. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Residential areas means any areas zoned as a single-family or apartment district under the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. 
(b)  Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to park a truck over three-quarter ton in weight or any trailer upon any street in a residential area, except for the purpose of loading or unloading the truck or trailer or except for the holder of a 24-hour loading/unloading permit issued by the chief of police or designee pursuant to section 86-222. 
(c)  Violations deemed nuisance. If any such truck or any trailer is found parked upon any such street in violation of any provisions of this section, the truck or trailer is hereby declared a nuisance per se and the fact that such truck or any trailer is so parked by any person shall be prima facie evidence that the person or the owner of such truck or any trailer unlawfully parked such truck or any trailer. 
(d)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Pickup trucks or passenger vans used for personal noncommercial purposes without commercial advertisement and rated one ton or less will be exempted. 
(2)  Vehicles parked on or directly adjacent to a construction site, which are a necessary part of the construction process being conducted at the site, shall be exempt for short periods of time according to the terms set out on a placard issued by the building official. The placard shall be posted in the window of the vehicle parked at or adjacent to the construction site indicating the exemption time as allowed by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 760, §§ 1—3, 12-2-1968; Ord. No. 961, §§ 1, 2, 7-2-1973; Ord. No. 2088, § 1, 9-20-1993; Ord. No. 2089, § 1, 9-20-1993; Ord. No. 2147, § 1, 11-7-1994; Ord. No. 2218, §§ 2, 3, 10-9-1995)  
Sec. 82-222. - Parking permits. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bus means a motor-driven passenger vehicle 25 feet or greater in length which has the capacity to accommodate more than 15 persons. 
On-street parking permit means written governmental permission authorized by the chief of police or appointed designee empowering the holder thereof to park or store a bus or recreational vehicle on a public street within a residential zoning district for a temporary period of time not to exceed one week or seven consecutive days in duration. Such permit shall identify the owner or operator of such vehicle, nearest street address or precise description of location where the vehicle is to be parked or stored, the date the permit is issued, the date of expiration, and any other information, conditions or special restrictions deemed necessary by the chief of police at the time of issuance. 
Recreational vehicle means any vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation which can be towed, hauled or driven and which is primarily designed to serve as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping or travel use, including, but not limited to, travel trailers, camping trailers, converted buses and self-propelled motor homes. This definition does not include pickup trucks equipped with camper units, pickup trucks with bed caps, or vans that have a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of three-quarter ton or less. 
(b)  Permit conditions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store any bus or recreational vehicle on a public street within any area of the city zoned for residential uses. This provision shall not prevent the temporary parking or standing of such vehicles engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or contents. Neither shall this provision prevent the temporary parking of such vehicles on residential streets in order to allow for the typical maintenance of residential properties such as lawn mowing, edging, house painting, etc. 
(2)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for parking or storing a bus or recreational vehicle on public streets within areas zoned for residential uses if a valid on-street parking permit has been issued to the owner or operator of the vehicle and the parking or storage of the vehicle in no way violates any other pertinent state statute, city code, ordinance, section or provision. 
(3)  The chief of police or appointed designee shall have sole authority to issue, revoke or extend any on-street parking permit and may impose any additional conditions or restrictions at the time of issuance deemed necessary to ensure that the health, safety and welfare of the residents and guests of the city are not jeopardized. 
(4)  No more than three on-street parking permits may be issued to allow a bus or recreational vehicle to be parked at the same address or street location within the same calendar year, unless otherwise deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
(5)  The chief of police or his designee, solely at his discretion, may issue a 24-hour loading/unloading permit that permits and allows the holder to park his vehicle solely for the purpose of loading or unloading the vehicle at a residential unit as an exception to section 82-221. 
(Ord. No. 1885, §§ 1, 2, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 2218, § 4, 10-9-1995)  
Secs. 82-223—82-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WEIGHT LIMITS ON STREETS 
 
Sec. 82-241. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bus means a motor-driven passenger vehicle 25 feet or greater in length which has the capacity to accommodate more than 15 persons. 
Commercial motor vehicle means any motor vehicle designed or used for the transportation of property, not including a passenger bus, passenger automobile, motorcycle, panel delivery truck, or pickup truck. 
Mobile home means living quarters equipped and used for sleeping and eating which may be moved from one location to another over a public street by being pulled behind a motor vehicle. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle, as herein defined, which is self-propelled. 
Pole trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or a pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads, such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
Recreational vehicle means any vehicular type of portable structure without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and which is primarily designed to serve as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping or travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, camping trailers, converted buses and self-propelled motor homes. This definition does not include pickup trucks equipped with camper units, pickup trucks with bed caps, or vans that have a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of three-quarter ton or less. 
Semitrailer means every vehicle of the trailer type so designed or used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another motor vehicle. 
Trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed or used to carry property or passengers wholly on its own structure and designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. 
Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
Vehicle means every mechanical device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, including motor vehicles, commercial motor vehicles, truck tractors, and semitrailers, severally as herein defined, but excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 10-20-1969; Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-21-1990) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 82-242. - Maximum weights generally; dimensions and fees. 
(a)  Compliance required. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful and in violation of this division for any person to drive, operate or move, and/or to cause or permit to be driven, operated, or moved on any public street within the corporate limits of the city, any commercial motor vehicle with or without load, contrary to any of the regulations contained in this section. 
(b)  Vehicle dimensions. 
(1)  No commercial motor vehicle shall exceed a total outside width, including any load thereon, of 96 inches, except that the width of a farm tractor shall not exceed nine feet and that the limitations as to size of a vehicle stated in this section shall not apply to implements of husbandry, machinery used solely for the purpose of drilling water wells, or to highway or street building or maintenance machinery owned or operated by or in behalf of the state or any of its political subdivisions or of the city. 
(2)  No commercial motor vehicle unladen or with load shall exceed a height of 13 feet, six inches, including load. 
(3)  No commercial motor vehicle, truck tractor, trailer, or semitrailer shall exceed a length of 40 feet, except that it shall be lawful for refrigeration equipment installed in a trailer or semitrailer for the purpose of refrigerating the cargo thereof to overhang the front of such vehicle, even though such overhang would make the total length of such vehicle more than 40 feet. When any such truck tractor and semitrailer are operated in combination, no such combination of a truck tractor and semitrailer coupled together shall exceed a total length of 55 feet, and when operated in any other combination of such vehicles coupled together, including but not limited to a truck and semitrailer, truck and trailer, truck tractor and semitrailer and trailer, or truck tractor and two trailers, then no such other combination of such vehicles coupled together shall exceed a length of 65 feet; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any disabled vehicle being towed by another vehicle to an intake place for repairs; and, provided further, that the limitations in this section shall not apply to any mobile home or to any combination of a mobile home and a motor vehicle, but no mobile home and motor vehicle combination shall exceed a total length of 55 feet. 
(4)  No vehicles or combination of vehicles, except pole trailers, shall carry any load extending more than three feet beyond the front thereof, nor more than four feet beyond the rear thereof. 
(c)  Vehicle weight. No commercial motor vehicle, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer, nor combination of such vehicles shall be operated or caused or permitted to be operated upon any public street within the corporate limits of the city having a weight in excess of any one or more of the following limitations: 
(1)  In no event shall the total gross weight with load of a two-axle vehicle exceed 40,000 pounds; of a three-axle vehicle exceed 66,300 pounds; of a four-axle vehicle exceed 76,000 pounds; of a five-axle vehicle exceed 80,000 pounds. 
(2)  No axle shall carry a load in excess of 20,000 pounds. An axle load shall be defined as the total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose centers may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. 
(3)  The total gross weight concentrated on the highway surface from any tandem-axle group shall not exceed 36,000 pounds for each such tandem-axle group. The term "tandem-axle group" is defined to be two or more axles spaced 40 inches or more apart from center to center having at least one common point of weight suspension. 
(4)  Vehicles used exclusively to transport ready-mixed concrete, which is hereby defined as a perishable product, may be operated with a tandem-axle load not to exceed 44,000 pounds. 
(d)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person operating or causing to be operated a motor vehicle under a valid and subsisting permit for the operation of overweight or oversized equipment for the transportation of such commodities as cannot be reasonably dismantled, which permit has been issued by the state department of public transportation under the provisions of the Texas Transportation Code as the article now exists or might from time to time be amended. 
(2)  Emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call. 
(e)  Permit. 
(1)  When required. Upon written application timely made by any person or corporation which desires to operate or cause to be operated on the public streets within the corporate limits of the city overweight or oversized equipment for the transportation of such commodities as cannot be reasonably dismantled, where the total gross weight or size of the vehicle and its load exceed the limits allowed by this section, the chief of police, after consulting with the city manager, shall issue a permit for the operation of such equipment or fleets of equipment for a specified period of time, over routes to be designated by the city manager, if such routes can be determined at the time application for the permit is made. 
(2)  Contents of application. The application for the permit provided for in this section shall be in writing, shall be dated and signed by the applicant, and shall contain the following: 
a.  The kind of equipment to be operated, with a complete description of the equipment and a statement as to its weight. 
b.  The kind of commodity to be transported and a certificate as to its weight. 
c.  The streets over which the equipment is to be operated, the dates and the approximate time of operation, and the number of trips to be made, except when the nature, route, time or frequency of operation cannot be determined at the time the permit is issued. 
(3)  Bond required. Before a permit is issued under this section, the applicant for the permit shall file with the city secretary a bond in an amount to be set and approved by the city manager. The amount of such bond shall not exceed the product of the number of vehicles for which a permit is sought multiplied by $10,000.00. Such bond shall be payable to the city and conditioned that the applicant will pay to the city the sum of money necessary to repair any damage which might be occasioned to any public street or publicly owned fixture appurtenant to such street by virtue of operation of any commercial vehicle under such permit. Venue of any suit for recovery upon the bond shall be in the county, and any bond issued hereunder shall contain an ambiguous contractual provision to that effect. 
(4)  Fee. The fee for a permit for oversized and overweight vehicle shall be in amounts established by the city and listed in appendix A. 
The proper fee shall accompany each application for permit and shall be made in cash or by cashier or certified check or postal money order. The fee shall be returned if the application is denied. 
(5)  Contents of permit. Any permit issued under this article shall include at least the following: 
a.  The name of the applicant, the date, a description of the equipment to be operated, and a description of the commodity to be transported. 
b.  The signatures of the chief of police and the city manager. 
c.  The time for which the permit is issued. 
d.  The specified streets over which the equipment is to be operated, insofar as it can be determined at the time the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 2, 10-20-1969; Ord. No. 1280, § 1, 11-19-1979)  
Sec. 82-243. - Authority of police officers to weigh loaded vehicles. 
(a)  Any police officer of the city who has reason to believe that the gross weight or axle load of a loaded motor vehicle is unlawful is authorized to weigh such vehicle by means of a portable or stationery scales furnished or approved by the city or cause such vehicle to be weighed by any public weigher, and to require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest available scales for the purpose of weighing. If the gross weight of such vehicle is found to exceed the maximum gross weight authorized by this division, plus a tolerance allowance of five percent of the gross weight authorized by this division, such police officer shall demand and require the operator or owner of such motor vehicle to unload such portion of the load as may be necessary to decrease the gross weight of such vehicle to the maximum authorized by this division, plus such tolerance allowance. Such operator or owner shall forthwith unload such vehicle to the extent necessary to reduce the gross weight thereof to such lawful maximum and such vehicle shall not be operated further over the public streets of the city until the gross weight of such vehicle has been reduced to a weight not in excess of the maximum limit plus such tolerance allowance. If the axle load of any such vehicle is found to exceed the maximum authorized by this division plus a tolerance allowance of five percent of the axle load authorized, such officer shall demand and require the operator or owner thereof to rearrange his cargo, if possible, to bring such vehicle and load within the maximum axle load authorized, and if this cannot be done by rearrangement of the cargo, then such portion of the load as may be necessary to decrease the axle load to the maximum authorized plus such tolerance allowance shall be unloaded before such vehicle may be operated further over the public streets of the city. 
It is further provided that if unloading is required, the police officer of the city is authorized to require the vehicle to be moved to a safe location for the purpose of parking and/or unloading. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any police officer, city employee, or official of the city to accept or agree to accept any gift, emolument, money or thing of value, privilege or the promise of either, from any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, or the officers, agents, servants, or employees thereof as an inducement to enforce or attempt to enforce the weighing and unloading provisions of this division. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, or the officers, agents, servants or employees thereof to give, or offer to give, or promise to give to any city employee, police officer or other officer of the city any gift, emolument, money or thing of value, privilege, or the promise of either, as an inducement to enforce or attempt to enforce the weighing and unloading provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 3, 10-20-1969)  
Sec. 82-244. - Relief from personal liability in enforcement of division. 
All of the regulations provided in this division are hereby declared to be governmental and for the health, safety and welfare of the general public. Any member of the city council or any city official or employees charged with the enforcement of this division, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 7, 10-20-1969) 
_____ 
Sec. 82-245. - Specific weight limits. 
(a)  Streets, weights designated. Except for governmental vehicles, utility vehicles and those vehicles servicing a lot or residence immediately abutting a street which has no other access except by the streets, listed in this subsection it shall be unlawful for any person to operate, drive, pull, tow or push a truck or trailer, with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity exceeding that indicated on the following streets: 
Street 	Location 	Manufacturer's 
Rated Carrying 
Capacity 
Bee Street 	Between Wicker Street and Valwood Parkway 	¾ ton 
Brookhollow Drive 		¾ ton 
Denton Drive 	The concrete box culvert at Cooks Creek 	15,000 pounds per axle 
Farmers Branch Lane 	Between Denton Road and Josey Lane 	¾ ton 
Gardenbrook Drive 	From Marsh Lane to Oakbrook Parkway 	1 ton 
Golfing Green Drive 	Between Webb Chapel Road and Brookhaven Club Drive 	¾ ton 
Lineville Drive 	From Farmers Branch Shopping Center to Harrisburg Circle 	¾ ton 
Longmeade Drive 	The concrete box culvert at Rawhide Creek 	15,000 pounds per axle 
Marsh Lane 	Between Valley View Lane and Brookhaven Club Drive 	¾ ton 
Marsh Lane 	Between Brookhaven Club Drive and Belt Line Road 	¾ ton 
Mercer Parkway 	Between Valley View Lane and Commerce Street 	1 ton 
Pebble Beach Drive 	Between Marsh Lane and Webb Chapel Road 	¾ ton 
Spur Trail 		¾ ton 
Sunbeck Circle 		¾ ton 
Tom Field Road 	Between Farmers Branch Lane and Valley View Lane 	¾ ton 
 
_____
(b)  Exceptions. Pickup trucks or passenger vans rated one ton or less being used for personal noncommercial purposes without commercial advertising are excepted from the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Presumptions. 
(1)  This section establishes a rebuttable presumption that all trucks with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity exceeding the weight limits specified in subsection (a) of this section being operated, driven, pulled, towed or pushed on the streets listed in subsection (a) of this section are being operated illegally and in violation of this section. 
(2)  When any person is charged with having operated, driven, pulled, towed or pushed a truck or any trailer with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity exceeding the weight limits specified in subsection (a) of this section on the streets named in subsection (a) of this section, as prohibited by this division, such charge shall be prima facie evidence that the person did operate, drive, pull, tow or push a truck or trailer exceeding the specified manufacturer's rated carrying capacity on such street and the city is not required to plead or prove or negate any of the exceptions contained in this section, but the person charged shall have the right to introduce evidence to show that the truck or trailer exceeding the specified manufacturer's rated carrying capacity was not operated, driven, pulled, towed or pushed in violation of this section as charged in the complaint. 
(d)  Signage. The city engineer is authorized to install such necessary signs and markings to adequately inform the traveling public of the weight limitations imposed by this section. 
(e)  Defacement of signs. Any person who shall deface, damage, knock down or remove any sign or markings posted as provided in subsection (d) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(f)  Installation; maintenance. The public works director of the city shall install and maintain appropriate signs prohibiting such unlawful travel. 
(g)  Complaint. When any person is charged with having operated, driven, pulled, towed or pushed a truck or any trailer with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity exceeding one ton on the streets listed in subsection (a) of this section, as prohibited by this division, proof that such truck or trailer exceeding the manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of one ton was, at the date of the offense alleged, owned by the person charged with the offense, shall constitute prima facie evidence to show that such truck or trailer exceeding the manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of one ton was operated, driven, pulled, towed or pushed by such owner at the place charged, but the owner shall have the right to introduce evidence to show that the truck or trailer exceeding the manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of one ton was not operated, driven, pulled, towed or pushed by him, as charged in the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 971, § 1, 9-4-1973; Ord. No. 1083, § 1, 11-3-1975; Ord. No. 1211, § 1, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 1239, § 2, 3-19-1979; Ord. No. 1256, §§ 1—3, 7-2-1979; Ord. No. 1362, §§ 1—3, 9-21-1981; Ord. No. 1384, §§ 1—3, 8-30-1982; Ord. No. 1755, §§ 1—4, 2-1-1988; Ord. No. 2080, § 1, 9-20-1993; Ord. No. 2081, § 1, 9-20-1993; Ord. No. 2082, § 2, 9-20-1993; Ord. No. 2083, § 1, 9-20-1993; Ord. No. 2084, § 1, 9-20-1993; Ord. No. 2387, §§ 2, 3, 5-18-1998; Ord. No. 3533 , § 4, 10-1-2018)  
Secs. 82-246—82-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RAILROADS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Railroads generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 471.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 82-271. - Speed limit. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any yard master, engineer, conductor or other person in charge of a locomotive or train to operate such locomotive or train within the corporate limits of the city on the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railroad at a speed in excess of 40 miles per hour from the south corporate limits line of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 22-1; Ord. No. 1449, § 1, 7-25-1983; Ord. No. 1654, § 1, 9-8-1986)  
Sec. 82-272. - Obstructing intersections. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any yard master, engineer, conductor or other person in any manner controlling or operating any railway locomotive, engine, car or train of cars to suffer or permit any such locomotive, engine, car or train of cars to block public access of any public street crossing within the corporate limits of the city for a longer period than five consecutive minutes, and all of the time such locomotive, engine, car or train of cars is permitted to block such public crossing shall be considered one period, unless between such periods at least five minutes have elapsed, during which time no such locomotive, engine, car or train of cars is permitted to block such crossing. 
(Code 1969, § 22-2; Ord. No. 1449, § 2, 7-25-1983; Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 9-8-1986) 
State Law reference— Obstructing railroad crossing, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 471.007.  
Sec. 82-273. - Roadbed maintenance. 
Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railroad Company owning or being responsible for the maintenance of its right-of-way within the city shall keep that portion of its roadbed and right-of-way in a safe, proper and usable condition for the use of the traveling public, and, in case of its failure to do so within 30 days after the receipt of written notice from the city manager given to the railroad company, it shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and subject to the penalties in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 22-3; Ord. No. 1449, § 3, 7-25-1983; Ord. No. 1654, § 3, 9-8-1986) 
State Law reference— Railroad required to maintain crossing, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 471.001.  
Secs. 82-274—82-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 82-301. - Location of driveway and street intersections. 
(a)  Principles. It is the policy of the city that the following principles be applied to the planning, design and permitting of the location of driveway and street intersections with freeway frontage roads: 
(1)  Access via driveways and streets to frontage roads at locations where access is provided on the effective date of this section is considered to meet the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Access to be constructed after the effective date of this section via driveways and streets to frontage roads should be provided only where needed and minimized wherever possible. 
(3)  Driveways providing access to properties abutting the frontage road should be located along cross streets and parallel streets where practical. As an alternative to direct driveway access to a frontage road, and where lot size and configuration do not reasonably allow for access via driveways along cross streets and parallel streets; combined, shared or mutual access drives must be considered. 
(4)  The distance between a street or driveway intersection with a frontage road and a ramp intersection with a frontage road must be maximized to the extent practical. 
(b)  Standards. It is the policy of the City of Farmers Branch the location of driveway and street intersections with freeway frontage roads be planned, designed and permitted in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Access to the main lanes of a freeway is allowed only via ramps. 
(2)  Driveway and street intersections are not permitted at locations where access control limits are established by right-of-way instrument. 
(3)  Driveway and street intersections are not permitted within 250 feet measured in the direction of travel from the point of intersection of the travel lanes of an exit ramp with the travel lanes of a frontage road. At locations where a public street or an essential driveway (for which alternative access locations are not practical) must be located within the 250-foot separation distance from an exit ramp, pavement design and traffic control measures in the vicinity of the intersection may be required to restrict and channelize access. Driveway and street intersections within 460 feet beyond the intersection of an exit ramp with a frontage road may be permitted only in cases where the city engineer or his designee determines that alternative access conforming to this policy cannot reasonably be located. (A graphical depiction of exit ramp access limitations is shown in Exhibit 1.) 
(4)  Driveway and street intersections are not permitted within 100 feet measured opposite to the direction of travel from the point of intersection of the travel lanes of an exit ramp with the travel lanes of a frontage road. At locations where a public street or an essential driveway (for which alternative access locations are not practical) must be located within the 100-foot separation distance from an exit ramp, pavement design and traffic control measures in the vicinity of the intersection may be required to restrict and channelize access. Driveway and street intersections within 300 feet in advance of the intersection of an exit ramp with a frontage road may be permitted only in cases where the city engineer or his designee determines that alternative access conforming to this policy cannot reasonably be located. (A graphical depiction of entrance ramp access limitations is shown in Exhibit 2.) 
(5)  At entrance and exit ramp locations, driveway and street intersections are not permitted between (a) the point of intersection of the travel lanes of an exit ramp with the travel lanes of a frontage road and (b) the edge of any continuous roadway pavement connecting the ramp and the frontage road. Essential driveway and street intersections with a frontage road may be permitted in such locations only in cases where the city engineer or his designee determines that alternative access conforming to this policy cannot reasonably be located. 
(c)  Conformance of certain intersections. The Citywide Master Thoroughfare Plan provides for the planned addition of new street intersections with frontage roads on the state highway system at the following locations: Mercer Parkway at IH35E, Knightsbridge Road at IH635, and Bond Street at IH635. Resolution No. 2001-004 and Ordinance No. 2578 approved the extension of Mira Lago Boulevard to a planned intersection with a future frontage road extension west of Luna road on the south side of IH635. These thoroughfare and street intersections with frontage roads on the state highway system have been determined to conform to this policy. 
(Ord. No. 2721, §§ 2—4, 5-19-2003) 
  
Secs. 82-302—82-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2927, § 2, adopted Aug. 21, 2007, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 82-401—82-405, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2875, § 2, adopted Sept. 5, 2006. 
 
Sec. 82-401. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
Department means the Police Department of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas, or an entity contracting with the city pursuant to this article. 
Intersection means area where two public roadways cross each other bounded by lateral lines extending from curb to curb, or in the absence of a curb from one edge of a roadway to another. 
Owner means the owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation or, if the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the analogous department or agency of the other state or country. 
Photographic traffic monitoring system means a system that: 
(1)  Consists of a camera system and vehicle sensor installed to exclusively work in conjunction with an electrically operated traffic control signal; and 
(2)  Is capable of producing at least two recorded images that depict the license plate attached to the front or the rear of a motor vehicle that is not operated in compliance with the instructions of the traffic control signal. 
Recorded image means a photographic or digital image recorded by an photographic traffic monitoring system that depicts the front or rear of a motor vehicle. 
System location means the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic traffic monitoring system is directed and in operation. 
Traffic control signal has the meaning assigned by Texas Transportation Code Section 541.304. 
(Ord. No. 2927, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 82-402. - Imposition of civil penalty for creating dangerous intersections. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle is liable for a civil penalty if the vehicle proceeds into an intersection at a system location when the traffic control signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal. 
(b)  The civil penalty for which the owner is liable is $75.00. 
(Ord. No. 2927, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 82-403 - Enforcement; procedures. 
(a)  The department is responsible for the enforcement and administration of this article. The city may contract with a third party, under the supervision of the department, for the administration, enforcement, installation, or operation of the photographic traffic monitoring system. 
(b)  In order to impose a civil penalty under this article, the department shall mail a notice of violation to the owner of the motor vehicle liable for the civil penalty not later than the 30th day after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred to: 
(1)  The owner's address as shown on the registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation; or 
(2)  If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous to the Texas Department of Transportation. 
(c)  A notice of violation issued under this article shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the violation alleged; 
(2)  The location of the intersection where the violation occurred; 
(3)  The date and time of the violation; 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(5)  The registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(6)  A copy of a recorded image limited solely to the area of the registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty for which the owner is liable; 
(8)  The number of days the person has in which to pay or contest the imposition of the civil penalty if the civil penalty is not paid or imposition of the penalty is not contested within that period; 
(9)  A statement that the owner of the vehicle in the notice of violation may elect to pay the civil penalty by mail sent to a specified address instead of appearing at the time and place of the administrative adjudication hearing; and, 
(10)  Information that informs the owner of the vehicle named in the notice of violation: 
a.  Of the person's right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty against the person in an administrative adjudication hearing; 
b.  The imposition of the civil penalty may be contested by submitting a written request for an administrative adjudication hearing before the expiration of the period specified under subsection (8); 
c.  That failure to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability for the penalty in a timely manner is an admission of liability and waiver of the owner's right to appeal the imposition of the civil penalty; 
d.  That failure to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed may result in the imposition of a late-payment fee of $25.00; and 
(11)  A statement that, if at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph or digital image taken by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person in the business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation, then the person must the present evidence, in the form of an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury attached to the notice and timely return by mail, establishing that the vehicle was at that time: 
a.  Being test driven by another person; 
b.  Being rented or leased by the vehicle's owner to another person being rented or leased by the vehicle's owner to another person; or 
c.  owned by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation. 
(d)  A notice of violation under this article is presumed to have been received on the fifth day after the date the notice of violation is mailed. 
(e)  In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the department may mail a warning notice to the owner that, in addition to any other information contained in the warning notice, must contain the information required by subsection (c). 
(f)  It is presumed that the owner of the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation mailed to the person if the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph or digital image taken by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system belongs to the owner of the motor vehicle. 
(g)  Evidence may be presented to rebut the presumption in subsection (f) by a person who is in the business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or by a person who did not own the vehicle at the time of the violation. The evidence must be made by sworn affidavit, through testimony at the administrative adjudication hearing, or by a written declaration under penalty of perjury. The affidavit or written declaration may be submitted by mail. 
(h)  If the presumption established by subsection (f) above is rebutted under the provisions of subsection (g) above, a civil penalty may not be imposed on the owner of the vehicle or the person named in the notice of violation, as applicable. 
(i)  If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in the photograph or digital image taken by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles and the vehicle was being rented or leased to an individual, the owner of the motor vehicle shall provide to the department the name and address of the individual who was renting or leasing the motor vehicle depicted in the photograph or digital image and a statement of the period during which that individual was renting or leasing the vehicle. The owner shall provide the information required by this subsection not later than the 30th day after the date the notice of violation is received. If the owner provides the required information, it is presumed that the individual renting or leasing the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation and department may send a notice of violation to that individual at the address provided by the owner of the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2927, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 82-404. - Administrative adjudication hearing. 
(a)  A person who receives a notice of violation under this chapter may contest the imposition of the civil penalty specified in the notice of violation by filing a written request for an administrative adjudication hearing. The request for a hearing must be filed on or before the date specified in the notice of violation, which may not be earlier than the 30th day after the date the notice of violation was mailed. 
(b)  On receipt of a timely request for an administrative adjudication hearing, the department shall notify the person of the date and time of the hearing. 
(c)  A hearing officer designated by the City of Farmers Branch Council shall conduct the administrative adjudication hearing. The hearing officer shall have the authority to administer oaths, take testimony, and issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents. 
(d)  In an administrative adjudication hearing, the issues must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(e)  The reliability of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system used to produce the recorded image of the motor vehicle involved in the violation may be attested to by affidavit of an officer or employee of the department or of the entity with which the department contracts who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. 
(f)  An affidavit of an officer or employee of the department or the contracting entity that alleges a violation based on an inspection of the applicable recorded image is: 
(1)  Admissible in the administrative adjudication hearing and in an appeal under this article; and 
(2)  Evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit. 
(g)  At the conclusion of the administrative adjudication hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a finding of liability for the civil penalty or a finding of no liability for the civil penalty. A finding under this subsection must be in writing and be signed and dated by the hearing officer. 
(h)  A finding of liability for a civil penalty must specify the amount of the civil penalty for which the person is liable. If the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability, a civil penalty for the violation may not be imposed against the person. 
(i)  A finding of liability or a finding of no liability entered under this section may: 
(1)  Be filed with the department and the Court Clerk of the Farmers Branch Municipal Court; and, 
(2)  Be recorded on microfilm or microfiche or using data processing techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2927, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 82-405. - Appeal. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle determined by a hearing officer to be liable for a civil penalty may appeal that determination to a judge by filing an appeal petition with the clerk of the court. The petition must be filed with City of Farmers Branch Court. 
(b)  The petition must be: 
(1)  Filed before the 31st day after the date on which the administrative adjudication hearing officer entered the finding of liability for the civil penalty; and, 
(2)  Accompanied by payment of the costs required by law for the municipal court. 
(c)  The court clerk shall schedule a hearing and notify the owner of the motor vehicle and the department and the office of the city attorney of the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(d)  An appeal stays enforcement and collection of the civil penalty imposed against the owner of the motor vehicle. The owner shall file a notarized statement of personal financial obligation to perfect the owner's appeal. 
(e)  An appeal under this section shall be determined by the court by trial de novo. Being an appeal from an administrative determination, the trial de novo shall not be by jury trial. 
(Ord. No. 2927, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 82-406. - Enforcement and late fee. 
(a)  If the owner of a motor vehicle is delinquent in the payment of a civil penalty imposed under this article, the county assessor-collector or the Texas Department of Transportation may refuse to register a motor vehicle alleged to have been involved in the violation. 
(b)  If the owner of a motor vehicle is delinquent in the payment of a civil penalty imposed under this article, the department may impose a $25.00 late fee in addition to any other amounts owed. 
(Ord. No. 2927, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 82-407. - Traffic safety fund. 
(a)  The penalties and fees collected from the imposition of civil liability under this article, after any deductions or remittances pursuant to state law or this article, shall be deposited in a traffic safety fund account established by the city council. 
(b)  Funds from the traffic safety fund may be used only to fund traffic safety programs, including pedestrian safety programs, public safety programs, intersection improvements, and traffic enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2927, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
ARTICLE VII. - AUTOMATED SCHOOL BUS SIGN ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 82-408. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section, the following terms, words and derivations thereof shall have the meanings given herein: 
Administrator means the governmental entity designated by the city council to administer and enforce this article. 
Automated school bus stop arm enforcement program means the installation of photographic student safety/school bus stop arm enforcement systems on school buses operated within the city for the purpose of reducing school bus stop arm violations and injuries to students citywide. 
Camera-enforced school bus means a school bus equipped with a photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system. 
Date of issuance means the date that a notice of violation is approved and mailed by a law enforcement officer in accordance with this article. 
Department means the department or departments of the city designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article. 
Director means the director of the department or the director's authorized representative. 
Hearing officer means an individual designated by the director to administratively adjudicate all school bus stop arm violations for which a notice of violation has been issued. 
Law enforcement officer means an individual licensed as a law enforcement officer by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers, including a peace officer, as defined under Article 2.12, Texas Statutes, Code of Criminal Procedure. 
Mail date means the date that a notice of violation is mailed in accordance with this article. 
Photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system means a system that: 
(1)  Consists of cameras installed on the exterior of a school bus that work in conjunction with an automatic stop arm on the school bus, which stop arm, along with flashing warning lights and other equipment required by section 547.701(c) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, warns drivers that the school bus is stopped for the purpose of loading or unloading students; and 
(2)  Is capable of producing a recorded image depicting the license plate attached to the front or the rear of a motor vehicle that passes the school bus in violation of this article. 
Recorded image means a photographic or digital image recorded by a photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system that depicts the front or the rear of a motor vehicle. 
School bus shall have the meaning given that term in Section 541.201 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended. 
School bus stop arm notice of violation means a notice of a school bus stop arm violation issued under this article ("notice of violation"). 
School bus stop arm violation means a violation under section 82-412 of this article. 
Vehicle owner means: 
(1)  The owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation or the analogous department or agency of another state or country; 
(2)  The person named under section 82-412 of this article as the lessee of the motor vehicle at the time of a school bus stop arm violation; or 
(3)  The person named under section 82-412 of this article as holding legal title to the motor vehicle at the time of a school bus stop arm violation. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-409. - School bus stop arm violation as civil offenses. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle that is operated in violation of section 545.066 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, by passing a stopped school bus displaying the visual signals required by section 547.701(c) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, commits a civil offense and is liable for a civil fine per violation. 
(b)  The city council may contract with another local government(s) in accordance with Chapter 791 of the Texas Government Code to enforce and administer this section ("administrator"). The city or administrator shall implement and enforce this section and may establish such rules or regulations, not inconsistent with this section, as are necessary to effect this section. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-410. - Law enforcement officers—Powers, duties, and functions. 
(a)  The administrator shall appoint law enforcement officers to issue notice of violations. 
(b)  A law enforcement officer shall have the following powers, duties, and functions: 
(1)  To review recorded images from the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system to determine whether a student school bus stop arm violation has occurred; 
(2)  To order a notice of violation to be issued based on evidence from the recorded images; and 
(3)  To void recorded images due to lack of evidence or due to knowledge that a defense described in section 82-412 of this article applies. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-411. - Hearing officers—Powers, duties, and functions. 
(a)  The director shall designate hearing officers to administratively adjudicate all school bus stop arm violations for which a notice of violation has been issued. 
(b)  A hearing officer shall have the following powers, duties, and functions: 
(1)  To administer oaths; 
(2)  To accept admissions to, and to hear and determine contests of school bus stop arm violations under this article; 
(3)  To issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, which orders may be enforced by a municipal court; 
(4)  To assess civil fines, penalties, and other costs for a school bus stop arm violation under of this article; and 
(5)  To waive penalties assessed for a student safety/school bus stop arm violation under this article. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-412. - School bus stop arm violations as civil offenses; defenses; presumptions. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle that is operated in violation of section 545.066 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, by passing a stopped camera-enforced school bus displaying the visual signals required by section 547.701(c) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, commits a civil offense and is liable for a civil fine as assessed in section 82-419 of this article. 
(b)  It is a defense to a charge of a school bus stop arm violation under this section: 
(1)  The school bus was not operating the visual signals required by section 547.701(c) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended; 
(2)  The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the lawful order or direction of a law enforcement officer; 
(3)  The operator of the motor vehicle was in the process of passing the school bus before the school bus operated a visual signal described by section 547.701(c) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended; 
(4)  The operator of the motor vehicle passed the stopped school bus so as to yield the right of way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle; 
(5)  The motor vehicle was being operated as an authorized emergency vehicle under Chapter 546 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, and the operator was acting in compliance with that chapter; 
(6)  The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle being operated by a person other than the vehicle's owner without the consent of the vehicle owner and proof is submitted to the hearing officer that the theft of the motor vehicle had been timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency; 
(7)  The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was a stolen plate being displayed on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the plate had been issued and proof is submitted to the hearing officer that the theft of the license plate had been timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency; or 
(8)  The presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain, or other unusually hazardous road conditions existed that would have made compliance with this section more dangerous under the circumstances than noncompliance. 
(c)  It is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle depicted in the recorded image of a school bus stop arm violation for which a notice of violation is issued is the vehicle owner who committed the school bus stop arm violation. Proof of ownership may be made by a computer-generated record of the registration of the vehicle with the Texas Department of Transportation showing the name of the vehicle owner to whom state license plates were issued. This proof is prima facie evidence of the ownership of the vehicle by the vehicle owner to whom the certificate of registration was issued. 
(d)  A vehicle owner who is in the business of selling, renting, or leasing vehicles will not be liable for the civil school bus stop arm fines, penalties, and costs imposed by the city on a vehicle for sale or a rented or leased vehicle if the vehicle owner presents evidence establishing that the vehicle depicted in the recorded image was at the time of the alleged violation being rented, leased, or test driven by another person. Evidence sufficient to establish that the vehicle was being rented, leased, or test driven includes: 
(1)  The true name, address, and driver's license number and state of issuance of the person renting, leasing, or test driving the vehicle at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was taken; or 
(2)  A true copy of the lease or rental agreement in effect at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was taken. 
(e)  Evidence presented under subsection (d) of this section must be presented through oral testimony or by affidavit under penalty of perjury. Evidence through oral testimony must be presented at the administrative adjudication hearing. Evidence by affidavit under penalty of perjury may be presented by mail. 
(f)  If the owner of a vehicle presents evidence under subsections (d) and (e) of this section establishing that the vehicle depicted in the recorded image was being rented, leased, or test driven at the time of the violation, the vehicle owner may not be held liable for civil school bus stop arm fines, penalties, and costs, and the law enforcement officer shall send the notice of violation to the test driver or lessee who is presumed to have committed the school bus stop arm violation. An owner of a vehicle who fails to comply with subsections (d) or (e) of this section will be treated as any other vehicle owner and will be liable for the school bus stop arm violation. 
(g)  If, at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was taken, the vehicle depicted in the recorded image was owned by a person in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles and the vehicle was being rented or leased to an individual, the vehicle owner shall, within 30 calendar days after the date the notice of violation is received, provide to the administrator the name and address of the individual who was renting or leasing the motor vehicle depicted in the recorded image and a statement of the period during which that individual was renting or leasing the vehicle. This information must be provided regardless of whether the vehicle owner provides evidence under subsections (d) and (e) of this section that the vehicle was being rented, leased, or test driven at the time of the school bus stop arm violation. 
(h)  A registered vehicle owner named in the notice of violation who did not hold legal title to the motor vehicle at the time of a school bus stop arm violation will not be liable for the civil school bus stop arm fines, penalties, and costs imposed by the city on that vehicle if the registered vehicle owner presents evidence establishing that another vehicle owner held legal title to the vehicle at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was taken. Evidence sufficient to establish that the vehicle was owned by another vehicle owner at the time of the school bus stop arm violation includes: 
(1)  The true name, address, and driver's license number and state of issuance of the vehicle owner who held legal title to the vehicle at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was taken; or 
(2)  A true copy of any purchase or sale documentation (including proof of transfer of title) showing the name of the vehicle owner who held title to the vehicle at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was taken (that vehicle owner's address must also be provided if not contained in the documentation). 
(i)  Evidence presented under subsection (h) of this section must be presented through oral testimony or by affidavit under penalty of perjury. Evidence through oral testimony must be presented at the administrative adjudication hearing. Evidence by affidavit under penalty of perjury may be presented by mail. 
(j)  If the registered vehicle owner named in the notice of violation complies with subsections (h) and (i) of this section, the registered vehicle owner may not be held liable for civil school bus stop arm fines, penalties, and costs, and the law enforcement officer shall send the notice of violation to the vehicle owner who held legal title to the vehicle at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was taken. A registered vehicle owner named in the notice of violation who fails to comply with subsections (h) and (i) of this section will be treated as any other vehicle owner and will be liable for the school bus stop arm violation. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-413. - School bus stop arm notice of violation; form. 
(a)  A notice of violation serves as the summons and complaint for purposes of the procedures. 
(b)  The notice of violation must be on a form prescribed by the administrator and must include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(2)  A description of the violation alleged; 
(3)  The date and time of the violation and the location of the school bus where the violation occurred; 
(4)  The notice of violation issuance date; 
(5)  The registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(6)  A copy of a recorded image of the violation that includes a depiction of the registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(7)  The amount of the civil fine to be imposed for the violation; 
(8)  The date by which the civil fine must be paid or the request for an administrative adjudication hearing must be made; 
(9)  A statement that, in lieu of requesting an administrative adjudication hearing, the vehicle owner named in the notice of violation may pay the civil fine in person or by mail at an address designated on the notice of violation; 
(10)  A notification that the vehicle owner has the right to contest the imposition of the civil fine in an administrative adjudication hearing by submitting a written request for an administrative adjudication hearing within 30 calendar days after the date the notice of violation is issued; 
(11)  A notification that any request by the vehicle owner to have the law enforcement officer who issued the notice of violation present at the hearing must be made in writing as part of the written request for an administrative adjudication hearing and that failure to timely make this request constitutes a waiver of the vehicle owner's right to require the presence of the law enforcement officer at the hearing; 
(12)  A notification that failure to pay the civil fine or to timely request an administrative adjudication hearing is considered an admission of liability for the school bus stop arm violation, is a waiver of the vehicle owner' s right to appeal the imposition of the civil fine, and will result in the assessment of appropriate civil fines, penalties, and costs; 
(13)  A statement that the vehicle owner will incur a late payment penalty if the vehicle owner fails to pay the civil fine or request an administrative adjudication hearing within 30 calendar days after the date of issuance of the notice of violation; and 
(14)  A notification that an arrest warrant may not be issued for failure to timely pay the civil fines, penalties, and costs and that the imposition of the civil penalty may not be recorded on the vehicle owner's driving record. 
(c)  The original or any copy of a notice of violation is a record kept in the ordinary course of city business and is prima facie evidence of the facts contained in the notice of violation. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-414. - Service of a school bus stop arm notice of violation. 
In order to impose a civil fine under this article, the law enforcement officer shall mail a notice of violation to the owner of the motor vehicle involved in the school bus stop arm violation within 30 calendar days after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred. The notice of violation must be mailed, by United States mail, to: 
(1)  The vehicle owner's address as shown on the registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation; 
(2)  If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the vehicle owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous to the Texas Department of Transportation; 
(3)  If the vehicle owner presents evidence or information that the vehicle was being rented, leased, or test driven at the time of the school bus stop arm violation, the address provided by the seller or lessor; or 
(4)  If the registered vehicle owner presents evidence that another person had legal title to the vehicle at the time of the school bus stop arm violation, the address provided. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-415. - Answering a school bus stop arm notice of violation. 
(a)  A vehicle owner who has been issued a notice of violation shall, either personally or through a representative, answer to the charge of the school bus stop arm violation by the date shown on the notice of violation, which date may not be earlier than the 30th day after the mail date of the notice of violation issued. An answer may be made in any of the following ways: 
(1)  An admission of liability with a payment of the applicable civil fine, and any additional penalties and costs; 
(2)  A written request to schedule an administrative adjudication hearing to either deny liability or admit liability with an explanation before a hearing officer, along with a $25.00 administrative adjudication hearing filing fee; 
(3)  A denial of liability accompanied by an affidavit under penalty of perjury presenting evidence that the vehicle depicted in the recorded image was at the time of the school bus stop arm violation being rented, leased, or test driven; 
(4)  A denial of liability accompanied by an affidavit under penalty of perjury presenting evidence that the person named in the notice of violation was not the owner of the vehicle depicted in the recorded image at the time of the violation; or 
(5)  A written request, along with a $25.00 administrative adjudication hearing filing fee for permission from a hearing officer to adjudicate by mail. 
(b)  Payment of the civil fine and any additional penalties and costs may be made in person or by mailing notice of violation to the address shown on the notice of violation, accompanied by payment of the amount shown on the notice of violation. Payment by mail may be made only by credit card, money order or check. Payment of the civil fine and all penalties and costs assessed under this article operates as a final disposition of the school bus stop arm violation charge, except when payment is made to reset a scheduled hearing as assessed under section 82-417 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-416. - Adjudication by mail. 
(a)  If a vehicle owner charged with a school bus stop arm violation shows good cause for not attending a hearing, either personally or through a representative, the hearing officer may permit the matter to be adjudicated by mail, which adjudication must be completed within 90 calendar days after the date of issuance the mail date of the notice of violation. 
(b)  Letters, memoranda, affidavits, photographs, and other documentary materials will be admissible as evidence for the purposes of adjudication by mail. The hearing officer may exclude from consideration any material that is not relevant to the adjudication of the alleged violation. 
(c)  Failure of the vehicle owner to proceed with adjudication by mail after requesting and receiving permission to adjudicate by mail is an admission of liability for the school bus stop arm violation and will subject the vehicle owner to the appropriate civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed by the hearing officer. 
(d)  If a hearing officer determines that adjudication cannot proceed by mail, the hearing officer shall advise the vehicle owner by first class mail that the vehicle owner must appear to answer the charge at a hearing. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-417. - Hearings for disposition of a school bus stop arm notice of violation; notice of violation and photographic record images as prima facie evidence. 
(a)  Every hearing for the adjudication of a school bus stop arm violation under this article must be scheduled for a hearing date held before a hearing officer not later than the 30th day after the administrator receives written request for an administrative adjudication hearing. The administrator shall notify, by mail, the vehicle owner requesting a hearing of the date, time, and location of the hearing. 
(b)  A vehicle owner may make a written request to reset a scheduled administrative adjudication hearing. A scheduled administrative adjudication hearing may not be reset more than once unless the vehicle owner pays an amount equal to the applicable civil fine for the school bus stop arm violation, plus an additional $20.00 hearing rescheduling fee. A receipt shall be issued for any amounts paid under this subsection. After presentation of the receipt, all amounts paid will be refunded to the vehicle owner if the hearing officer, or a municipal court on appeal, finds that the vehicle owner is not liable for the school bus stop arm violation. 
(c)  At a hearing, the notice of violation and the recorded image produced by the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system are prima facie proof of the school bus stop arm violation, and the law enforcement officer who issued the notice of violation is not required to be present unless requested by the vehicle owner charged or by the hearing officer. A vehicle owner's request to have the law enforcement officer, who issued the notice of violation, present at the hearing must be in writing as part of the vehicle owner's request for an administrative adjudication hearing. 
(d)  At a hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider evidence presented by the administrator and by the vehicle owner. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to a hearing under this article, and the hearing officer shall make a decision based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing, after giving due weight to all presumptions and prima facie evidence established by this article or other applicable law. 
(e)  At a hearing, the reliability of the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system used to produce the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation may be attested to by affidavit of the administrator, officer or employee of the city, or of the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system, who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. An affidavit of the administrator, officer or employee of the city that alleges a school bus stop arm violation based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded image is admissible in a proceeding under this article, is evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit, and is prima facie evidence of the violation alleged in the notice of violation. 
(f)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall immediately render an order or decision, either by: 
(1)  Finding the vehicle owner liable for the school bus stop arm violation, assessing the applicable civil fine and any penalties and other costs in accordance with this article, and notifying the vehicle owner of the right to appeal to municipal court; or 
(2)  Finding the vehicle owner not liable for the school bus stop arm violation. 
(g)  An order of a hearing officer must be in writing, signed, and dated by the hearing officer and filed with the administrator in a separate index and file. The order may be recorded using computer printouts, microfilm, microfiche, or similar data processing techniques. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-418. - Failure to answer a school bus notice of violation or failure to appear at a hearing. 
(a)  The failure of a vehicle owner charged with a school bus stop arm violation to answer to the charge within 30 calendar days after the mail date or to appear at any hearing, including a hearing on appeal, when required to appear is an admission of liability for the school bus stop arm violation, and the hearing officer, or the municipal court in the case of an appeal, shall issue an order of liability and assess against the vehicle owner the appropriate civil fines, penalties, and other costs. 
(b)  Within seven calendar days after filing an order of liability issued under this section, a hearing officer or the entity with which the city contracts, shall mail notice to the vehicle owner of the order. The notice must be sent by United States mail to the address required for service of a notice of violation or to the address of the vehicle owner last known to the hearing officer. The notice must include a statement of: 
(1)  The amount of the civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed; and 
(2)  The right to appeal to municipal court. 
(c)  Regardless of any other provision of this article, a vehicle owner who receives a notice of violation and who fails to timely pay the civil fine or fails to timely request an administrative adjudication hearing is still entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing if: 
(1)  The vehicle owner submits to the hearing officer a written request for a hearing, accompanied by an affidavit and filing fee assessed under section 82-415 of this article, that attests to the date on which the vehicle owner received the notice of violation; and 
(2)  The written request, filing fee assessed under this article, and affidavit are submitted to the hearing officer within 30 calendar days after the date the vehicle owner received the notice of violation. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-419. - Civil fines for school bus stop arm violations; penalties and other costs; delinquent accounts. 
(a)  If a civil fine is assessed, it must be in accordance with this section. A fine may not be waived or modified by a hearing officer, or by a municipal court on appeal, when a vehicle owner is found liable for a school bus stop arm violation, except that additional penalties and other costs and fees may be added in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The owner of a motor vehicle liable for a school bus stop arm violation shall pay a civil fine of $300.00 for each violation. 
(c)  A $25.00 late penalty fee shall be assessed if the vehicle owner fails to answer a notice of violation within 30 calendar days after its date of issuance. 
(d)  A $50.00 failure to appear penalty shall be assessed if the vehicle owner fails to appear at a hearing scheduled to adjudicate the school bus stop arm violation. 
(e)  A $35.00 returned check fee shall be assessed against the vehicle owner for any check returned for non-sufficient funds. 
(f)  A penalty assessed under subsection (c) of this section may be waived by a hearing officer, or by a municipal court on appeal, if the vehicle owner can establish that: 
(1)  Through no fault of the owner: 
a.  No notice of the school bus arm sign violation was received as required by this article; 
b.  No notice of the hearing officer's order was received as required by this article; 
c.  Payment of the civil fine assessed for the civil fine assessed for the school bus stop arm violation was not posted in a timely manner; or 
(2)  The penalty was assessed in error. 
(g)  A vehicle owner whose account remains delinquent over 60 days may be turned over to a collection agency and may be charged a collection fee in an amount of 30 percent of the total amount due. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-420. - Appeal from hearing. 
(a)  A vehicle owner determined by a hearing officer at an administrative adjudication hearing to be liable for a school bus stop arm violation may appeal this determination to the municipal court by filing an appeal petition, along with a filing fee of $20.00, with the municipal court clerk or a deputy clerk before the 31st calendar day after the date the hearing officer's order is entered with the department. If the hearing officer's order is reversed, the $20.00 filing fee will be returned by the city to the appellant. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an appeal petition, the municipal court clerk or deputy clerk shall schedule an appeal hearing and notify all parties of the date, time, and location of the hearing. The enforcement officer or other authorized person who issued the notice of violation is not required to be present at the appeal hearing unless requested by the vehicle owner charged. A vehicle owner's request to have the law enforcement officer or other authorized person who issued the notice of violation present at the appeal hearing must be in writing and made as part of the appeal petition. Failure to timely make this request constitutes a waiver of the vehicle owner's right to require the presence of the enforcement officer or other authorized person at the appeal hearing. 
(c)  The appeal hearing must be a trial de novo in municipal court and is a civil proceeding. The decision of the municipal court is final. 
(d)  Service of notice of appeal under this section stays the enforcement and collection of any civil fines, penalties, and costs ordered by the hearing officer. An appeal petition must be accompanied by a notarized statement in which the vehicle owner agrees to pay all civil fines, penalties, and costs ordered by the hearing officer, if the vehicle owner is still found liable by the municipal court upon appeal. 
(e)  At an appeal hearing, the notice of violation and the recorded images produced by the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system are prima facie proof of the notice of violation, and the enforcement officer or other authorized person who issued the notice of violation is not required to be present unless requested by the vehicle owner. 
(f)  At an appeal hearing, the reliability of the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system used to produce the recorded images of the school bus stop arm violation may be attested to by affidavit of an officer or employee of the city, or of the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system, who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. An affidavit of an officer or employee of the city that alleges a school bus stop violation based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded images is admissible in a proceeding under this article, is evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit, and is prima facie evidence of the violation alleged in the notice of violation. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-421. - Effect on liability; exclusion of civil remedy; enforcement. 
(a)  The imposition of a civil fine under this article is not a conviction or criminal offense and may not be considered a conviction or criminal offense for any purpose. Failure to timely pay a civil fine may not result in an arrest warrant being issued for the vehicle owner and may not be recorded on the vehicle owner's driving record. 
(b)  A civil fine may not be imposed on the owner of a motor vehicle if the operator of the vehicle was arrested or was issued a criminal citation by a law enforcement officer under section 545.066 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, for the school bus stop arm violation recorded by the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system. 
(c)  The city attorney and administrator are authorized to file suit or take other action to collect any civil fines, penalties, late fees and costs assessed under this article. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Sec. 82-422. - Disposition of civil fines, penalties and costs assessed for school bus stop arm violations. 
Civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed under this article must be used to fund the automated school bus stop arm enforcement program, other programs designed to further student safety, or other traffic safety projects and improvements. 
( Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 11-4-2014 )  
Chapter 86 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Department of water and sewers, established, § 3.04; power of city to acquire property for water and sewer system, § 1.08; franchises and public utilities, art. VIII; gifts from public utility, § 9.01; notice of damage or injury required to preserve claim against city, § 9.04. 
Cross reference— Erosion and sedimentation control regulations, § 34-31 et seq.; flood damage prevention, § 42-31 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— General authority of city relative to water and sewer systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 402.002, 402.017. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 86-1. - Public improvement inspections; fees. 
(a)  No person shall commence construction of any street, alley, potable water line, sanitary sewer line, drainage facility or other improvement to be constructed in association with the use, development, or redevelopment of land within the city and which, upon completion of construction or installation of such improvement, the person intends to be accepted, owned, and maintained by the city as a public improvement, without first paying a public improvement inspection fee in the amount set forth in Appendix A of this Code. The city may suspend the issuance of any permits, certificates of obligation, or the granting of any other approvals with respect to the land being developed, redeveloped, or otherwise served by the improvements being constructed unless and until the required public improvement inspection fees are paid. 
(b)  The owner, developer, and contractor shall at all times during construction provide access to the public improvements being constructed to the director of public works, the director's designee, or other person with whom the city has contracted, for the purpose of inspecting such improvements to ensure compliance with all applicable federal, state, and city laws, ordinances, regulations, and design and construction standards. 
(c)  The fee authorized by this section shall not be assessed with respect to public improvements constructed using city funds pursuant to a construction contract between the city and the contractor constructing the improvements or when collection of such fee is otherwise waived pursuant to an agreement authorized by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 3459 , § 2, 8-15-2017)  
Secs. 86-2—86-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing standards, § 22-226 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-31. - Permit required for connection. 
A permit is required from any person who shall tap or connect with the water system of the city, or who shall turn on the water from such water system. 
(Code 1969, § 27-26)  
Sec. 86-32. - Bypass or connection between meter and main. 
No bypass or connection between any water meter and the water main shall be made, maintained or permitted. 
(Code 1969, § 27-28)  
Sec. 86-33. - Compliance with water service requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take or use water from the city waterworks system except under the terms and conditions specified under this article. 
(Code 1969, § 27-1)  
Sec. 86-34. - Tapping fees. 
For the purpose of establishing fair and equitable charges for tapping the city's water mains, tapping fees are established by the city and listed in appendix A for the following service: 
(1)  The fee collected for a temporary construction water meter (fire hydrant meter) shall be in an amount as established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code, plus a refundable security deposit which shall be in an amount as established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(2)  The fees for water main taps with meters are established in amounts as established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. The fee for a two-inch or larger size water tap shall be based upon the actual cost to be incurred by the city as estimated by the director of public works or his designated agent. 
(3)  The fee for water main taps, services, meters and accessory objects for other than one-family or two-family dwelling uses shall be as follows: 
a.  The cost to be incurred by the city, as estimated by the director of public works or his designated agent; including, but not limited to, all labor, materials, street cuts, borings, shoring, vaults, pavement repairs and any other costs incurred, due to the installation of meters, water main taps and water service mains. 
b.  Upon receipt of a request for water or sewer service, the director of public works may: 
1.  Provide all of the materials, labor and equipment necessary to furnish the requested service at the fees established by this article; or 
2.  Provide no materials, labor or equipment. If no materials, labor or equipment is provided, the director of public works shall furnish the customer with installation standards and equipment specifications, and the customer, at his own expense and at no cost to the city, may retain a plumbing or utility contractor to install the tap and service. All completed installations shall be left uncovered until an inspection can be conducted and the installation is approved by the director of public works or his agent. 
(4)  When a street cut or boring is necessary to furnish a tap to residential one-family and two-family dwelling uses, as defined by section 86-77(a)(3)c, a fee in an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code, per linear foot of such street cut or boring, shall be collected. 
(Code 1969, § 27-2; Ord. No. 1156, §§ 1—3, 9-12-1977; Ord. No. 1282, §§ 1—3, 12-3-1979; Ord. No. 2069, §§ 11, 12, 9-9-1993)  
Sec. 86-35. - Unauthorized furnishing of water to another. 
All owners and occupants of property are hereby prohibited from furnishing water to any person for any purpose whatsoever without the written consent of the building official. 
(Code 1969, § 27-8)  
Sec. 86-36. - Tampering with water service equipment. 
All meters, curb cocks, valves and meter boxes connected with the city waterworks mains and service pipes, including those furnished at the expense of the consumers or property owners, shall remain under the direct control of the building official. It shall be unlawful for any persons, other than those authorized by the building official, to connect, disconnect, move or tamper with any such meter, or to turn on or off the water to the curb cock valve or meter, or to open, move or tamper with any meter box, or for anyone to open any meter box in any way except with a regulation meter box key. 
(Code 1969, § 27-9)  
Sec. 86-37. - Access to hydrants, gathering valves, manholes, curb cocks, meters, or meter boxes required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon or about any fire hydrant, gathering valve, manhole, curb cock, meter or meter box connected with any water pipe of the city waterworks any obstruction, debris or structure of any kind, so as to prevent free access to such equipment at all times. 
(Code 1969, § 27-10)  
Sec. 86-38. - Misappropriation of city waterworks equipment or supplies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who uses or takes from the city waterworks any water supplies or property except in accordance with the rules and regulations as provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1969, § 27-11)  
Sec. 86-39. - Destruction of city water equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to unlawfully, wilfully or maliciously injure, deface or destroy any reservoir, machinery, pipes, hydrants, meter boxes, lids or other fixtures, properties or supplies belonging to the city waterworks. 
(Code 1969, § 27-12)  
Sec. 86-40. - Interference with water equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any water meter, service, main, standpipe, fire hydrant or any other waterworks property. 
(Code 1969, § 27-13)  
Sec. 86-41. - Tapping fire hydrant; changing valve connections. 
No fire hydrant shall be tapped, and no valves of city water connections shall be changed, except as may be installed upon written permission from the building official. 
(Code 1969, § 27-14)  
Sec. 86-42. - Connecting electricity to pipes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause, or permit to be made, any metallic connections, either directly or indirectly, with the water mains, lateral supply or service pipes of the city waterworks, or any private pipes, mains or laterals which are connected to or with any such water mains, lateral supply or service pipes of the city waterworks whereby any electrical current shall be communicated to or transmitted along or through any water main, lateral, pipes or wires of any metal of any sort that is a conductor of electricity that shall hereafter be metallically connected, bonded or joined to or with any water mains, lateral supply or service pipes of the city waterworks in violation of section 86-31. 
(Code 1969, § 27-15)  
Secs. 86-43—86-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CROSS CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 86-46. - Purpose; scope; intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to establish minimum requirements for the installation, repair, replacement, removal, inspection, and testing of potential points of contamination or pollution to the potable water system of the city. 
(b)  Scope. This division shall apply to all land, properties and/or premises located in the city or any land, property and/or premises that is served by the water system of the city. 
(c)  Other ordinances or codes. If any other ordinance or code of the city conflicts with this division and the standards and regulations established in this division, the higher or stricter standard or regulation shall apply. 
(d)  Intent. It is declared to be the intent of this division to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public by regulating and controlling connections to the potable water system of the city and to prohibit any connection to the potable water system that has a potential for contamination or pollution of the potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 1, 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-47. - Cross connection standards. 
(a)  Every source of pollution or contamination or potential source of pollution or contamination from any contaminant which originates from or is located at a residential or commercial establishment, which is connected to any public water supply or which provides water to the public, shall be removed or be equipped with the protection required under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of all property owners and persons in charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this division. In the event of any changes to the plumbing system, it is the responsibility of the property owners to notify the city. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(100), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-48. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. If a word or term used in this division is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the most recently adopted edition of the city plumbing code and/or the Manual of Cross Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California, ninth edition: 
Air gap means a physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or appurtenance and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. 
Atmospheric vacuum breaker backflow prevention device and atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB) mean a device used to prevent backsiphonage in nonhealth hazard conditions. This device cannot be tested and cannot prevent backpressure backflow. 
Auxiliary supply means any water source or system, other than the public water system, that may be available in the building or on the property, including groundwater or surface waters used for industrial, irrigation or any other purpose. 
Backflow means the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases or substances into the city's water system. 
Backflow prevention assembly means an assembly to counteract backpressure or prevent backsiphonage. 
Backpressure means any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow and the introduction of fluids, mixtures or substances from any source other than the intended source. 
Backsiphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
Commercial establishment means property or location which is used primarily for manufacture, production, storage, wholesaling or retailing of services which are or may be placed in the flow of commerce, or any property or location which is used primarily for the provision of any service. 
Contaminants means any foreign material, solid or liquid, not common to the potable water supply which makes the water unfit or undesirable for human or animal consumption. 
Contamination means the admission of contaminants into the potable water supply system. 
Cross connection means any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it is possible for any nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions. 
Cross connection control device means any nationally approved or recognized device placed upon any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, which is designed to prevent nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water, or other substances, from entering into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions. 
Customer service inspection means an inspection designed to inspect and detect any actual or potential point of contamination of the potable water system, cross connection hazards and/or exceeding of the lead action level in solder or flux, pipe or pipe fittings. 
Degree of hazard means the low or high hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential cross connections as follows: 
(1)  Health hazard means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
(2)  High hazard means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that potentially could allow a substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water supply. 
(3)  Low hazard means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that potentially could allow a substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to one's health to backflow into the potable water supply. 
(4)  Pollution hazard means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. Maximum degree of intensity of pollution which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances. 
(5)  System hazard means an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or consumer's potable water supply or of a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
Director means the city manager, or the city manager's designee, who is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
Double check detector backflow prevention assembly and double check detector (DCDA) mean an assembly composed of a line-size approved double check assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow. 
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly and double check assembly and double check (DC) mean an assembly which consists of two independently acting, approved checkvalves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. 
Fireline tester means a tester who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on firelines only. 
General tester means a tester who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on any domestic, commercial, industrial or irrigation service except firelines. 
Mobile unit means any operation, which may have the potential to introduce contaminants into a potable water system from a mobile source. These operations include, but are not limited to, carpet-cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles, street-cleaning vehicles, liquid-waste vehicles, power-wash operations and pest-control vehicles. 
Nonresidential use means water used by any person other than a residential customer of the water supply and includes fire protection systems, heating and cooling systems in multifamily complexes and all uses not specifically included in residential uses as defined in the city zoning ordinance. 
Point-of-use isolation means the appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at which the actual or potential cross connection exists. 
Pollution means an impairment of the quality of the public potable water supply which does not create a hazard to the public health, but which does adversely affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable water for domestic use. Also defined as low hazard. 
Potable water supply means any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use. 
Premises means any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and structures located on it. 
Premises isolation means the appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water system and the water user. 
Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly and pressure vacuum breaker (PVB) mean an assembly which provides protection against backsiphonage, but does not provide adequate protection against backpressure backflow. The assembly is a combination of a single checkvalve with an AVB and can be used with downstream resilient seated shutoff valves. In addition, the assembly has suction and discharge gate valves and resilient seated test cocks which allows the full testing of the assembly. 
Public water system and system mean any public or privately owned water system, which supplies water for public domestic use. The system will include all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment used in the process of producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly and reduced pressure principle assembly or RP assembly (RP) mean an assembly containing two independently acting approved checkvalves together with a hydraulically operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the checkvalves and at the same time below the first checkvalve. The assembly shall include property located resilient seated test cocks and a tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valve at the end of the assembly. 
Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly and reduced pressure detector (RPDA) mean an assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow. 
Representative of the water system means a person designated by the city to perform cross connection control duties that shall include, but are not limited to, cross connection inspections and water use surveys. 
Residential use means water used by any residential customer of the water supply and includes single-family dwellings, duplexes and apartments where the individual units are each on a separate water meter. See "nonresidential use" for other connections in residential zoning districts. 
Service connection means the point of delivery which the water purveyor loses control of the water. 
Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker (SVB) means an assembly containing an independently operating, internally loaded checkvalve and independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the checkvalve. This assembly is to be equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly. 
Tester means a person that is a TNRCC certified backflow prevention assembly tester approved by and registered with the city. 
Thermal expansion means heated water that does not have the space to expand. 
TNRCC means the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission. 
Used water means water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the service connection. 
Water use survey means a survey conducted or caused to be conducted by the local authority designed to identify any possible sources of contamination to the potable water supply. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(101), 6-27-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-49. - Protection required; installation. 
(a)  All potential points of contamination shall be removed or protected by an approved assembly or device that will prevent the contamination of the potable water supply. An approved assembly or device may be used to prevent potential contamination in each of the following circumstances, but is in no way limited to the following circumstances: 
(1)  The nature and extent of any activity on the premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity on the premises, or materials stored on the premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply. 
(2)  Premises having one or more cross connections and the cross connections are protected by an atmospheric vacuum breaker device (AVB). 
(3)  Internal cross connections are present that are not correctable. 
(4)  Intricate plumbing arrangements that are present which make it impractical to ascertain whether cross connections exist. 
(5)  There is unduly restricted entry so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to ensure that cross connections do not exist. 
(6)  Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations in the judgment of the city. 
(7)  An appropriate cross connection survey report form has not been filed with the city community services department upon request of the city. 
(8)  A fire suppression system that is connected to the city's water system. 
(9)  All new construction if deemed necessary in the customer service inspection. The type of assembly required will be determined by the degree of hazard. 
(10)  When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be installed at the service connection that supplies water for public domestic use. 
(11)  Any used water return system. 
(12)  If a point-of-use assembly has not had the testing or repair done as required by this division, a premises isolation assembly will be required. 
(13)  If it is determined that additions or alterations have been made to the plumbing system without obtaining proper permits, premises isolation may be required. 
(14)  All multistory buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank. 
(15)  Retrofitting will be required on all high hazard connections and wherever else the city deems necessary to retrofit. 
(16)  Where the potable water system is connected to any auxiliary supply. 
(b)  The backflow prevention assembly protection which is required under this division shall be any of the duly nationally recognized and authorized backflow prevention assemblies listed in a state-approved plumbing code, or as determined by the city. Each backflow prevention assembly must have been approved by the city prior to installation. Failure to obtain such approval prior to installation of the backflow prevention assembly may result in the backflow prevention assembly failing to meet final approval by the city. The city shall determine the type and location of backflow assembly to be installed within the area served by the city's water system. 
(c)  All backflow prevention assemblies installed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be installed in a manner designed to facilitate ease of testing and inspection by the city. Any currently installed backflow prevention assemblies which are located in inaccessible locations, or where the tester is subject to physical danger, shall be relocated to approved locations following current national guideline standards. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(102), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-50. - Multiple connections. 
Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy for supply and/or fire protection will be required to install a backflow assembly on each of the additional service lines to the premises. The type of assembly will be determined by the degree of hazard that could occur in the event of an interconnect between any of the buildings on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(103), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-51. - Right-of-way encroachment. 
(a)  No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any city right-of-way except as provided in this section. 
(1)  A backflow prevention assembly required by the city may be installed upon or within any city right-of-way only if the owner proves to the city that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, installing it in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities, and obtains a permit from the city. The city retains the right to approve the location, height, depth, enclosure, and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation. 
(2)  All permits and inspections required by the city Code to perform work in the right-of-way shall be obtained. 
(3)  The city shall not be liable for any damage done to or caused by an assembly installed in a right-of-way. 
(4)  A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's expense, relocate a backflow prevention assembly which encroaches upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street or utility construction or repairs for purposes of public safety. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he fails to relocate a backflow prevention assembly located in or upon any city right-of-way after receiving a written order from the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(104), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-52. - Testing of assemblies. 
(a)  The city shall require all backflow prevention assemblies to be inspected and tested in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Immediately after installations (residential, nonresidential). 
(2)  Whenever the assembly is moved (residential, nonresidential). 
(3)  A minimum of once a year (nonresidential). 
(4)  Premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one year, prior to reoccupancy (nonresidential). 
(5)  Immediately after repairs (residential, nonresidential). 
(b)  All assembly testing shall be performed by a state-certified backflow prevention assembly tester, registered and approved by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this division. Persons and occupants of premises which are provided water service by the city, either directly or indirectly, shall allow the city or its representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, testing, records examination, or in the performance of any of their duties. Where persons or occupants of premises have security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the persons and occupants of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(d)  The city is not liable for damage to a backflow prevention assembly, which may occur during testing. 
(e)  A water use survey may be conducted at any establishment located in the city which is served by a public water supply or which provided water to the public. Upon determination that the establishment falls under the provisions of this division and requires a backflow prevention assembly, a notice to abate the condition or to install the proper backflow prevention assembly shall be issued. 
(f)  It is the responsibility of the person who owns or controls property to have all assemblies tested in accordance with this division. Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the regulatory authority deems necessary. 
(g)  All results from assembly testing by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall be placed on a form that is furnished by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(105), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-53. - Thermal expansion. 
It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion, if a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(106), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-54. - Pressure loss. 
Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly is not the responsibility of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(107), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-55. - Residential service connections. 
Any person who owns or controls any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross connection will be required to eliminate the actual or potential cross connection or have an approved backflow assembly installed in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(108), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-56. - Rental properties. 
Any person who owns or controls property is responsible for the installation, testing and repair of all backflow assemblies on their property. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(109), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-57. - Customer service inspection. 
(a)  Pursuant to TNRCC water system regulations, a customer service inspection for cross connection control shall be completed by the city prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Water service to a newly constructed facility. 
(2)  After any material improvement to buildings or premises. 
(3)  Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises. 
(4)  When deemed necessary by the city. 
(b)  Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a new construction facility until after the customer service inspection is completed. 
(c)  Temporary water service which poses a potential cross connection threat to the potable water supply shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(110), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-58. - Air gap separation. 
Air gaps provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and should be utilized at all locations where high hazard substances are at risk of entering the potable water system. 
(1)  An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel and in no case less than one inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a 45-degree angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses are not allowed. 
(2)  Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior approval from the regulatory authority and must be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(3)  Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when spaced from the inside edge of the spout opening a distance greater than three times the diameter of the effective opening for a single, or a distance greater than four times the effective opening for two intersecting walls. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(111), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-59. - Installation guidelines and requirements for backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  Generally. To ensure proper operation and accessibility of all backflow prevention assemblies, the following national guideline requirements shall apply to the installation of these assemblies. A permit is required for the installation, replacement or relocation of any backflow prevention device. 
(1)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the current TNRCC rule and these regulations. The assembly installer must obtain the required plumbing permits and have the installation inspected by the city. 
(2)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed inside of the building unless otherwise addressed in this division or prior written approval has been obtained from the city. 
(3)  At facilities which require a backflow prevention assembly to be installed at the point of delivery of the water supply, such installation of the assembly must be before any branch in the line and on private property located just inside the boundary between the city right-of-way and the landowner's property. The city may specify other areas for installation of the assembly. Assemblies that must be installed or are located on city rights-of-way are the responsibilities of the business or entity that the water line is serving. 
(4)  The assembly must be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions. 
(5)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the city. 
(6)  All vertical installations of backflow assemblies must have prior approval by the city. 
(7)  Assemblies that are larger than four inches and installed more than five feet above floor level must have a suitable platform for use by testing or maintenance personnel. 
(8)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall not be installed above a ceiling or in a concealed space without prior approval from the city. 
(9)  All assemblies installed eight feet or higher must have a suitable platform and a permanent ladder for use by testing or maintenance personnel. 
(10)  Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line must not be installed. 
(11)  Lines should be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly. 
(12)  All facilities that require continuous, uninterrupted water service and are required to have a backflow assembly must make provisions for the parallel installation of assemblies of the same type so that testing, repair and maintenance can be performed. 
(13)  The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damages resulting from installation, operation and/or maintenance of a backflow assembly. 
(14)  Upon completion of installation, the city shall be notified and all assemblies must be inspected and tested. All assemblies must be registered with the city and shall provide the date of installation, manufacturer, model, type, size, serial number of the backflow assembly, and initial test report. 
(b)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies (RPs). Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies (RPs) may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. The RP is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. The RP shall be effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure. 
(1)  RPs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. 
(2)  The assembly must be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and must be located in an area where water damage to building or furnishing would not occur from relief valve discharge. The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damage caused by water discharge from an RP assembly. An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RP assemblies. 
(3)  No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed in a location that is subject to flooding or where the device could be submerged in a contaminated liquid. 
(4)  Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances as established in this division. Removable protective enclosures are typically installed on the smaller assemblies. 
(5)  Assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least a six-inch clearance on both drain sides and on top of the assembly, and 12 inches below and behind the assembly. All assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum of 12 inches on the back side, 24 inches on the test cock side, and the relief valve opening shall be at least 12 inches plus nominal size of assembly above the floor or highest possible water level removable top. 
(6)  All RP assemblies must be tested in accordance with this division. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. A permit must be obtained upon installation or replacement of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(7)  Alternate methods of compliance with these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the city. 
(c)  Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assemblies (RPDAs). Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assemblies (RPDAs) may be utilized in all installations requiring a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly and detector metering. 
(1)  RPDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for reduced pressure principle backflow assemblies (RP). 
(2)  The line-size RP assembly and the bypass RP assembly must each be tested. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the certified tester. 
(d)  Double check valve prevention assemblies (DCs). Double check valve backflow prevention assemblies (DCs) may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. 
(1)  DCs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for premises being served. 
(2)  Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two assemblies installed in parallel. Assemblies should be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the maximum water requirements while the two together will provide the maximum flow required. 
(3)  The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and maintenance. 
(4)  Assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least a six-inch clearance below and on both sides of the assembly. All assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum clearance of 12 inches on the back side, 24 inches on the test cock side, and 12 inches below the assembly. Pattern and double check valve assemblies shall be installed so that the checks are horizontal and the test cocks face upward. These clearance standards apply to all assemblies installed in enclosures, and meter boxes. 
(5)  Vertical installations of DCs are allowed only on sizes up to and including four inches that meet the following requirements: 
a.  Internally spring-loaded checkvalves. 
b.  Flow is upward through assembly. 
c.  Manufacturer states their assembly can be used in a vertical position. 
d.  Approved by the city. 
(6)  All DCs must be tested in accordance with this division. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. A permit is required upon installation, replacement or relocation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(7)  Alternate methods of compliance with these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the city. 
(e)  Double check detector backflow prevention assemblies (DCDAs). Double check detector backflow prevention assemblies (DCDAs) may be utilized in all installations requiring a double check valve assembly and detector metering. 
(1)  DCDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for double check valve assemblies (DCs). 
(2)  The line-size DC assembly and the bypass DC assembly must each be tested. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the certified tester. 
(f)  Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (PVBs). Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (PVBs) may be utilized at point-of-use protection only and where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. PVBs protect against backsiphonage only and shall not be installed where there is potential for backpressure. 
(1)  Assembly shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches above the highest downstream piping. 
(2)  PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from water discharge. 
(3)  The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum clearance of 12 inches all around the assembly. 
(4)  All PVBs must be tested in compliance with this division. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. A permit is required for the installation, replacement or relocation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(5)  Alternate methods of compliance with these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the regulatory authority. 
(g)  Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (SVBs). Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (SVBs) may be utilized in all installations requiring a pressure vacuum breaker. SVBs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(112), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-60. - Fire suppression systems. 
(a)  All new installations of fire suppression systems which utilize the city's potable water supply shall have installed an approved backflow prevention device according to the degree of hazard. 
(b)  All fire-line detector double check valve backflow prevention assemblies must be installed inside the building. 
(c)  An approved double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA) or reduced pressure detector assemblies (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through during each 24-hour period, unless an alternate method has been approved in writing by the city. An RPDA must be installed if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system. 
(d)  All costs associated with this division and the purchase, installation, testing and repair of DCDA or RPDA devices is the responsibility of the property owner and/or persons in charge of any premises. 
(e)  Upon the approved installation of the DCDA or RPDA device, a cross connection test report completed by a licensed fireline tester must be sent to the attention of the city and must include the information required by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(113), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-61. - Fire hydrant protection. 
(a)  An approved double check valve backflow prevention assembly (DCD) or reduced pressure detector assemblies (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire hydrant water meters which are being used for a temporary water supply during any construction or other uses which would pose a potential hazard to the public water supply. An RPDA must be installed if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into the system. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use and rental of a fire hydrant water meter to abide by the conditions of this division. All fire hydrant meter rentals shall meet the current requirements as provided for by the city. 
(c)  Only city fire hydrant water meters with approved backflow prevention assemblies are allowed to be used within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(114), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-62. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  Property owner. It is the responsibility of all property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this division and to comply with the following: 
(1)  The payment of all costs associated with this division and the purchase, installation, testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(2)  Installing and maintaining all backflow prevention assemblies in accordance with this division and acceptable industry practice. 
(3)  The annual testing of all backflow prevention assemblies in nonresidential establishments. Such testing must be conducted by a certified cross connection tester who is registered with the city. 
(4)  Maintaining all backflow prevention assemblies in proper working order at all times, including repair as required. 
(5)  Maintaining all backflow prevention assemblies in a manner which allows them to be tested by a method that has been approved by the regulatory authority. 
(6)  Keeping all records related to backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and repair on the premises for a minimum of three years. 
(b)  Certified backflow prevention assembly tester. The certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Annually register with the regulatory authority and pay the required fee. 
(2)  Maintain testing equipment in proper working condition. Recalibration of test equipment must be performed every 12 months. 
(3)  Maintain the design or operation characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly. 
(4)  Ensure that devices are tested according to accepted industry practice and TNRCC regulations. 
(5)  Enter required testing data, including test gauge serial numbers, on cross connection test forms obtained from the regulatory authority. 
(6)  Report test results to the regulatory authority within 30 days of testing. 
(7)  Provide a copy of the completed test report to the property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises. 
(8)  Maintain testing and/or repair records for a minimum of three years. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(115), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-63. - Backflow prevention assembly tester certification; registration required. 
Only approved TNRCC licensed backflow prevention assembly testers can test backflow prevention assemblies in the city. Testers must register annually with the city, provide proof of TNRCC certification, and provide proof that testing equipment is able to maintain a calibration of plus or minus 0.2 psid accuracy and pay an annual, nonrefundable, tester registration fee as referenced in section 86-67. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(116), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-64. - Compliance for lawn irrigation. 
For all lawn irrigation system installations a permit shall be required. Such permit shall be issued by the building inspection department. Installation requirements must comply with the current city plumbing code and/or guidelines for the appropriate device found in this division. Interconnections of the potable water supply with an alternate water source is prohibited unless appropriate backflow protection is installed. High hazard backflow protection devices must be installed if any mechanical injection stations are used with the irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(117), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-65. - Mobile units. 
The connection of a mobile unit to any potable water system is prohibited unless such connection is protected by an air gap or an approved backflow prevention assembly. Prior approval and annual device testing of any backflow prevention assembly must be received from the city before connecting to any potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(118), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-66. - Enforcement. 
(a)  City manager to enforce provisions. This division shall be enforced by the city manager or the manager's designated representatives. 
(b)  City to inspect assemblies; water service and certificate of occupancy not provided until assemblies tested and operational; city not liable for damage. The city shall inspect and cause to be tested all backflow prevention assemblies installed pursuant to the requirements of this division. For new facilities, permanent water service shall not be provided until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. Except in cases where the testing of backflow prevention assemblies must be delayed until the installation of internal production or auxiliary equipment, the regulatory authority shall not approve a certificate of occupancy until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. The city shall not be liable for damage caused by any backflow prevention assembly as a result of the inspection or testing. 
(c)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, alter, repair, remove, convert, move, improve or use any equipment regulated by this division in violation of this division. A person commits an offense: 
(1)  If there is failure to maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this division. 
(2)  If there is failure to comply with a repair order issued by the city. 
(3)  If backflow from premises owned, operated or managed by the person enters the public water supply system. 
(4)  If there is a failure to pay any fees required by this division. 
(5)  By violating any section of this division. 
(6)  If discontinued or disconnected water service to premises under this division is reinstated except as directed by the city. 
(7)  If he is in charge of any facility and allows an unregistered tester to perform testing work at his establishment. 
(8)  By testing any backflow prevention assembly within the city without being registered with the regulatory authority. 
(9)  By testing any backflow prevention assembly within the city without being certified by the TNRCC. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this division or any amendment thereto shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in municipal court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00 for each offense; and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Disconnection of utilities. If, at any time, a degree of hazard, other than a low hazard, is found to exist at a building, structure or premises and the degree of hazard is such that there exists an immediate threat to the health of the general public, the city may require the immediate disconnection of the water service to the premises. If the degree of hazard is such that there is not an immediate threat to the health of the general public, after notification of the violation has been made to the owner and/or occupant of the building and the violation is not corrected, the city may require that the water service be disconnected to the premises. 
(f)  Revocation of registration. A certified tester's registration may be reviewed and revoked by the city if it is determined that the tester has: 
(1)  Falsely, incompletely, or inaccurately reported assembly reports; 
(2)  Used inaccurate gauges; 
(3)  Used improper testing procedures; or 
(4)  Created a threat to public health or the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2531, § 2(119), 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 86-67. - Fees. 
(a)  The fees to be collected upon approval of an application for the installation, relocation or replacement of cross connection control devices shall be equal to the plumbing, mechanical, electrical, irrigation, and fire sprinkler permit fee schedule in the development fee schedule of the city as listed in appendix A. 
(b)  A cross connection control and backflow prevention device registration fee shall be collected for each device connected to the potable water system as listed in appendix A. 
(c)  An annual fee to be collected for the registration of certified backflow prevention assembly testers performing work within the city is listed in appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 2531, §§ 3—5, 6-27-2000)  
DIVISION 3. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3104, § 1, adopted Oct. 4, 2010, amended Div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, §§ 86-68—86-74, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for full derivation. 
 
Sec. 86-68. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aesthetic water use means water use of ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools and water gardens. 
Commercial water use and institutional water use mean water use which is integral to the operations of institutional, nonprofit establishments, government, and commercial entities such as retail establishments, hotels, motels, restaurants, office buildings and construction metering. 
Conservation means those practices, techniques and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
Customer means any person, company or organization using water supplied by the city, or listed as a customer on the city's water billing account. 
Domestic water use means water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry or institution. 
Drought contingency plan or plan means the provisions set forth in this division. 
Industrial water use means the use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
Landscape irrigation use means water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, rights-of-way and medians. 
Nonessential water use means water uses that are not essential nor required for the protection of public, health, safety and welfare, including: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields and golf courses, except otherwise provided under the drought contingency plan; 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle; 
(3)  Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(4)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)  Flushing gutters or permitting excessive water to run in any gutter or street; 
(6)  Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life; and 
(7)  Failure to repair a controllable leak within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak. 
(Ord. No. 3104, § 1, 10-4-2010)  
Sec. 86-69. - Authorization. 
The city manager or his designee is authorized and directed to implement the provisions of the drought contingency plan set forth in this division upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare and is further authorized to: 
(1)  Initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this division which measures are fully enforceable under this chapter; and 
(2)  Implement additional measures deemed necessary to ensure public health and safety after filing a written summary of the proposed additional measures with the city secretary and placed with the subject ordinance if the initial measures imposed by the city manager pursuant to this division are insufficient to improve water supply conditions to adequately meet public health and safety requirements; and 
(3)  Take such measures as reasonable and necessary to obtain a temporary alternative water source including, but not limited to, bottled water or trucked water from an alternate supply source if the city water system experiences internal equipment failures, distribution problems, system outage or contamination from the supply source. 
(Ord. No. 3104, § 1, 10-4-2010)  
Sec. 86-70. - Public information. 
(a)  Customer involvement. The goal of this plan is to minimize the cost and inconvenience associated with reducing water demand. Customer input is always welcomed and may be expressed during regularly scheduled city council meetings or by calling city's public works department at city hall. 
(b)  Notices. The city, by and through its department of public works, shall periodically provide the public with information about the conditions under which each stage of the drought contingency plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage by way of utility bill inserts, press releases or such other means as the director of public works may determine. All customers are presumed to have received notice of water conservation measures undertaken pursuant to this division upon the issuance of notice in accordance with this section. 
(c)  Public education. The city, by and through its department of public works, shall periodically provide the public with information about the drought contingency plan by way of utility bill inserts, press releases or such other means as the director of public works deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 3104, § 1, 10-4-2010)  
Sec. 86-71. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or customer to violate any provision of this division. Any person or customer violating or failing to comply with any provision of this division including, but not limited to, using water from city's water system in a manner otherwise prohibited during the imposition of measures by the city manager under stage 3 or stage 4 as described in section 86-73 shall be fined, upon conviction, in an amount not more than $1,000.00. Each separate incident of prohibiting watering on the same day shall constitute a separate offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Violations of restrictions regarding the use of water authorized by this division may result in a citation to be issued with a fine in the following amounts: 
(1)  First citation: up to $100.00. 
(2)  Second citation: up to $500.00. 
(3)  Third and subsequent citation: up to $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 3104, § 1, 10-4-2010)  
Sec. 86-72. - Application. 
The provisions of the drought contingency plan shall apply to all persons, customers and property served by or using water provided by the city. The terms "person" and "customer," as used in the drought contingency plan, include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations and all other legal entities. 
(Ord. No. 3104, § 1, 10-4-2010)  
Sec. 86-73. - Water conservation stages. 
No customer shall make, cause, use or permit the use of water received from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to the provisions of this division, or in excess of the use permitted by the city manager in accordance with the provisions of this division. The following is the criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages: 
(1)  Stage 1—Water Awareness. Stage 1—Water Awareness water conservation measures may be implemented by the city manager with a goal of reducing total water use by five percent in the event the city water system experiences (i) a reduction in available water supply, (ii) water production or distribution system limitations, (iii) supply source contamination, (iv) system outage due to failure or damage of major water system components (e.g., pumps) or (v) is not otherwise able to maintain adequate levels of water storage for fire-fighting purposes. Stage 1—Water Awareness water conservation measures shall be implemented by the city manager if the City of Dallas notifies its customer cities (i) it is experiencing unforeseen circumstances with its pumping facilities and/or reservoirs, (ii) it is experiencing supply source contamination, (iii) its total water supply in connected lakes or the western reservoirs or eastern reservoirs drops below 65 percent of Dallas Water Utilities' share of the total conservation storage, or (iv) customer supply demand on Dallas Water Utilities' water distribution system exceeds 85 percent of the system's delivery capacity for four consecutive days. 
a.  Measures available. The city manager may request voluntary customer compliance with one or more of the following water conservation measures upon the city manager's determination that circumstances warrant implementation of Stage 1—Water Awareness measures: 
1.  Reduction in frequency of watering new and first-year landscaping and foundations. 
2.  Reduction in frequency of washing or rinsing of vehicles and recommend use of bucket/container, handheld hose with positive shutoff valve or commercial carwash. 
3.  Reduction of excessive runoff from landscape areas. 
4.  Reduction in frequency in draining and refilling of swimming pools and ornamental fountains. 
5.  Reduction in hosing off paved areas, buildings, windows or other surfaces. 
6.  Reduction of all other nonessential water use. 
b.  Termination criteria. Stage 1—Water Awareness conservation measures may be terminated: 
1.  At the discretion of the city manager if the measures were implemented by the city manager at the city manager's discretion because of internal problems within the city water system; or 
2.  Upon receipt of notice from the City of Dallas that the conditions giving rise to its request to implement Stage 1—Water Awareness measures have ended. 
(2)  Stage 2—Water Watch. Stage 2—Water Watch water conservation measures may be implemented by the city manager with a goal of reducing total water use by five percent in the event the city water system experiences (i) a reduction in available water supply, (ii) water production or distribution system limitations, (iii) supply source contamination, (iv) system outage due to failure or damage of major water system components (e.g., pumps) or (v) is not otherwise able to maintain adequate levels of water storage for fire-fighting purposes. Stage 2—Water Watch water conservation measures shall be implemented by the city manager if the City of Dallas notifies its customer cities (i) it is experiencing unforeseen circumstances with its pumping facilities and/or reservoirs, (ii) it is experiencing supply source contamination, (iii) its total water supply in connected lakes or the western reservoirs or eastern reservoirs drops below 55 percent of Dallas Water Utilities' share of the total conservation storage, or (iv) customer supply demand on Dallas Water Utilities' water distribution systems exceeds 90 percent of the system's deliverable capacity for three consecutive days. 
a.  Measures available. The city manager may request voluntary customer compliance with one or more of the following water conservation measures upon the city manager's determination that circumstances warrant implementation of Stage 2—Water Watch measures: 
1.  Continue conservation measures available from stage 1. 
2.  Reduction in frequency of watering new and first-year landscaping and foundations. 
3.  Reduction of excessive runoff from landscape areas. 
4.  Further reduction in frequency in draining and refilling of swimming pools and ornamental fountains. 
5.  Further reduction in all other nonessential water use. 
6.  If the conservation measures implemented in subsections (1) and (2)a.1.-5. are in the opinion of the city manager ineffective in sufficiently improving water supply conditions, the city manager may seek additional voluntary conservation measures, such as restricting the washing or rinsing of vehicles to commercial carwashes or use of bucket/container, handheld hose with positive shutoff valve. 
b.  Termination criteria. Stage 2—Water Watch conservation measures may be terminated: 
1.  At the discretion of the city manager if the measures were implemented by the city manager at the city manager's discretion because of internal problems within the city water system; or 
2.  Upon receipt of notice from the City of Dallas that the conditions giving rise to the request to implement Stage 2—Water Watch measures have ended. 
(3)  Stage 3—Water Warning. Stage 3—Water Warning water conservation measures may be implemented by the city manager with a goal of reducing total water use by five percent or, at the discretion of the city manager, a greater percentage, in the event the city water system experiences (i) a reduction in available water supply, (ii) water production or distribution system limitations, (iii) supply source contamination, (iv) system outage due to failure or damage of major water system components (e.g., pumps) or (v) is not otherwise able to maintain adequate levels of water storage for fire-fighting purposes. Stage 3—Water Warning water conservation measures shall be implemented by the city manager if the City of Dallas notifies its customer cities (i) it is experiencing unforeseen circumstances with its pumping facilities and/or reservoirs, (ii) it is experiencing supply source contamination, (iii) its total water supply in connected lakes or the western reservoirs or eastern reservoirs drops below 45 percent of Dallas Water Utilities' share of the total conservation storage, or (iv) customer supply demand on Dallas Water Utilities' water distribution system exceeds 95 percent of the system's deliverable capacity for two consecutive days. 
a.  Measures available. If the city manager declares that the conditions for implementation of Stage 3—Water Warning water conservation measures exist, the following mandatory water use reductions shall become effective: 
1.  The use of water for the following purposes shall be prohibited: 
i.  Operation of ornamental fountains; 
ii.  Allowing excess runoff from landscape areas; 
iii.  Draining and refilling of swimming pools; 
iv.  Hosing off paved areas, building, windows, or other surfaces; 
v.  Washing or rinsing of vehicles at any location other than a commercial car wash unless using a bucket/container for water and a handheld hose with an automatic shut-off when the hose is not being held. 
2.  Issuance of permits by the city for new swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, ornamental ponds and fountain construction shall be suspended. 
3.  If the water use restrictions in subsections (3)a.1 of this section are determined by the city manager to have not been sufficiently effective in improving water supply conditions or achieving the goal in water conservation intended to be achieved by such measures, the city manager may require that all landscape and other outdoor water usage at each service address be limited to three days a week, based on the last digit of the metered service physical street address, with the designated addresses and permitted watering days to be as follows: 
Last Digit of 
Address 	Allowed Landscape 
Water Days 
1, 3, 5, 7, 9 	Monday, Wednesday, Friday 
0, 2, 4, 6, 8 	Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday 
Sunday—no watering (storage recovery day) 
 
4.  If the water use restrictions in subsections (3)a.1.—(3)a.3. of this section are determined by the city manager to have not been sufficiently effective in improving water supply conditions or achieving the goal in water conservation intended to be achieved by such measures, the city manager may require that all landscape and other outdoor water usage at each service address be limited to five days per month, based on the last digit of the metered service physical street address, with the designated addresses and permitted watering days to be as follows: 
Last Digit of 
Address 	Allowed Landscape 
Water Dates 
Last Digit of Address 	Allowed Water Dates 
0 and 5 	5th, 10th, 15th, 20th, 25th, 30th 
1 and 6 	1st, 6th, 11th, 16th, 21st, 26th 
2 and 7 	2nd, 7th, 12th, 17th, 22nd, 27th 
3 and 8 	3rd, 8th, 13th, 18th, 23rd, 28th 
4 and 9 	4th, 9th, 14th, 19th, 24th, 29 th 
No watering will be allowed on the 31st 
 
Where there are no numbers, a number will be assigned by the city manager or his designee. These restrictions also apply to government facilities. Apartments, office buildings, golf course fairways, complexes or other property containing multiple addresses will be identified by the lowest address number. 
b.  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the restrictions set forth in subsection (3).a. above: 
1.  Foundations and new plantings (first year) of trees and shrubs may be watered with a handheld hose or soaker hose on any day for up to two hours; 
2.  Landscape nurseries may water planter stock only without restrictions; and 
3.  Golf course greens and tee boxes may be watered without restrictions. 
c.  Termination criteria. Stage 3—Water Warning conservation measures may be terminated: 
1.  At the discretion of the city manager if the measures were implemented by the city manager at the city manager's discretion because of internal problems within the city water system; or 
2.  Upon receipt of notice from the City of Dallas that the conditions giving rise to the request to implement Stage 3—Water Warning measures have ended. 
(4)  Stage 4—Water Emergency. Stage 4—Water Emergency water conservation measures may be implemented by the city manager with a goal of reducing total water use by five percent or, at the discretion of the city manager, a greater percentage, in the event the city water system experiences (i) a reduction in available water supply up to a repeat of the drought of record, (ii) water production or distribution system limitations, (iii) supply source contamination, (iv) system outage due to failure or damage of major water system components (e.g., pumps) or (v) is not otherwise able to maintain adequate levels of water storage for fire-fighting purposes. Stage 4—Water Emergency water conservation measures shall be implemented by the city manager if the City of Dallas notifies its customer cities that (i) it is experiencing unforeseen circumstances with its pumping facilities and/or reservoirs, (ii) it is experiencing supply source contamination, (iii) its total water supply in connected lakes or the western reservoirs or eastern reservoirs has dropped below 30 percent of Dallas Water Utilities' share of the total conservation storage, or (iv) customer supply demand on Dallas Water Utilities' water distribution system exceeds 98 percent of the system's deliverable capacity for one day. 
a.  Measures available. 
1.  All landscape watering at each service address shall be limited to five days per month, based on the last digit of the metered service physical street address, with the designated addresses and permitted watering days to be as follows: 
Last Digit of 
Address 	Allowed 
Water Dates 
0 and 5 	5th, 10th, 15th, 20th, 25th, 30 th 
1 and 6 	1st, 6th, 11th, 16th, 21st, 26 th 
2 and 7 	2nd, 7th, 12th, 17th, 22nd, 27 th 
3 and 8 	3rd, 8th, 13th, 18th, 23rd, 28 th 
4 and 9 	4th, 9th, 14th, 19th, 24th, 29 th 
No watering will be allowed on the 31st 
 
Where there are no numbers, a number will be assigned by the city manager or his designee. These restrictions also apply to government facilities. Apartments, office buildings, golf course fairways, complexes or other property containing multiple addresses will be identified by the lowest address number. 
2.  The use of water for the following purposes shall be prohibited: 
i.  Operation of ornamental fountains; 
ii.  Allowing excess runoff from landscape areas; 
iii.  Draining and refilling of swimming pools; 
iv.  Hosing off paved areas, building, windows, or other surfaces; 
v.  Washing or rinsing of vehicles at any location other than a commercial car wash; 
vi.  Watering foundations for longer than a two-hour period during off-peak hours, as determined by the Director of Public Works, by any means other than a soaker hose or handheld hose and on a day other than a day the landscaping on the property may be watered in accordance with subsection a.1., above; 
3.  The city manager may require commercial water customers to reduce water consumption by a percentage determined by the city manager or his designee. 
4.  Issuance of permits by the city for new swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, ornamental ponds and fountain construction shall be suspended. 
b.  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the restrictions set forth in subsection (4).a. above: 
1.  Landscape nurseries may water planter stock only without restrictions; and 
2.  Golf course greens and tee boxes may be watered without restrictions. 
c.  Termination criteria. Stage 4—Water Emergency conservation measures may be terminated: 
1.  At the discretion of the city manager if the measures were implemented by the city manager at the city manager's discretion because of internal problems within the city water system; or 
2.  Upon receipt of notice from the City of Dallas that the conditions giving rise to the request to implement Stage 4 - Water Emergency measures have ended. 
(5)  City manager declaration. Upon a finding by the city manager that "Stage 1—Water Awareness conservation conditions," "Stage 2—Water Watch conservation conditions," "Stage 3—Water Warning conservation conditions," or "Stage 4—Water Emergency conditions" exist or no longer exists, respectively, the city manager shall issue notice of the commencement and/or termination of the imposition of the water conservation measures in effect for the respective stage. Said notice shall be: 
a.  Posted on the city's official bulletin board and at all public entrances and exits of city hall and other city facilities where the public has access; 
b.  Posted on the city's internet website; and 
c.  Issued in a press release that is hand-delivered or sent by facsimile or electronic mail to: 
1.  The city's official newspaper for posting of public notices; and 
2.  The local ABC, CBS, NBC, and Fox affiliates in Dallas. 
d.  Published in the city's official newspaper. 
(6)  Contents of notice. Each notice issued in accordance with subsection (5) shall contain at least the following information: 
a.  The effective and/or termination date of the applicable water conservation stage which shall in no case be earlier than 12:01 a.m. on the day following the date the declaration is published in the city's official newspaper; 
b.  A brief description of the water conservation stage and the measures to be in effect and/or terminated; 
c.  The telephone number(s) of the office to contact regarding questions about the water conservation stage in effect; and 
d.  When the notice relates to the imposition of Stage 3—Water Warning or Stage Four—Water Emergency, the following sentence printed in bold type: "Failure to comply with the water conservation measures currently in effect is a violation of Chapter 86, Article III, Division 3 of the Farmers Branch Code of Ordinances and, upon conviction, may result in a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 per offense plus court costs." 
(Ord. No. 3104, § 1, 10-4-2010)  
Sec. 86-74. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances granted. The city manager, or designee, may in writing, grant temporary variances for the water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if (i) it is determined that the failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or (ii) the persons requesting such variance establishes to the satisfaction of the city manager that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Compliance with this division cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or the other condition for which the water conservation measure is in effect; and/or 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use as the conservation measure(s) from which variance is sought. 
(b)  Petitions for variances. Persons requesting a variance from the provisions of a mandatory water conservation measure shall file a petition for variance with the city not later than five days after notice is posted in accordance with subsection 86-73(5) of the commencement of a mandatory water conservation measure. All petitions for variance shall be submitted for review to the city manager or designee and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of petitioner(s); 
(2)  Purpose of water use; 
(3)  Specific water conservation measure(s) from which the petitioner is requesting relief; 
(4)  Detailed statement as to how the specific water conservation measure(s) adversely affect(s) the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with the identified conservation measure(s); 
(5)  Description of relief requested; 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought; 
(7)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date; and 
(8)  Other pertinent information. 
(c)  Conditions. Variances granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the city manager or designee: 
(1)  Variances shall include a timetable for compliance; and 
(2)  Variances granted shall expire when the water conservation measure is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
(d)  Action of city manager. In considering an application for a variance pursuant to this section, the city manager or designee may: 
(1)  Deny the application; 
(2)  Grant the variance requested; 
(3)  Grant in part and deny in part; or 
(4)  Craft an alternate variance that is intended to substantially achieve the reduction in water use that would be achieved by the water conservation measures from which variance is sought. 
(e)  Violations. No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this division occurring prior to the granting of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 3104, § 1, 10-4-2010)  
Sec. 86-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing standards, § 22-226 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-76. - Septic tanks; installation and maintenance. 
(a)  All septic tanks installed in the city shall be installed in accordance with the specifications and requirements of the county health officer. 
(b)  All septic tanks located in the city shall be maintained in accordance with the specifications and requirements of the county health officer so as to prevent such tanks from constituting a health hazard. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to permit any of his septic tanks to be in such a condition as to constitute a health hazard to the residents of the city. 
(Code 1969, §§ 27-5, 27-6)  
Sec. 86-77. - Sewer tap fees. 
(a)  For the purpose of establishing fair and equitable charges for tapping the city's sewer mains, when the city makes the tap, such charges shall be in amounts established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(1)  The fee for sanitary sewer main taps serving residential one-family and two-family dwelling uses shall be in amounts established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(2)  The fee for a sanitary sewer main tap larger than six inches shall be based upon the actual cost to be incurred by the city as estimated by the director of public works or his designated agent. 
(3)  The fee for a sanitary sewer main tap and sewer lateral and appurtenances to a customer's property line for other than residential one-family or two-family dwellings shall be as follows: 
a.  The actual cost incurred by the city, as estimated by the director of public works or his designated agent, including, but not limited to, all labor, materials, street cuts, boring, shoring, manholes, cleanouts, pavement repairs, and any other costs incurred due to the installation that is required to provide a sanitary sewage collection system to the customer's property. 
b.  Upon receipt of a request for water or sewer service, the director of public works may: 
1.  Provide all of the materials, labor and equipment necessary to furnish the requested service at the fees established by this article; or 
2.  Provide no materials, labor or equipment. If no materials, labor or equipment is provided, the director of public works shall furnish the customer with installation standards and equipment specifications, and the customer, at his own expense and at no cost to the city, may retain a plumbing or utility contractor to install the tap and service. All completed installations shall be left uncovered until an inspection can be conducted and the installation is approved by the director of public works or his agent. 
c.  Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meaning described in this subsection: 
1.  One-family dwelling means a dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one family and located on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract and occupied by one family. 
2.  Two-family dwelling means a single structure designed and constructed with two living units under a single roof for occupancy by two families. 
(4)  The fee to be collected upon an application for an estimate of water or sewer meter/tap charges wherein the exact price is not fixed by ordinance, such as meters two inches and larger, sewer taps larger than six inches, and street cutting fees, is an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  In regard to and in addition to subsection (a) of this section, when a pavement cut is necessary to make a sewer tap, an additional charge in an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code, per lineal foot of cut, shall be made for making such cut or boring. 
(c)  The city shall make all sewer service taps except those that are installed by the utility contractor in conjunction with the installation of the city's sewer mains. 
(Code 1969, § 27-2.1; Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 9-12-1977; Ord. No. 1282, § 3, 12-3-1979; Ord. No. 2069, § 13, 9-9-1993)  
Sec. 86-78. - Disconnection for violation. 
Whenever evidence determines that a sewer customer is violating the provisions of this article, the city shall disconnect the service of such offending customer from the city sewer system, after due notice. 
(Code 1969, § 27-4)  
Sec. 86-79. - Discharge of harmful wastes into system. 
(a)  Standards established in contract with Trinity River Authority. No user of the city sanitary sewer system shall discharge wastes into the system which are determined by the city manager, or his duly appointed representative, to be harmful to the sewer system of the city. In no event shall discharges be permitted which will result in the wastewater flow from the city into the system of the Trinity River Authority not satisfying the standards for quality established in that certain contract dated August 30, 1973, between the city and the Trinity River Authority. The quality of wastewater shall be measured at the point of entry as provided in such contract. Sections 4.01, 4.02, 4.03, 4.04 and 4.05 of such contract, entitled "Quality and Testing," are hereby adopted by reference and shall have the same effect in the interpretation of this section as if copied in this section in full. 
(b)  Actions by city upon violation of contract. Any discharge into the sanitary sewer system of the city which results in the wastewater flow of the city not meeting the requirements of the contract shall be immediately terminated upon notice or shall be given pretreatment by the discharger, prior to entry into the system, to the extent required by the city. 
(c)  Additional charges due to overstrength wastewater; distributed amongst offending system users. If additional charges are imposed upon the city because of its discharge of overstrength wastewater, such additional charges shall be distributed in an equitable manner among the users of the system who are either wholly or partially responsible for such overstrength wastewater. In distributing such charges, the city shall use that certain contract dated August 30, 1973, in determining the acceptable quality of wastewater and the amount of any additional charges to be assessed against individual users of the system. 
(d)  Testing of remedial actions; costs; apportionment. The cost of any testing of remedial action required of the city because of the discharge of overstrength wastewater shall be apportioned in an equitable manner among those users of the system who were found to be either wholly or partially responsible for such abnormal strength wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 1251, §§ 1—3, 6-18-1979)  
Secs. 86-80—86-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL WASTES  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 86-101. - Purpose and policy. 
This division sets forth uniform requirements for users of the public sewers of the City of Farmers Branch and enables the city to comply with its contract with the Trinity River Authority for sewage treatment services and enables the control authority to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use, and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(1)  To protect the general public and both publicly owned treatment works personnel and city personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment; 
(2)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works and the pretreatment program operations of the city; 
(4)  To enable the city to comply with its contract with the Trinity River Authority for sewage treatment services and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject; and 
(5)  To prevent the entrance of pollutants into watercourses within the city and to maintain the quality of water consistent with public health and enjoyment. 
This division shall apply to all users of the city sewer system. The division authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 1.1, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-102. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the administrative authority shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the administrative authority may be delegated by the administrative authority to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 1.2, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-103. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the designated meanings: 
• BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
• CFR - Code of Federal Regulations 
• COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand 
• EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
• gpd - gallons per day 
• mg/l - milligrams per liter 
• NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
• POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
• RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
• SIC - Standard Industrial Classification 
• TCEQ - Texas Commission on Environmental Quality 
• TPDES - Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
• TRA - Trinity River Authority 
• TSS - Total Suspended Solids 
• TTO - Total Toxic Organics 
• U.S.C. - United States Code 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 1.3, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-104. - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this division, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
Act or "the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
Administrative authority. The city manager or such other official designated by the city manager or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Approval authority. The regional administrator of the EPA, or the executive director of the TCEQ. 
Authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
City. The City of Farmers Branch or the City Council of the City of Farmers Branch. 
Composite sample. A sample that is collected over a 24-hour time period, formed either by continuous sampling or mixing discrete samples. The sample may be composited either as a time composite sample: composed of a minimum of 12 discrete sample aliquots collected at constant time intervals providing a representative sample irrespective of stream flow; or as a flow proportional composite sample: collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while maintaining a constant time interval between aliquots. 
Control authority. The Trinity River Authority of Texas. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial user. An industry that discharges wastewater into the wastewater system. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the Trinity River Authority's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Monitored industrial user. A user not classified as a significant industrial user, and is not, therefore, subject to certain other requirements contained in this division for significant industrial users, which produces industrial wastewater which the administrative authority determines should be monitored and regulated by permit. 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program of the Environmental Protection Agency, and/or the permit program of the state agency delegated to act on EPA's behalf with an approved pretreatment program. 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Trinity River Authority's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, contaminated groundwater or subsurface water, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). The term contaminated groundwater shall mean groundwater or subsurface water containing an organic contaminant at a concentration exceeding maximum contaminant levels for organic contaminants as set forth in 40 CFR Part 141. 
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in sections 86-121 and 86-122 of this division. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A "treatment works," as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1292) which is owned by the city and/or the control authority. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Shall. The word "shall", whenever used in this division, will be interpreted in its mandatory sense; "may" is permissive. 
Significant industrial user. 
(1)  A user defined as subject to national categorical pretreatment standards by the United States EPA; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug. Is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Storm sewer. All roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, watercourses, pipes, and storm drains, which are designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater. 
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Total toxic organics. The sum of the masses or concentration of the toxic organic compounds listed in 40 CFR 122 Appendix D, Table II, excluding pesticides, found in industrial users discharges at a concentration greater than 0.01 mg/L. Only those parameters reasonably suspected to be present, to be determined by the administrative authority, if any, shall be analyzed for with non-categorical industries. With categorical industries, TTO's will be sampled for as stipulated in the particular category or those parameters reasonably suspected to be present, to be determined by the administrative authority, where not stipulated. 
User. A source of indirect discharge or discharge. 
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 1.4, 2-17-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 86-105—86-120. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - General Sewer Use Requirements 
 
Sec. 86-121. - Prohibited discharges to the storm sewer. 
(a)  Discharge of water containing a pollutant. No person shall allow, permit, or otherwise cause, water containing a pollutant to infiltrate, discharge, or otherwise enter into the backfill of the storm Sewer, or storm sewer, or waters of the state. 
(b)  Discharge of waste. No person shall discharge waste to, into or adjacent to the storm sewer or waters of the state. 
(c)  Exception. This section will not apply to the city or its employees in the event of a discharge resulting from firefighting activities, water utility maintenance, and similar public health and safety activities conducted by the city. 
(d)  Defense. It is an affirmative defense that the discharge was composed entirely of unpolluted stormwater. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 2.1, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-122. - Prohibited discharges to the POTW. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 60°C (140°F) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having corrosive properties capable of causing damage or injury to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW, as per the specific prohibition in the applicable local limits in section 86-124. In no case shall wastewater containing a pH less than 5.5 be discharged unless the POTW is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges. 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 65°C (150°F) or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 40°C (104°F); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the administrative authority in accordance with section 86-144; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the POTW's NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, and subsurface drainage, unless specifically authorized by the administrative authority; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(15)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(16)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than that specified in the applicable local limits in section 86-124. 
(17)  Wastewater causing a reading on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the city's sewage collection system of more than ten percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter. 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 2.2, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-123. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated by reference, and the following conditions may apply: 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the administrative authority may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the administrative authority shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 2.3, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-124. - Local limits. 
The local limits for Molybdenum are held in reserve and shall not be enforced unless state or federal laws are enacted requiring such enforcement. No discharge may contain pollutants at concentrations greater than the concentrations listed below to the following systems(s): 
Toxic Pollutant 	TRA Central Instantaneous Maximum Limits (mg/l) 
Arsenic 	0.2 
Cadmium 	0.1 
Chromium 	2.9 
Copper 	2.3 
Cyanide 	0.5 
Lead 	0.9 
Mercury 	0.0004 
Molybdenum 	0.2* 
Nickel 	4.6 
Selenium 	0.1 
Silver 	0.8 
Zinc 	8.0 
Oil & Grease 	200 
Total Toxic Organics 	2.13 
pH 	5.5 to 11.0 Standard Units 
*Limits for Molybdenum held in reserve 
 
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The administrative authority may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. Any wastes which by strength or other characteristics could under any circumstance, in the opinion of the administrative authority, cause the city to violate any part of the contract, and contract amendments, between the city and the Trinity River Authority for the treatment of wastewater, shall be prohibited. If in the opinion of the administrative authority, such wastes can be safely pretreated, the administrative authority may approve the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with the provisions of this division for such wastes. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 2.4, 2-17-2003; Ord. No. 2964, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 86-125. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 2.5, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-126. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The administrative authority may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 2.6, 2-17-2003)  
Secs. 86-127—86-140. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Pretreatment of Wastewater 
 
Sec. 86-141. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in subdivision II of this division within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the administrative authority, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the administrative authority for review, and shall be acceptable to the administrative authority before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 3.1, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-142. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the administrative authority may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(b)  The administrative authority may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the administrative authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the administrative authority and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 3.2, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-143. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
At least once every two years, the administrative authority shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The administrative authority may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the administrative authority may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the administrative authority of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 86-191; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 3.3, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-144. - Hauled wastewater. 
Hauled wastewater may be introduced into the POTW only at locations and at times designated by the administrative authority or the Trinity River Authority. Such wastes shall not violate subdivision II of this division. Only those waste haulers which are approved by the administrative authority are authorized to discharge wastewater into the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 3.4, 2-17-2003)  
Secs. 86-145—160. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Wastewater Discharge Permit 
 
Sec. 86-161. - Application. 
(a)  Wastewater analysis. When requested by the administrative authority, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater by the deadline stipulated. The administrative authority is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(1)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the administrative authority and paying to the city an industrial discharge permit fee established by ordinance or resolution of the city council and set forth in Appendix A of this Code, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to subsection (c) below and the applicable fee may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(2)  The administrative authority may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(3)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this division and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 86-219 through 86-238. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this division and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, unless such user currently has a valid permit issued by the administrative authority, shall apply to the administrative authority for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection (e), and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 90 days of the effective date of this division except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the administrative authority. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with subsection (e), must be filed prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The administrative authority may require all users to submit, as part of an application, the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 86-186(b); 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the administrative authority to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(f)  Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(g)  Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The administrative authority will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 90 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application the administrative authority will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The administrative authority may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 2709, §§ 4.1—4.7, 2-17-2003; Ord. No. 3522, § 3, 9-11-2018 )  
Sec. 86-162. - Permit issuance process. 
(a)  Permit duration. Permits issued to significant industrial users which are issued under this chapter shall be valid for a specified time period, such period to be at the discretion of the administrative authority, but not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. 
(b)  Permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the administrative authority to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the POTW's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event will exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable, and provisions for informing the new owner or operator that a discharge permit exists and for providing a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit to the new owner or operator; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the administrative authority to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 5.2, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-163. - Permit appeals. 
Any person, including the user, may petition the administrative authority to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the administrative authority fails to act within 45 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint in writing with the administrative authority within ten days of administrative denial. The administrative authority shall schedule a hearing before the city council within 60 days of receipt of request. The decision of the city council shall be considered the final city action for purposes of judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 5.3, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-164. - Permit modification. 
The administrative authority may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, city or POTW personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 5.4, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-165. - Permit transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall not be transferred to a new owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 5.5, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-166. - Permit revocation. 
The administrative authority may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the administrative authority of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the administrative authority of changed conditions pursuant to section 86-190; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the administrative authority timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges, including applicable surcharges and cost recovery charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 5.7, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-167. - Permit periods and reissuance. 
All wastewater discharge permits issued to significant industrial users will be valid for a specified time period, such period to be at the discretion of the administrative authority, but not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. All permittees shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit renewal application prior to the permit expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 5.7, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-168. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the collection system, the city will enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (a), above, the administrative authority shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the administrative authority may deem necessary. 
(c)  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (a), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 86-124. The requirement shall specify that such chapter and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City of Farmers Branch Industrial Waste Ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the administrative authority; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the administrative authority; 
(4)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the administrative authority with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(5)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(7)  A provision ensuring the administrative authority access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the administrative authority; and 
(8)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 5.8, 2-17-2003)  
Secs. 86-169—86-185. - Reserved.  
Subdivision V. - Reporting Requirements 
 
Sec. 86-186. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the administrative authority a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the administrative authority a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the administrative authority, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 86-195. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 86-196. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M and submit a compliance schedule to the administrative authority for approval. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 86-187. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 86-161(f). 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.1, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-187. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection 86-186(b)(7): 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the administrative authority no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the administrative authority. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.2, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-188. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the administrative authority a report containing the information described in section 86-186(b)(4-6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 86-161(f). 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.3, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-189. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the administrative authority but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 86-161(f). 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the administrative authority, using the procedures prescribed in sections 86-195 and 86-196, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.4, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-190. - Reports of changed conditions. 
Each user must notify the administrative authority of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system, which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater before the change is made. 
(1)  The administrative authority may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 86-161(e). 
(2)  The administrative authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 86-161(g) or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 86-164 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow changes of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.5, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-191. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, opisodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the administrative authority and the Trinity River Authority of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the administrative authority, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.6, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-192. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the administrative authority as the administrative authority may require. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.7, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-193. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the administrative authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the administrative authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the administrative authority monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the administrative authority samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.8, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-194. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 86-190. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 86-186, 86-188 and 86-189. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the administrative authority, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.9, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-195. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.10, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-196. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the administrative authority may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.11, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-197. - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.12, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-198. - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the administrative authority. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 6.13, 2-17-2003)  
Secs. 86-199—86-215. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VI. - Compliance Monitoring 
 
Sec. 86-216. - Right of entry: Inspection and sampling. 
The administrative authority, control authority, TCEQ, EPA, or their designated representative, shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the administrative authority, control authority, TCEQ, EPA, or their designated representative ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the administrative authority, control authority, TCEQ, EPA, or their designated representative, will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The administrative authority or control authority shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The administrative authority may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a minimum, annually to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the administrative authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the administrative authority or control authority access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(6)  In accordance with 40 CFR 403, the administrative authority shall inspect and monitor each permitted significant industrial user a minimum of once per year. If the administrative authority elects to perform compliance monitoring for the industry then the administrative authority will monitor the industry a minimum of semiannually. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 7.1, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-217. - Search warrants. 
If the administrative authority has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the administrative authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 7.2, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-218. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the administrative authority's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the administrative authority, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 8, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-219. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The administrative authority shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which during the previous 12 months were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; or 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); or 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the administrative authority believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; or 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the administrative authority's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; or 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; or 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; or 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the administrative authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 9, 2-17-2003)  
Secs. 86-220—86-235. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VII. - Enforcement Remedies 
 
Sec. 86-236. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. 
(1)  When the administrative authority finds that any user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the administrative authority may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within the timeframe specified in the notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by that user to the administrative authority. Submission of this plan in no way relieves that user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the administrative authority to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(2)  A notice of violation is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of a permit issued under this chapter or the person found violating this chapter. 
(b)  Consent orders. The administrative authority may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (c)and (d) below and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The administrative authority may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the administrative authority and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 15 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(d)  Administrative orders. When the administrative authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the administrative authority may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, water and/or sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Administrative orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. An administrative order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does an administrative order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of an administrative order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the administrative authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the administrative authority may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Emergency suspensions. The administrative authority may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonable appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The administrative authority may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the administrative authority may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of water and/or sewer connections, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The administrative authority may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the administrative authority that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection (g), above, are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the administrative authority prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsections (c) and (g), above. 
Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this subsection. 
(g)  Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in section 86-166, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to termination of discharge: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; or 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; or 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; or 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in subdivision II. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 86-236(c) why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the administrative authority shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 10, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-237. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. When the administrative authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the administrative authority may petition the appropriate court through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The administrative authority may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Any person found violating, or continuing to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the City of Farmers Branch for a maximum civil penalty of $2,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties may accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The administrative authority may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed the maximum amount set by the city as allowed by state law, per violation, per day, or imprisonment as decided by an appropriate court, or both. 
(2)  Any person who introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty not to exceed the maximum amount set by the city as allowed by state law, or be subject to imprisonment as decided by an appropriate court, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum amount set by the city as allowed by state law, per violation, per day, or imprisonment as decided by an appropriate court, or both. 
(4)  Any person is criminally responsible for a violation of this chapter if: 
a.  The person commits or assists in the commission of a violation, or causes or permits another person to commit a violation; or 
b.  The person owns or manages the property or facilities determined to be the cause of the illegal discharge under this chapter. 
A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this chapter. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The administrative authority may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the administrative authority may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the administrative authority is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(e)  Applicability of more stringent regulations. If national pretreatment standards, categorical or otherwise, more stringent than the discharge limits prescribed in this chapter are promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency for certain industries or dischargers, the more stringent national pretreatment standards will also be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 11, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-238. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The administrative authority may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the City of Farmers Branch, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the administrative authority to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Financial assurance. The administrative authority may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(c)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 12, 2-17-2003)  
Secs. 86-239—86-255. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VIII. - Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations 
 
Sec. 86-256. - Action brought in federal court only; upset provision. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (c), below, are met. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the administrative authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset, if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(f)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 13.1, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-257. - Action brought in municipal or state court only; act of God provision. 
(a)  An event that would otherwise be a violation that is caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe is not a violation. 
(b)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe shall have the burden of proof. 
(c)  In the event that subsections (a) and (b) of this section has been demonstrated the user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 13.2, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-258. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  (1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the administrative authority, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the administrative authority of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass, the administrative authority may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  (1)  If the bypass is prohibited, the administrative authority may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  The administrative authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the administrative authority determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 13.3, 2-17-2003)  
Secs. 86-259—86-265. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COST RECOVERY 
 
Sec. 86-266. - Fees. 
The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications. A permit application fee shall be paid by each applicant for a wastewater discharge permit prorated at $100.00 for every 12 months of the permit period established by the administrative authority; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 14.1, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-267. - Industrial waste charges. 
If the volume or character of the waste from a discharger to be treated by the POTW requires the collection, treatment, or other disposal facilities of the city to be improved, expanded, or enlarged in order to treat the waste or if additional cost is to be incurred by the city or TRA, the discharger shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger, pay in full, added costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste. 
The agreement entered into pursuant to this subsection shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Amortization of all capital outlay by city for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste; 
(2)  Operation and maintenance costs by city including salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals and supplies, proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, overhead and office expense. 
(3)  Amortization shall be completed in a five-year period and payment shall include all debt service incurred by city. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 14.2, 2-17-2003) 
_____ 
Sec. 86-268. - Surcharge. 
A surcharge shall be assessed each user discharging wastewater with BOD and TSS concentrations in excess of normal domestic sewage. The industrial wastewater surcharge shall be calculated using the following formula: 
SC = Q * 8.34 * [ a (BOD - 250) + b (TSS - 250) ] * c 
SC 	= 	Surcharge based on excess concentration in dollars 
Q 	= 	Flow in million gallons 
8.34 	= 	Conversion factor (8.34 lbs of water per gallon) 
BOD 	= 	Biochemical Oxygen Demand as determined by approved method 
TSS 	= 	Total Suspended Solids as determined by approved method 
250 	= 	Normal limits of BOD and TSS in domestic sewage 
a 	= 	Unit cost of BOD treatment in dollars per pound 
b 	= 	Unit cost of TSS treatment in dollars per pound 
c 	= 	Administrative overhead recovery factor to be periodically established 
 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 14.3, 2-17-2003) 
_____ 
Sec. 86-269. - Recovery of damage cost. 
Any discharger or user causing damage to, obstructing, or otherwise impairing the POTW or sanitary sewer system shall be liable for all expenses, losses, or damage caused by the dischargers or users activity which resulted in damage. The city shall bill the discharger or user for the costs incurred by the city or POTW for any cleaning, repair, or replacement caused by the activity resulting in damage to the system or POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 14.4, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-270. - Adjustments and billing of charges. 
(a)  The city will review and, if necessary, adjust charges at least annually to ensure that the costs deemed appropriate under this chapter are recovered properly. Increases in surcharge amounts will be retroactive for two billing periods and will continue for at least six billing periods unless subsequent tests determine that the charge should be further increased. 
(b)  For any discharger or user having a water utility account with the city, the city shall bill the discharger or user by the month and will show the industrial wastewater charges as a separate item on the regular bill for water and sewer charges. 
(c)  For any discharger or user not having an established water utility account, charges shall be billed at least annually or more frequently than annually if determined appropriate by the administrative authority. 
(d)  Should a discharger or user hold any portion of the industrial wastewater charges in dispute, for which payment has already been made, a review of the basis for these charges shall be made by the administrative authority. If, after review, the charges are found to be unjustified, a refund or credit will be given to the discharger or user according to city operational procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 14.5, 2-17-2003)  
Sec. 86-271. - Enforcement provisions of cost recovery charges. 
(a)  According to procedures established by applicable city ordinance, the city shall terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a discharger or user from the system upon failure of that discharger or user to pay any industrial wastewater charges. 
(b)  In addition to sanctions provided for by this chapter, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided by other city ordinances of the city for failure to pay for water and sanitary sewer services when due. 
(Ord. No. 2709, § 14.6, 2-17-2003)  
Secs. 86-272—86-275. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SERVICE RATES AND BILLING PROCEDURE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-276. - Water service rates. 
(a)  The monthly rates or charges for services furnished by the waterworks system of the city shall be in the schedule in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  For duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, apartment houses or any multifamily dwelling a minimum charge as established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code will be charged for each unit regardless of whether it is located in a single-family residence, duplex, apartment house or combination thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 27-29; Ord. No. 1114, § 1, 8-13-1976; Ord. No. 1130, § 1, 2-11-1977; Ord. No. 1158, § 1, 9-12-1977; Ord. No. 1355, § 1, 8-3-1981; Ord. No. 1405, § 1, 10-4-1982; Ord. No. 1521, § 1, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1712, §§ 1—5, 9-12-1977; Ord. No. 1735, § 1, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. 1795, § 1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 1841, § 1, 9-18-1989; Ord. No. 1962, § 1, 9-23-1991; Ord. No. 2006, § 1, 9-28-1992; Ord. No. 2077, § 1, 9-9-1993; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 9-6-1994; Ord. No. 2205, § 1, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 2278, § 1, 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 2411, § 1, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 86-277. - Sewer rates. 
(a)  The monthly rates or charges for services furnished by the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be in the schedule in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  All customers connected to the sanitary sewer system who have a source of water supply that is in addition to, or in lieu of, the city water supply must have a meter approved by the superintendent of utilities on such source if any water from such source enters the sanitary sewer system. The volume charge as set forth in appendix A of this Code shall be based on the sum of the volumes of water delivered by all sources of supply which may be discharged to the sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  Any user of the sanitary sewer system may have installed at their expense a separate water meter on the city water system if all the flow through such meter will be used for purposes which preclude such flow from entering the sanitary sewer system. The water flow through such separate meters will not be considered in determining sanitary sewer service charges. 
(d)  The volume charge as set forth in appendix A of this Code shall be for the discharge of normal strength wastewater having a biochemical oxygen demand not exceeding 250 milligrams per liter and suspended solids not exceeding 250 milligrams per liter. If the sewage flow from the city, measured at the point of entry to the Trinity River Authority System, is found to have a biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids content exceeding 250 milligrams per liter, and if a surcharge is imposed upon the city because of such overstrength sewage, the city may, at its option: 
(1)  Require a pretreatment of the wastewater discharged by any user found to be discharging wastewater having a biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids content exceeding 250 milligrams per liter to the extent required to prevent the total flow from the city from exceeding the surcharge limits, measured at the point of entry to the Trinity River Authority System, with the provision that no user shall be required to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids content of wastewater discharged by that user to less than 250 milligrams per liter; or 
(2)  Require that any users found to be discharging wastewater having a biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids content exceeding 250 milligrams per liter pay their pro rata share of any surcharge imposed upon the city. The proportionate part of the total surcharge to be paid by any user shall be determined with consideration given to the volume of wastewater discharged by the user, the concentration of biochemical oxygen demand of that user's wastewater above the base level of 250 milligrams per liter and the concentration of suspended solids of such wastewater above a base level of 250 milligrams per liter. 
(Code 1969, § 27-30; Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 8-13-1976; Ord. No. 1130, § 2, 2-11-1977; Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 9-12-1977; Ord. No. 1249, § 1, 5-21-1979; Ord. No. 1267, § 1, 9-17-1979; Ord. No. 1736, § 1, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. 1796, § 1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 1842, § 1, 9-18-1989; Ord. No. 1912, § 1, 10-1-1990; Ord. No. 1963, § 1, 9-23-1991; Ord. No. 2007, § 1, 9-28-1992; Ord. No. 2078, § 1, 9-9-1993; Ord. No. 2139, § 1, 9-6-1994; Ord. No. 2206, § 1, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 2279, § 1, 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 2412, § 1, 12-21-1998)  
Secs. 86-278—86-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BILLING PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 86-301. - Due date of water and sewer service bills; service fee for late payment. 
Consumers shall be billed for the water and sewer rates and charges once each month, at which time they shall become due and payable, and in case any user or customer shall not pay the rates and charges within 15 days of the billing date, the account will be considered as past due. Accounts not paid within 25 days of the billing date shall be charged a service fee of five percent of the total water and sewer bill. 
(Code 1969, § 27-31; Ord. No. 1114, § 1, 8-13-1976; Ord. No. 1130, § 1, 2-11-1977; Ord. No. 1158, § 1, 9-12-1977; Ord. No. 1355, § 1, 8-3-1981; Ord. No. 1405, § 1, 10-4-1982; Ord. No. 1521, § 1, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1712, §§ 1—5, 9-12-1977; Ord. No. 1735, § 1, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. 1795, § 1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 1841, § 1, 9-18-1989; Ord. No. 1962, § 1, 9-23-1991; Ord. No. 2006, § 1, 9-28-1992; Ord. No. 2077, § 1, 9-9-1993; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 9-6-1994; Ord. No. 2205, § 1, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 2278, § 2, 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 2411, § 2, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 86-302. - Failure to pay rates and charges; disconnection from service; service charge. 
If any user or customer of such service does not pay the rates and charges within 30 days of the mailing date and a bill has been rendered for the following month's rates and charges together with those for the preceding month, the entire amount due for the two months shall be paid within 15 days of the date the second bill was mailed. Failure to pay the entire bill within this 15-day period or to make satisfactory arrangements with the finance department for its payment will subject the service in question to be disconnected without further notice. After this period, there shall be charged and collected a service charge as established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 1969, §§ 27-32, 27-33; Ord. No. 1114, § 1, 8-13-1976; Ord. No. 1130, § 1, 2-11-1977; Ord. No. 1158, § 1, 9-12-1977; Ord. No. 1355, § 1, 8-3-1981; Ord. No. 1405, § 1, 10-4-1982; Ord. No. 1521, § 1, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1712, §§ 1—5, 9-12-1977; Ord. No. 1735, § 1, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. 1795, § 1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 1841, § 1, 9-18-1989; Ord. No. 1962, § 1, 9-23-1991; Ord. No. 2006, § 1, 9-28-1992; Ord. No. 2077, § 1, 9-9-1993; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 9-6-1994; Ord. No. 2205, § 1, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 2278, § 3, 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 2411, § 3, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 86-303. - Deposits for service. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain water or sewer service shall make application to the city, and before such person may be granted such service, they shall deposit a reasonable sum of money, this deposit to be determined by the finance department upon the basis of the probable monthly amount of water to be used by the applicant at the location for which application is made. No such deposit shall be for an amount less than the amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  Any person desiring water or sewer service for two weeks or less shall not be required to provide a deposit and shall be charged as listed in appendix A for consumption up to 5,000 gallons of water. Usage exceeding 5,000 gallons of water during the two-week period shall be billed at the water and sewer rates outlined in section 86-276. 
(c)  Apartment accounts shall be charged, as deposit, the larger of $100.00 or one-twelfth of the annual average bill at the service location. Deposits for new service locations will be based on average consumption for meters of equivalent size and usage within the city. 
(d)  Deposits on all accounts, except apartments, will be refunded after 12 consecutive months of good payment history. Good payment history is defined as no returned checks, penalty fees, or service charges during the 12-consecutive-month period. 
(e)  No deposit shall be required for new residential service for a teacher of the Carrollton-Farmers Branch Independent School District. 
(Code 1969, § 27-27; Ord. No. 1114, § 1, 8-13-1976; Ord. No. 1130, § 1, 2-11-1977; Ord. No. 1158, § 1, 9-12-1977; Ord. No. 1355, § 1, 8-3-1981; Ord. No. 1405, § 1, 10-4-1982; Ord. No. 1521, § 1, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1712, §§ 1—5, 9-12-1977; Ord. No. 1735, § 1, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. 1795, § 1, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 1841, § 1, 9-18-1989; Ord. No. 1962, § 1, 9-23-1991; Ord. No. 2006, § 1, 9-28-1992; Ord. No. 2077, § 1, 9-9-1993; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 9-6-1994; Ord. No. 2205, § 1, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 2278, § 4, 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 2411, § 4, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 2622, § 1, 9-10-2001; Ord. No. 2610, § 1, 5-21-2002)  
Secs. 86-304—86-335. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WATER AND SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS 
 
Sec. 86-336. - Purpose of article; where front foot rule equitable; no vested right; severability clause. 
The intent and purpose of this article is to provide an equitable charge for water and sanitary sewer connections as a proportionate distribution of the cost of water and sanitary sewer main extensions to serve property in the city on a front foot basis. In case a property or tract of land is so situated or shaped that the front foot rule creates an inequitable basis, as between it and other tracts of land in the city, then, in that event, the city shall determine the proper charge in accord with the intent and purpose of this article. No person shall acquire any vested right under the terms and provisions of this article. The terms and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be severable, in that if any section, phrase, word or part thereof shall be deemed to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 27-46)  
Sec. 86-337. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abutting foot means property contiguous and adjacent to a water and/or sewer line. 
Approach and off-site main mean water and/or sewer mains totally outside of a tract of land to be subdivided and developed for resale. A main adjacent to a tract of land to be subdivided and developed shall not be considered to be an approach main. 
Consumer means the actual user of water from a city water connection. 
Developer means the owner or agent of the owner subdividing and installing utilities to serve lots or tracts for resale or lease. 
Frontage means property abutting either side of a water and/or sewer line. 
Oversize cost means the difference between the actual cost of the main as built and the size of main determined to be the minimum size required to serve the subdivision. Only those mains larger than 12-inch mains shall be considered for oversize cost. Consideration shall then be given only if such larger mains are required to serve land not owned by the developer. 
Property owner means the record title holder of premises served with water from a connection by the city. 
(Code 1969, § 27-47) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-338. - Determination of pro rata charges. 
The amount of pro rata charge shall be determined by dividing the total cost of the particular water and/or sewer main extension by the total frontage, in feet, of all properties, including street intersections, which may be served by the main. If water and/or sewer mains are extended by the city, the total cost shall include a ten percent fee for engineering. The frontage of all platted property now satisfactorily connected to the water or sanitary sewer system shall be deducted from the total frontage in determining the respective water or sewer pro rata charge. 
(Code 1969, § 27-48)  
Sec. 86-339. - Application of pro rata charges. 
(a)  On lots or tracts of land which extend through from one street to another, with frontage on both streets, and where the distance between the street lines is 260 feet or more, then the pro rata charges herein provided for shall be paid on both frontages when a connection is secured to the lot or tract. 
(b)  Where lots or tracts are irregular in size or shape, then the pro rata charges shall be based upon equivalent rectangular lots or tracts using one front foot for each 150 square feet of area. 
(c)  Where lots or tracts are used for other than single-family residential purposes, then the pro rata charges provided in this section shall be paid on the frontage on all streets which the property may abut. 
(d)  Where lots or tracts are used for single-family residential purposes, and which abut upon two streets, the pro rata charges provided in this section shall be payable only on the shorter frontage on which a water or sewer main exists. 
(e)  Where lots or tracts are used for single-family residential purposes only, and have a depth greater than 150 feet, the pro rata charges herein provided shall be paid on the frontage on all streets which the property may abut minus 150 feet for each frontage in excess of one. 
(f)  For property in the state of development for which a building permit has been issued at the time of the passage of this ordinance, any pro rata charges due shall be at the rate in effect at the time the building permit was issued. A property owner eligible for a water or sewer main extension, and whose request had been accepted prior to the passage of this ordinance, shall be charged the pro rata charges due under the then applicable ordinance. 
(g)  In addition to the pro rata charges on water and sanitary sewer mains, the property owner must pay the tapping charges, as established by the city. 
(Code 1969, § 27-49)  
Sec. 86-340. - Extension of water and sewer lines for individual owners. 
(a)  Upon the request of the owner, or his agent, of a given lot or tract of land, for the purpose of this article known as the applicant accompanied by the payment of the charges due under this article, the city may extend or cause to have extended, lay or construct all necessary sanitary sewer and/or water mains, including necessary appurtenances, a maximum distance of 100 feet, excluding street intersections, plus the distance across the frontage necessary to provide the service for which application has been made. The applicant to be served shall be required to pay the charges provided for in this section. The owners of all intervening property served by the given main extension shall be required to pay the charges provided for in this section at such time as their property is connected to the mains thus laid. Where an applicant for service secures an extension and service under this particular option for main extension, he shall pay the pro rata charges on all property owned by him and which is served by the extension required. In applying the 100-foot rule, the required extension of main shall be figured in such manner as to leave out of the calculations that portion of any main adjacent to property already having other than a temporary service, and for which the pro rata charges thereon have been paid or credited under the terms of this article. 
(b)  An exception to the 100-foot rule shall be made where two or more individual applicants desire water and/or sanitary sewer service and the nearest applicant is more than 100 feet from the existing lines. In that case, the city may extend their mains upon payment of the charges due under this article, provided there is one customer for every 100 feet of such extension, excluding street intersections and that portion of the extension adjacent to property already having other than temporary water and/or sanitary sewer service. An exception to the 100-foot rule may also be made when an individual applicant is more than 100 feet from existing water and/or sewer mains and the city council approves such extension as being in the best interests of the city. 
(c)  The city shall not be responsible for extensions under the conditions of this section unless the necessary right-of-way in a street, alley or easement is available, at no charge to the city, for the construction and continued maintenance of the desired extensions. 
(Code 1969, § 27-50)  
Sec. 86-341. - Extension by special agreement with city council. 
(a)  No provision of this article shall prohibit the city council from entering into a special agreement or contract in a form acceptable to the city council for the extension of water and sewer mains, which will assist in the orderly and beneficial development of the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this section are not intended to apply to the extension of water and sewer mains for the normal development of property. This section is specifically reserved for those unusual cases in which the city council may provide a means for the extension of water and sewer mains which will be an integral part of the planned, future utility systems and, at the same time, provide for land development and improvement which would not otherwise be economically feasible. The provisions of this section are not intended to relieve the developer from his responsibilities as provided in section 86-342. 
(Code 1969, § 27-51)  
Sec. 86-342. - Extension of water and sewer mains for the development of property. 
(a)  After the final plat of a subdivision has been given approval by the city planning and zoning commission, and filed for record, the developer shall provide extensions of water and sewer mains under the provisions of this section. The developer shall be responsible for the design and preparation of construction plans for water and sanitary sewer facilities to serve the subdivision, including any approach mains that may be required. These plans shall conform in all details to the city's standards, as to the design, grade, location, size and quality of materials and construction. Plans and profiles shall be shown in scales in not less than one inch to 100 feet, horizontal and one inch to ten feet, vertical. Plans and profiles shall show clearly all surface improvements, all existing or proposed subsurface utility lines and obstructions, and street and alley grades, as approved by the director of public works. The engineer submitting the plans and profiles must be a registered professional civil engineer in the state, and he must affix his seal and signature to the tracings of all plans and profiles. One set of reproducible tracings of water and sewer plans shall be submitted to the director of public works for approval, together with two copies of the water and sewer plans and profiles, two copies of the plans and profiles of the storm sewers and street grades as approved by the director of public works, and one copy of the plat of the addition that has been recorded in the records of the county, and has been so stamped. Upon final approval, the tracings will be returned to the developer's engineer for the purpose of making such prints as he may require, after which the tracings shall be returned to become permanent property of the city. All plans, distributed to contractors, material suppliers, and those plans used during construction of the improvements, shall be prints of the tracings as approved by the director of public works. 
(b)  Upon approval of the plans by the city, the developer may enter into a contract with any individual, or may, himself, construct the system as so planned; provided, however, that the construction and installation of the water and sewer lines, or either of them, shall be supervised by inspectors of the city, to see that the installation is made in accordance with the plans and the city's standard specifications, which shall be a part of the installation contract. The developer shall furnish the director of public works with copies of the bids received, and payments made, for the installation of the water and sewer system, if he wishes to be eligible for any pro rata refunds to which he may be entitled under the terms of this article. Such bids shall show unit costs in sufficient detail to enable the construction costs of various segments of mains installed by the developer to be determined. The city retains the right to review the unit prices and to determine that the prices, as submitted, are representative of actual construction costs prevailing at the time. When the project is ready for construction, line grade stakes will be set by the developer's engineer, but these stakes will not be set until after the developer's engineer has properly staked, on the ground with iron pins, all pins, all points of curves, all points of tangency, all block corners and all easements within the subdivision. The developer shall furnish the city with the name of the contractor who is to install the water and sewer mains. The contractor shall not commence any work within the subdivision until authorized to do so by the director of public works. No installation of water or sewer mains shall be made at any location other than a dedicated street, alley or easement, running in favor of the city, which shall be filed of record by the owner of the addition. Any such installation, when made, shall become the property of the city, free and clear of all incumbrances, and any contract entered between the developer and a contractor shall provide for a performance bond, such as the city uses in its standard specifications, which shall be a part of such installation contract. The city shall be named as one of the beneficiaries in such bond. If the developer makes the installation himself, then he shall execute a performance bond in favor of the city, in the same form and conditioned in the same manner, as provided for in the standard contract documents used by the city in making of water and sanitary sewer installations. The city specifically reserves the option to advertise for bids and install all or any portion of extensions of water and sewer lines over 12 inches in size where the costs of such lines, as determined by the bids taken by the developer, are not considered reasonable. In those cases in which existing mains are in place, and are incorporated within the water and/or sewer system of the developer, the developer shall pay the city such pro rata charges as may be due under the terms of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 27-52)  
Sec. 86-343. - Refunds. 
(a)  All refunds provided for in this article shall be made on May 1, and include funds then accrued to the credit of the developers and others. The contract entered into by any property owner in the city, under the provisions of this article, shall be effective only for a period of five years after the date of the contract. No refunds will be made by the city to any applicant or contracting party after this five-year period has expired, nor shall the city ever be liable for payment of interest on any deposits, payments or refunds provided for in this section. 
(b)  Developers shall be eligible for refunds of certain portions of the costs incurred by them in the installation of water and sewer mains under certain conditions. For mains 12 inches and smaller, which have been constructed by the developer entirely at his own expense, as approach mains, and for mains lying along one or more sides of a subdivided tract, which serve property other than the subdivision for which the extensions were made, the developer shall be credited with refunds equal to the pro rata charges which may be collectable from other parties under the terms of this article. 
(c)  If such mains are larger than 12 inches in size, and if the developer did not receive a credit for oversize cost at the time of installation, he shall receive a credit for refund equal to the difference between the cost of such water and/or sewer main and one-half the cost of a 12-inch main, or such sizes as are required to serve the subdivision for which the extensions are required. 
(Code 1969, § 27-53)  
Sec. 86-344. - Temporary lines. 
Where temporary lines are constructed as an expedient to develop a particular area, such as across easements within the subdivision of which no frontage can be connected, or where sewers are constructed which otherwise are not required in the ultimate plan of development for the sanitary sewer system, the developer will bear the total cost without refund. 
(Code 1969, § 27-54)  
Sec. 86-345. - No funds available. 
In no event may the city be required to make extensions under the provisions of this article if there are no funds available on hand for the purpose. 
(Code 1969, § 27-55)  
Sec. 86-346. - Charges to be credited to water pro rata fund. 
Any and all sums of money hereafter collected as a pro rata charge or deposit for water and/or sewer extensions, at the rates set forth in this article, shall be credited to the water pro rata fund of the city and all refunds shall be paid from this same account. Interest earned on pro rata fund investments shall be used to accelerate the retirement of the city's water and sewer revenue bonds. 
(Code 1969, § 27-56)  
Sec. 86-347. - Pro rata charges for mains existing at the time of passage of this article. 
With the exception of those mains which have been installed under a contract with the city and which provide a definite repayment schedule as property is developed, the pro rata charges for connection to a water main existing at the time of passage of this article shall be an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code per front foot of the lot or tract of land to which water connections may be made. The pro rata charge for sewer connections under the same conditions shall be an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code per front foot of the lot or tract of land which such connections may be made. For those lots having building permits already issued, or other commitments made at the time of passage of this article, the pro rata charges shall be the same as those which have been previously agreed upon. 
(Code 1969, § 27-57)  
Sec. 86-348. - Lift stations and special installations. 
If a lift station or other special installations are required, such lift station or special installations shall be installed under separate agreements between the city and the developer. 
(Code 1969, § 27-58)  
Secs. 86-349—86-359. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LIQUID WASTE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 86-360. - Purpose and policy. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the generation, transportation and disposal of grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and septage, for the protection of the sanitary sewer system and the environment. The wastes regulated by this article do not include hazardous wastes or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid wastes. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 86-361. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the administrative authority shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the administrative authority may be delegated by the administrative authority to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 86-362. - Definitions. 
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings as used in this article: 
Administrative authority. The director of environmental health services or such other official designated by the director of environmental health services or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Approval authority. The regional administrator of the EPA or the executive director of the TCEQ as the context indicates. 
Approved. Accepted as satisfactory under the provisions of this article and given formal and official sanction by the approving authority. 
Disposal. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid or semisolid grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and/or septage into or on any land or water so that such waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwater. 
Disposal site. A permitted site or part of a site at which grease trap waste, grit trap waste, or septage is processed, treated and/or intentionally placed into or on any land at which will remain after closure. 
Disposer. A person who receives, stores, retains, processes, or disposes of liquid waste. 
Generator. A person who causes, creates, generates, or otherwise produces liquid waste. 
Grease trap. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum based oil, grease wastes and solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
Grease trap waste. Greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid and/or solid wastes removed from commercial operations by a grease trap. 
Grit trap. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum based oils, grease wastes and solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
Grit trap waste. Petroleum based oil, grease wastes and solids from commercial automotive or heavy machinery repair and/or washing facilities. 
Hazardous waste. Any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste (or combination of wastes), which because of its quality, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Have any of the following characteristics: toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or combustible, explosive or otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise improperly managed, and is identified or listed as a hazardous waste as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or by the Administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the federal "Solid Waste Disposal Act," as amended by the "Resource Conversation and Recovery Act of 1976" and as may be amended in the future. 
Liquid waste. Waterborne solids, liquids, and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, grit trap, chemical/portable toilet and/or septic tank and described as a grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage. 
Manager. The person conducting, supervising, managing, or representing the activities of a generator, transporter or disposer. 
Manifest system. The system consisting of a five-part trip ticket used to document the generation, transportation, and disposal of liquid. 
Owner. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
Permit. The formal written document issued to a person by the approving authority authorizing collection of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage. 
Permittee or permit holder. A person granted a permit under this article. 
Person. Shall have the same meaning as in section 86-104. 
POTW. Publicly-owned treatment works. 
Sanitary sewer. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not normally admitted. 
Septage. Wastes removed from a portable toilet, chemical or septic tank. 
Special wastes. Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that, because of its quality, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties, require special handling and disposal to protect the human health or the environment. 
Spill. The accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and septage. 
TCEQ. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
Tank. A device, designed to contain an accumulation of grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and septage which is constructed primarily of non-earthen materials (e.g., concrete, steel, plastic) to provide structural support for the containment. 
Toxic waste. Any liquid, semi-liquid, or solid waste material which has the ability to chemically produce injury once it reached a susceptible site in or on the body. 
Transporter. A person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste. 
Trip ticket. The shipping document originated and signed by the transporter which contains the information required by the approving authority. 
Vehicle. A mobile device in which or by which liquid waste may be transported upon a public street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
DIVISION 2. - LIQUID WASTE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 86-363. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. A person shall obtain a permit issued by the administrative authority pursuant to this division prior to collecting or transporting liquid waste generated by a generator located in the city. In the event the person desires to operate a business using more than one vehicle for the collection and transportation of liquid waste, the person shall obtain from the administrative authority a permit for each vehicle. 
(b) Offense. A person commits an offense if the person collects or transports liquid waste without a valid permit issued by the administrative authority pursuant to this division. 
(c)  Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to a violation of subsection (b) that: 
(1)  The person was disposing of the person's own waste from the person's own recreational vehicle, boat, travel trailer; or 
(2)  The person was transporting liquid waste through the city that was collected outside of the city and which was disposed of outside of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 86-364. - Permit application procedures. 
(a)  Application information. A person required by section 86-363 to have a permit shall complete and file a permit application on a form prescribed by the administrative authority; and submit with the application the following: 
(1)  A photocopy of applicant's driver's license. If the applicant is a person other than an individual, the driver's license shall be that of the applicant's chief operating officer or manager; 
(2)  A copy of the applicant's current registration issued by the TCEQ, pursuant to 30 T.A.C. sec. 312.142, to collect and transport liquid wastes; 
(3)  A copy of the state registration license receipt issued to each vehicle the applicant elects to register under the permit; 
(4)  A list of all disposers the applicant proposes to use; 
(5)  Proof that the applicant's vehicles which will be registered under the permit are insured in at least the minimum amounts as required by state law, or are self-insured as provided by state law, to secure payment of all lawful and proper claims arising out of the operation of each vehicle. A written statement from an authorized agent of the applicant's insurance carrier verifying the issuance of such insurance shall be filed with the administrative authority before a permit is issued. All such verifications of insurance shall provide for 30-day cancellation notice to the administrative authority; and 
(6)  Such additional information requested by the administrative authority. 
(b)  Demonstration of knowledge. The applicant shall demonstrate to the administrative authority that the applicant and applicant's drivers have sufficient knowledge of the vehicles they will be operating and the liquid waste facilities they will be servicing to collect and transport liquid waste in a safe and competent manner. 
(c)  Vehicle inspection. The applicant must submit for inspection by the administrative authority each vehicle for which the applicant proposes to obtain a permit. Each vehicle shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The business name, telephone number, and address of the applicant shall be permanently displayed on both sides of the vehicle in letters of a minimum height of three inches, in a color contrasting to their background. An address is sufficient if it includes the applicable city and state. If the applicant's business is not within a municipality, the name of the county and state will be sufficient; 
(2)  The vehicle shall display current state vehicle registration tags and inspection certificate; 
(3)  The vehicle shall display the TCEQ-assigned registration number in accordance with state regulations; 
(4)  Unless a different size is otherwise approved by the administrative authority, the vehicle shall have a single waste tank which shall be of a minimum 1,000-gallon capacity permanently mounted on the vehicle, and designed to transport wastes. Portable tanks or other containers temporarily installed in a vehicle are prohibited. This paragraph does not apply to vehicles used to transport chemical toilet wastes; 
(5)  The vehicle's engine which powers its movement, drive train, and emissions system shall not be modified for the purpose of creating a vacuum to empty liquid waste facilities; 
(6)  The vehicle shall have a power take off (PTO) unit to create vacuum sufficient to remove the entire contents of the liquid waste facilities it services; 
(7)  The vehicle shall be clean and odor free; 
(8)  All piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to the tank or vehicle; 
(9)  The tank shall be liquid tight; 
(10)  The tank shall be constructed so that every interior and exterior portion can be easily cleaned; 
(11)  All piping, valves, and connections shall be accessible and easy to clean; 
(12)  Any inlet or opening of the tank shall be constructed so that collected waste will not spill during filling, transfer, or during transport; 
(13)  All outlet connections shall be constructed so that no waste will leak, run, or spill out of the vehicle; 
(14)  All outlets shall be of a design and type suitable for the waste handled and capable of controlling flow or discharge without spillage or undue spray on or flooding of immediate surroundings while in use; 
(15)  All pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances shall be of a design and type suitable for the type of waste handled, be capable of being easily disassembled for cleaning, and operate without spillage, spray, or leakage; 
(16)  All tank valves shall have a safety plug or cap; 
(17)  All closed vehicles, tanks, or containers used to transport liquid wastes regulated by this article shall have sight gauges installed and maintained in such a manner that they can be used to determine whether a vehicle is loaded and the approximate capacity of the load. Gauges are not required to read in gallons or liters, but shall show what percentage of the tank capacity is filled. An alternate method to measure actual volumes may be utilized if the transporter has received prior written approval from the TCEQ's executive director and has provided a copy of that approval to the administrative authority; and 
(18)  All discharge valves and ports shall be prominently marked. All discharge ports shall be visible and readily accessible. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 86-365. - Issuance and display of permit. 
(a)  Permit issued. Upon approval of the application by the administrative authority and payment of the appropriate fee as determined under subsection (b), the administrative authority will issue a permit authorizing the applicant to collect or transport liquid waste within the city with the vehicle identified in the permit application. 
(b)  Permit fee. At the time of application, an applicant shall pay to the city a fee of $200.00 for each vehicle operated by the permittee. 
(c)  Term of permit. A permit shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance, unless suspended or revoked. 
(d)  Transferability. A permit shall not be transferable. 
(e)  Vehicle registration number. The administrative authority shall issue a vehicle registration number to each vehicle registered under a permit and shall list this number on the permit. A vehicle registration number is not transferable. 
(f)  Display of permit numbers. The administrative authority shall number permits consecutively and each permit holder shall cause to be displayed on each side of each vehicle in a color contrasting with the background and in three-inch letters or larger, the business name, TCEQ registration number and the following: 
FB (CITY OF FARMERS BRANCH) 
The first two letters (FB) shall represent the city issuing the permit, followed by the assigned permit number. The permit holder shall place business name, TCEQ registration number and the vehicle permit number on each vehicle before the vehicle is operated. 
(g)  Copy of permit in vehicle; presentation. The permit holder shall cause a copy of the permit to be kept in each vehicle at all times and presented to the administrative authority or any peace officer upon demand. A copy of the permit holder's transporter registration issued by the TCEQ shall be kept in each vehicle at all times and presented to the administrative authority or any peace officer upon demand. 
(h)  Offenses. A person commits an offense if: 
(1)  The person operates or causes to be operated a vehicle without the vehicle registration number assigned to that vehicle by the administrative authority displayed as required by subsection (f); or 
(2)  The person operates or causes to be operated a vehicle which is not permitted by the city in accordance with subsection (a); or 
(3)  The person operates a liquid waste transportation vehicle and fails to display to the administrative authority or any peace officer upon demand a copy of a valid city permit in accordance with subsection (g); or 
(4)  The person operates a liquid waste transportation vehicle and fails to display to the administrative authority or any peace officer upon demand, a copy of a valid liquid waste transporter registration issued by the TCEQ in accordance with subsection (g); or 
(e)  If upon the sale of the permitted business, cessation of operation of the permitted business, or the sale or cessation of operation by a permit holder of a vehicle registered under a permit issued pursuant to this article, the person fails to comply with any provision of section 86-370. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 86-366. - Grounds for permit denial. 
(a)  Grounds. The administrative authority may deny an application for a permit under this article if: 
(1)  The applicant, a partner of the applicant, a principal in the applicant's business, or applicant's manager or operator has: 
a.  Within the five years preceding the date of the application been convicted of a misdemeanor that is punishable by confinement and/or by a fine exceeding $500.00, and which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in operating a liquid waste transportation business; or 
b.  Been convicted of a felony which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in operating a liquid waste transportation business; 
(2)  The applicant fails to provide evidence of liability insurance or self insurance as required by this section; 
(3)  The applicant had a permit, that was issued under this article or its predecessor, suspended or revoked within the 12 months preceding the date of the application; 
(4)  The application contains a false statement of material fact; 
(5)  The application or any other required information is incomplete; 
(6)  The applicant's vehicle submitted for inspection does not meet the criteria of section 86-364(c); provided, however, the administrative authority may issue a permit but exclude from registration those vehicles not meeting said criteria; 
(7)  The applicant has not shown proof that the applicant and the applicant's drivers are qualified under section 86-364(b); 
(8)  The applicant has violated a provision of this article within the preceding 12 months; or 
(9)  The applicant does not have a valid liquid waste transporter registration issued by the TCEQ. 
(b)  Notice of denial. An applicant whose permit is denied will be notified by the administrative authority in writing of the denial and the grounds therefor. Such notice will be sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the mailing address listed on the application. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 86-367. - Permit conditions. 
A person who has been issued a permit by the administrative authority shall comply with the following: 
(1)  A permit holder shall immediately notify the administrative authority of any management changes in the business during the time the permit is in effect, and shall provide the administrative authority with a photocopy of the new manager's or chief operating officer's driver's license; 
(2)  The permit holder shall notify the administrative authority of all changes in disposal sites it wants to utilize during the permit periods, and shall use only those disposal sites permitted or approved by the TCEQ and the administrative authority; 
(3)  The permit holder shall maintain insurance required by section 86-364(a)(5) and immediately notify the administrative authority of any changes in its insurance carrier or policy, and insured status or self-insured status; 
(4)  The permit holder shall maintain all vehicles registered under the permit in compliance with the requirements of section 86-364(c); 
(5)  The permit holder shall immediately notify the administrative authority when it sells or otherwise disposes of vehicle registered under the permit; 
(6)  The permit holder shall maintain vehicle registration numbering in compliance with section 86-365(f); 
(7)  The permit holder shall immediately notify the administrative authority when the permit holder's waste transporter registration issued by the TCEQ expires or is suspended or revoked; 
(8)  A permit holder shall ensure that all of the permit holder's employees collecting and transporting liquid waste in vehicles registered under the permit remain sufficiently knowledgeable of such vehicles and of liquid waste facilities they service, so that they are able to collect and transport liquid waste in a safe and competent manner; and 
(9)  The permit holder shall ensure that none of the vehicles registered under a permit exceeds state weight limits while transporting liquid waste. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 86-368. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
After notice and hearing, the administrative authority may suspend for up to six months or may revoke a permit if the administrative authority determines that: 
(1)  The permit holder, a partner of the permit holder, a principal in the permit holder's business, a permit holder's manager or operator, or an officer of the permit holder: 
a.  Has within the five years preceding the date of the hearing been convicted of a misdemeanor that is punishable by confinement and/or by a fine exceeding $500.00, and which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in operating a liquid waste transportation business; or 
b.  Has been convicted of a felony which relates to the duty or responsibility in operating a liquid waste transportation business; 
(2)  The permit holder failed to comply with any of the permit conditions stated in section 86-367; 
(3)  The permit holder or an employee failed to: 
a.  Use the manifest system book in compliance with this article; or 
b.  Maintain manifests for five years; or 
c.  Allow the administrative authority to inspect the manifest; 
(4)  The permit holder or an employee improperly disposed of liquid waste; 
(5)  The permit holder or an employee commingled liquid waste with hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid waste in a city-permitted vehicle; 
(6)  The permit holder or an employee refused to allow the administrative authority or a peace officer to inspect a liquid waste transportation vehicle or obtain liquid waste samples from such vehicle; 
(7)  The permit holder or any employee thereof, within the 12 months preceding the hearing, was convicted of violating this article; or 
(8)  The permit holder's liquid waste transporter registration issued by the TCEQ expired, or was suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 86-369. - Additional permit holder responsibilities. 
(a)  Sale or cessation of business. A permit holder shall immediately notify the administrative authority in writing when the liquid waste transportation business is sold or ceases to operate. 
(b)  Delivery of records. In addition to the written notification required in subsection (a), above, the permit holder shall immediately deliver to the administrative authority: 
(1)  All completed original trip tickets in the permit holder's possession; 
(2)  All unused trip tickets in the permit holder's possession; and 
(3)  The permit holder's permit. 
(c)  Removal of registration numbers. The permit holder shall remove the city registration number from all liquid waste transportation vehicles upon the sale or cessation of operation of the liquid waste transportation business. 
(d)  Sale or cessation invalidates permit. A permit shall be invalid upon the sale or cessation of operation of a liquid waste transportation business. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 86-370. - City vehicles exempt. 
Vehicles owned and/or operated by the city that transport liquid waste shall be exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Secs. 86-371—86-374. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TRANSPORTERS, GENERATORS AND DISPOSERS 
 
Sec. 86-375. - Transporter responsibilities. 
(a)  Knowledge of waste content. Before accepting a load of liquid waste, a transporter shall determine the nature of the liquid waste and whether the transporter's equipment is sufficient to properly handle the transportation without spillage, leaks, or release of toxic, odorous or harmful gasses. Upon delivery of the waste to the disposer, the transporter shall inform the disposer of the nature of the waste. 
(b)  Removal of contents. A transporter pumping waste from a liquid waste facility shall remove 100 percent of the contents of such facility; provided, however, in the case of septic tanks, a small residual of sludge may be left for seeding purposes. 
(c)  No hazardous waste. A transporter operating a vehicle permit issued pursuant to this article shall not transport hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid waste in said vehicle. 
(d)  Commingling waste prohibit. A transporter operating a vehicle under a permit issued pursuant to this article shall not: 
(1)  Commingle hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid waste with liquid waste in the vehicle; or 
(2)  Mix incompatible wastes within the same container; or 
(3)  Use the same container or pumping equipment to collect or transport liquid waste which is incompatible with previously handled waste without first emptying and cleaning the container and equipment; provided, however, a transporter may mix wastes with different characteristics if the disposer to which the waste is being transported is authorized to store, process, or dispose of such mixed wastes. 
(e)  Authorized disposal sites. A transporter shall handle and dispose of grease trap wastes or grit trap wastes commingled with septage only at an authorized, licensed, disposal site that is not a POTW. 
(f)  Only inspected vehicles used. A transporter shall not operate a vehicle that fails to meet the requirements of section 86-364(c). 
(g)  Random inspections. A transporter shall allow the administrative authority or any peace officer upon request to: 
(1)  Inspect vehicles registered under a permit issued pursuant to this article; and 
(2)  Obtain samples of liquid waste from the transporter's vehicle. 
(h)  Use of solid waste receptacles prohibited. A transporter shall not place liquid waste into a generator's solid waste receptacles. 
(i)  Manifest system. A transporter operating under a permit issued pursuant to this article shall use, in the following manner, a manifest system book consisting of five-part trip tickets purchased from the administrative authority in packs of 25 for $60.00 per packet: 
(1)  Each manifest system book shall be used exclusively for a single vehicle. 
(2)  A transporter will complete one trip ticket for each individual collection. 
(3)  Before leaving the generator's site with the collected liquid waste, the transporter shall: 
a.  Sign the original part of a trip ticket; 
b.  Obtain the signature of an authorized representative of the generator on the trip ticket; and 
c.  Leave the first copy (yellow) of the trip ticket with the generator or generator's authorized representative. 
(4)  Upon completion of delivery of liquid waste to the disposer, the transporter shall: 
a.  Have the disposer sign the original part of the trip ticket; and 
b.  Leave the second (pink) copy of the trip ticket with the disposer. 
(5)  The transporter shall retain the third copy (green) of the trip ticket for the transporter's own records. 
(6)  The transporter shall return the fourth copy (orange) of the trip ticket to the generator not later than the 15th day after the waste is received at the disposal facility. 
(7)  The transporter shall deliver to the administrative authority all completed original trip tickets no later than the tenth day of the month following the month in which the trip tickets are completed. 
(8)  The transporter shall retain its copies of all trip tickets for a period of five years and, upon request, shall make such copies available to the administrative authority for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(j)  Exception to use of manifest: Chemical toilet companies. Chemical toilet companies servicing their own units shall be exempt from, and may elect not to comply with, the requirements of subsection (i); provided, however, no later than the tenth day of the month following the month in which the disposal occurred, the owner or operator of a chemical toilet company that elects not to comply with subsection (i) must submit to the administrative authority: 
(1)  A monthly total of the volume of liquid waste collected from its toilet units that has been disposed by said company; and 
(2)  The locations of such disposal. 
(k)  Transporter offense. A transporter commits an offense if the person engages in the transportation of liquid waste and fails to comply with any provision of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 86-376. - Generator responsibilities. 
(a)  Use of permitted transporters required. A generator shall not allow the removal of liquid waste generated by the generator to be performed by any person other than a transporter holding: 
(1)  A valid permit issued by the administrative authority pursuant to this article; and 
(2)  A valid permit issued by TCEQ, if one is required by law or regulation, 
(b)  Contents of liquid waste; mixing with other waste types prohibited. A generator: 
(1)  Shall determine whether liquid waste that it generates contains hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid waste; and 
(2)  Shall not present to a transporter operating pursuant to a permit issued under this article: 
a.  Hazardous wastes; 
b.  Class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid waste; or 
c.  Hazardous wastes or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid wastes combined with liquid wastes. 
(c)  Signing trip ticket. A generator shall sign the original of a trip ticket prepared and presented by the transporter prior to a transporter leaving a generator's premises with a load of liquid waste. 
(d)  Retention of trip tickets. A generator shall keep a copy of all trip tickets for liquid waste collected from its premises by transporters holding permits pursuant to this article for a period of five years from the date of delivery of the liquid waste to the transporter and shall make such trip ticket copies available to the administrative authority for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(e)  Liquid waste collection facilities. A generator shall install or provide liquid waste collection facilities on its premises of such type and size as required by applicable provisions of this Code and as otherwise specified and/or approved by the administrative authority. 
(f)  Maintenance of liquid waste collection facilities. A generator shall install, repair, replace, and maintain apparatus and equipment as necessary to ensure the continuous and proper operation and function of the generator's liquid waste collection facilities. 
(g)  Pumping out wastes. A generator shall: 
(1)  Have its liquid waste collection facilities pumped out as follows: 
a.  Grease traps located upon the premises of food establishments shall be pumped out 100 percent as necessary to maintain their effectiveness; 
b.  Grit traps shall be 100 percent pumped out as necessary to maintain their effectiveness, but in no case less than once per each 12 months; and 
c.  Septic tanks shall be pumped out 100 percent except for a small residual of sludge left for seeding purposes, said pumping to occur as often as necessary to maintain the effectiveness of the tanks; 
(2)  Supervise the servicing of the generator's liquid waste collection facilities; and 
(3)  Insure that the generator's liquid waste collection facilities are completely emptied by the transporter during such servicing. 
(h)  Ordering pumping. If the administrative authority determines that liquid waste from a liquid waste collection facility is overflowing or otherwise escaping from the facility such that suspended solids contained in the liquid waste are entering the sanitary sewer system, the administrative authority may order a generator to have its grease trap and/or grit trap pumped as necessary for the protection of the sanitary sewer more often than required by subsection (g). 
(i)  Leak inspection. The generator shall regularly inspect its liquid waste collection facilities for seepage into the surrounding media whenever the facility has been pumped. 
(j)  Inspection records. A generator shall maintain records of liquid waste collection facility inspections for three years from the date of inspection and shall make such records available for inspection to the administrative authority at all reasonable times. 
(k)  Spills. A generator shall: 
(1)  Not later than 24 hours after the occurrence of the spill, report to the administrative authority that a spill occurred from the generator's liquid waste collection facility; and 
(2)  Immediately clean up or cause to be cleaned up all spills of liquid waste occurring during the operation of generator's liquid waste collection facility or the collection of the generator's liquid waste and have a transporter properly dispose of the such waste. 
(l)  Generator offenses. It shall be an offense under this article if a generator: 
(1)  Fails to comply with any provision of this section; or 
(2)  Fails to comply with any order of the administrative authority authorized by this article; or 
(3)  Allows upon any premises under the generator's control the accumulation of liquid waste that: 
a.  Emits noxious or offensive odors; or 
b.  Creates an unsanitary condition; or 
c.  Is injurious to the public health. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 86-377. - Disposer responsibilities. 
(a)  Signing trip tickets; discrepancies. A disposer shall: 
(1)  Sign the original of a trip ticket prepared by a transporter operating under a permit issued pursuant to this article for all liquid waste received on the disposer's premises from such transporter; and 
(2)  Note on each copy of the trip ticket any significant discrepancies between: 
a.  The quantity of liquid waste designated on the trip ticket and the quantity or liquid waste the disposer actually receives; and 
b.  The type of liquid waste described on the trip ticket and the type of liquid waste the disposer actually receives. 
(b)  Significant discrepancies defined. For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Significant discrepancies in quantity are: 
a.  In the case of discrepancies in bulk weight, variations greater than ten percent in weight between the weight shown on the trip ticket and the weight actually delivered to the disposer; and 
b.  In the case of liquid waste, any variation in volume in gallons greater than 15 percent between the volume shown on the trip ticket and the volume actually delivered to the disposer; and 
(2)  Significant discrepancies in type of waste are obvious differences in the type of waste described on the trip ticket and the type of waste actually delivered to the disposer which can be discovered by inspection or waste analysis. 
(c)  Retaining approval of disposal sites. In order to retain city approval of its disposal site, a disposer shall comply with subsections (a) and (b) of this section, and shall: 
(1)  Maintain in effect all valid federal, state, and local permits required to operate a disposal site for liquid waste; 
(2)  Comply with all federal, state, and local laws pertaining to the operations of the disposal site; 
(3)  Accept only those classes of liquid waste authorized under federal, state, and local laws; and 
(4)  Dispose of liquid waste in accordance with federal, state, and local laws. 
(d)  Disposer offense. A disposer commits an offense if the disposer accepts liquid waste for disposal or disposes of liquid waste and fails to comply with subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Secs. 86-378—86-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 86-381. - Interference with grease trap, grit trap or sanitary sewer. 
A person commits an offense if the person causes or permits the plugging or blocking of, or otherwise interferes with or permits the interference with, a grease trap, grit trap, or the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 86-382. - Bioremediation of grease traps. 
(a)  Bioremediation of grease traps prohibited. A person commits an offense if the person introduces, causes, permits, or suffers the introduction of any bioremediation media into a grease trap. 
(b)  Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of subsection (a) that: 
(1)  The administrative authority has approved the use of the bioremediation media; and 
(2)  The use of the media complies with subsection (c). 
(c)  Approved bioremediation media. Bioremediation media may be used with the administrative authority's approval if the person has proved, to the satisfaction of the administrative authority, that laboratory testing which is valid for the type of grease trap to be used has verified that: 
(1)  The media is a pure live bacterial product and contains no surfactants, emulsifiers, or substances which act as solvents for fat; 
(2)  The total mass of oil and grease discharge to the sanitary sewer after the use of the media will not exceed the discharge limits for oil and grease established in the industrial waste regulations contained in section 86-121; 
(3)  The pH of the discharge is not less than 5.5 nor greater than 11; 
(4)  The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap and does not increase the potential of oil and grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer; 
(5)  The media is not destroyed by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and detergents or by hot water; 
(6)  Any waste pumped from the grease trap after use of the media is acceptable at disposal sites for grease trap waste; and 
(7)  The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming or obstruction in the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 3024, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Secs. 86-383—86-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - CREATION AND ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 86-501. - Municipal drainage utility system established. 
The Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act, Chapter 552, Subchapter C, Texas Local Government Code, as amended (the "act"), is hereby adopted and shall be fully implemented as provided by the act and by the city council; and the drainage of the city is hereby found to be a public utility within the meaning of the act. 
( Ord. No. 3298, § 1, 9-16-2014 )  
Sec. 86-502. - Drainage service provided. 
The city will provide storm water drainage for all real property within its boundaries upon payment of the determined drainage charges, as defined in the act, and excluding property exempt under the act and certain real property exempted pursuant to this article, and that the fees, assessments, and charges will be based on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms. The drainage charges established herein shall be for all non-exempt benefitted property as defined in the act within the city drainage system. 
( Ord. No. 3298, § 1, 9-16-2014 )  
Sec. 86-503. - Billing for drainage service. 
The city is hereby authorized to bill the drainage charges incurred as a result of the adoption of the act and through the establishment of the municipal drainage utility system. The drainage charge shall be separately identified from other public utility billings. Drainage charges may only be expended for the costs of service as defined by the act. 
( Ord. No. 3298, § 1, 9-16-2014 )  
Sec. 86-504. - Authority to levy drainage charges; findings. 
The city may levy a schedule of drainage charges upon satisfaction of the procedural requirements provided in the act and this article. Prior to the levy of any drainage charges, the city council shall conduct a public hearing on the drainage charges pursuant to the act. Prior to adoption of this article, the city council found and determined: 
(1)  The city will establish a schedule of drainage charges against all real property in the proposed area which includes the entire city subject to the charges under the act; 
(2)  The city will provide drainage for all real property in the proposed service area on payment of the drainage charges, except real property exempt under the act; and 
(3)  The city will offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms. 
( Ord. No. 3298, § 1, 9-16-2014 )  
Sec. 86-505. - Exemptions authorized. 
The city is authorized to exempt certain property, entities or persons from all ordinances, resolutions, and rules which the city may adopt from time to time in connection with the adoption of the act and the establishment of its municipal drainage utility system. Any exemptions to the drainage charges established herein other than the exemptions required by the act shall be set forth in the drainage charge schedule. 
( Ord. No. 3298, § 1, 9-16-2014 )  
Sec. 86-506. - Charges. 
(a)  The city council shall, following the adoption of this article, from time to time establish by ordinance a drainage charge schedule for charges which shall be collected through the city's bill for public utilities pursuant to the act and other applicable law. There shall be a drainage charge on each monthly public utility statement for the city drainage system as set forth in the drainage charge schedule. The city manager, or designee, is authorized to collect such charges in a manner consistent with the city charter, the act and this article. The drainage charges shall be a separate line item on the public utility statement, and shall be clearly identified as a separate charge. Except, as otherwise provided herein, the billing, charges and collection procedures shall be consistent with city collection procedures for water and sewer services provided by the city. 
(b)  The drainage charges established pursuant to this article will apply to the accounts maintained by the city for public utility services. 
(c)  All billings, credits, exemptions and other procedures relating to drainage charges established pursuant to this article shall be subject to the provisions of the act and other applicable law. 
(d)  A deposit for the drainage services as a precondition to accepting surface flow from benefited property into the city drainage utility system shall not be required. All real property of the city will be provided with drainage utility system service on timely payment of drainage charges established herein. 
( Ord. No. 3298, § 1, 9-16-2014 )  
Sec. 86-507. - Appeals. 
(a)  Billing and payment disputes for administrative issues relating to the drainage charges shall be subject to appeals procedures used by the city for other public utility billing disputes. A person or entity that owns or occupies a benefitted property may appeal the drainage charges established herein pursuant to this procedure set forth in this section. 
(b)  Appeals for the following reasons shall be directed to the managing director of finance and administration for evaluation and determination. An appeal shall be in writing and submitted to the managing director of finance and administration within 30 days after the public utility billing statement containing the matter to be disputed. During all periods of appeal the person or entity that owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder shall be responsible for payment of the charges in full: 
(1)  Exempt property has been assessed a drainage charge; 
(2)  Drainage charge for an individual property is assessed on more than one public utility account; or 
(3)  Drainage charge is assessed to individual property outside the city's jurisdictional area. 
(c)  The managing director of finance and administration shall render a written decision on such appeals within 30 days after receiving a timely written notice of appeal from the person or entity that owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder. The managing director of finance and administration shall deliver a copy of the appeal decision to the person or entity that owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder by U.S. mail to the address of the landowner/account holder according to the most recent records in the possession of the city. 
(d)  Appeals for claims that the drainage charge for an individual property is based on an incorrect determination of the property's contribution to the drainage utility system as established in the city drainage charge schedule shall be directed to the director of public works for evaluation and determination. An appeal pursuant to this section 86-507(d) shall be in writing and submitted to the director of public works within 30 days after the public utility billing statement containing the matter to be disputed. During all periods of appeal the person or entity that owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder shall be responsible for payment of the charges in full. 
(e)  Any person or entity who owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder who disagrees with the decision of the managing director of finance and administration or the director of public works, as the case may be, may appeal such decision to the city manager in writing within ten days after receipt of the decision of the managing director of finance and administration or the director of public works, as the case may be. The city manager shall render a written decision within 30 days after receipt of a timely appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 3298, § 1, 9-16-2014 )  
Sec. 86-508. - Penalties; enforcement. 
Failure to pay the drainage charges promptly when due shall subject such user to discontinuance of any public utility services provided by the city, in accordance with the procedures adopted by the city for discontinuance of any city public utility service including water and/or sewer service and other applicable laws. 
( Ord. No. 3298, § 1, 9-16-2014 )  
Secs. 86-509—86-519. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM FEE SCHEDULE 
 
Sec. 86-520. - Establishment of drainage utility fee. 
The drainage utility fee set forth in this division 2 is adopted pursuant to section 86-506 and shall be collected through the city's bill for public utilities pursuant to the act, division 1 of this article, and other applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 3299, § 1, 9-16-2014 )  
Sec. 86-521. - Impervious area; fee assessed. 
(a)  Drainage utility fees shall be charged based on a property's contribution to the public drainage utility system. The contribution shall be based on the impervious area for the property. 
(b)  The drainage utility fee, payable monthly, shall be established with respect to all property within the city according to the following schedule: 
Property Type 	Impervious Area (sq. ft.) 	Monthly Drainage Utility Fee 
Single-Family Residential 		
Tier 1 	<3100 	$3.05 
Tier 2 	3100 to <5100 	$4.50 
Tier 3 	=5100 	$7.20 
All Other Non-Exempt Property 		$4.50 per ERU* 
 
*ERU (Equivalent Residential Unit) = 4,000 square feet impervious area 
(c)  A minimum charge of one ERU shall be applied to each non-exempt non-single family residential developed property, regardless of classification. 
( Ord. No. 3299, § 1, 9-16-2014 )  
Sec. 86-522. - Exemptions. 
The following property shall not be assessed a drainage utility fee: 
(1)  Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed has been accepted by the city in which the property is located for maintenance; 
(2)  A subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city; 
(3)  Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately owned drainage system; 
(4)  State property; 
(5)  Public or private institutions of higher education property; and 
(6)  City property. 
( Ord. No. 3299, § 1, 9-16-2014 )  
Sec. 86-523. - Fee credits. 
(a)  A property owner may petition the city to reduce the drainage utility fee for an individual property to account for on-site storm water management controls that reduce the property's impact to the drainage utility system. 
(b)  The petition shall be evaluated and the fee adjustment decision determined by the director of public works or the director's designated representative. The evaluation and determination performed by the director of public works shall be based on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms in accordance with the act and this article. 
( Ord. No. 3299, § 1, 9-16-2014 )  
Secs. 86-524—86-605. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 86-606. - Drainage. 
(a)  Lots shall be graded to provide a minimum slope of one percent to drain storm and irrigation water to the public right-of-way in addition to any requirements regarding construction of improvements set forth in chapter 22 of this Code. 
(b)  Unobstructed swales of minimum two-foot width and one percent slope for a total of four feet with two lots combined will be provided on side lot lines for lots with alleys and also on rear lot lines where alleys are not provided. Maintenance of the swales is to be performed by the property owner. No permanent structures, including driveways, are permitted within this or any drainage area. Fences may be permitted as long as the flow of water is not obstructed. Utility boxes and poles less than one square foot in diameter may be permitted. 
(c)  Other design configurations that will provide equivalent drainage must be approved by the city engineer. 
(d)  No person shall: 
(1)  Obstruct the existing natural drainage pattern of adjacent public or private property; or 
(2)  Redirect or increase the existing quantity or velocity of water draining onto adjoining private property. 
(e)  The director of public works or designee shall have the authority to waive the requirement for preparation of a lot grading plan prepared and signed by a professional engineer prior to or concurrent with new construction on residential lots upon receipt of an affidavit signed by the owner or authorized agent of the lot and binding on the owner of the lot that provides, as a minimum, that: 
(1)  The lot is not in or adjacent to a designated floodplain; 
(2)  No filling has occurred on the lot to remove the floodplain designation from the lot; 
(3)  No floodplain alteration permit has been issued; and 
(4)  Such other statements and agreements to be made by the owner of the lot as may be required by the director of public works to confirm that the finished grade of the lot after completion of construction is in all respects in compliance with this division and the storm drainage design manual and that any noncompliance subsequently discovered and any adverse impact on adjacent properties resulting from such noncompliance will be remedied by the lot owner. 
( Ord. No. 3625 , § 1, 1-21-2020)  
Chapter 90 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; littering from passenger vehicles, etc., § 34-326 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 90-1—90-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cruise and cruising mean the movement of unoccupied taxicabs over the public streets of the city in search of prospective passengers for hire; except, however, unoccupied taxicabs proceeding to answer a telephone call for taxicab service from an intending passenger, and taxicabs running by the most direct route, after having discharged a passenger, to the garage where such taxicab is housed or to the unoccupied taxicab stand nearest the place of discharge of the passenger, shall not be considered to be cruising. 
Driver means every person in actual charge of the operation of a taxicab, whether as owner or agent, servant, or employee of the owner. 
Owner means any person who has control, direction, maintenance and the benefit of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of taxicabs on or over the streets or public ways of the city, whether as owner or otherwise, except as "driver" as defined in this section. 
Public stand means any place on a public street that is being generally appropriated and used by a taxicab, when not engaged in the transportation of passengers for the purpose of awaiting public or private patronage. 
Street means any street, avenue, alley, highway, square or park within the city limits. 
Taxicab means every automobile, or motor-propelled vehicle used for transportation by driver or passengers for hire over the public streets of the city and irrespective of whether or not the operations extend beyond the incorporation limits of the city at rates for distance traveled, or for waiting time, or both, or at rates per hour, per week or per month; provided, however, the term "taxicab" shall not apply to motorbusses or limousines operated within the incorporated limits of the city under a franchise from the city over a fixed or defined route, nor shall the term apply to motorbusses or limousines regularly operated over a fixed and defined route in the city to or from points outside of the limits of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 26-11; Ord. No. 1401, § 1, 9-13-1982) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-32. - Intergovernmental agreements exception. 
The city manager may enter into intergovernmental agreements, subject to the approval of and upon such terms as required by the city council, with other cities, counties or other public agencies, whereby the provisions of this article may be modified and/or waived. Such agreements shall be in writing and state the terms, conditions and duration of such agreements. 
(Code 1969, § 26-17; Ord. No. 1401, § 1, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-33. - City exempt from liability. 
The city shall not be liable for any sum on account of any claim or on account of any act or omission of any officer of the city in connection with any matter relating to taxicabs. 
(Code 1969, § 26-13; Ord. No. 1401, § 27, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-34. - Restriction on city officers and employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to accept, directly or indirectly, any gifts, discounts or gratuities from any holder of a taxicab franchise or any taxicab driver or from any person engaged in the repair of taxicabs. 
(Code 1969, § 26-14; Ord. No. 1401, § 28, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-35. - Authority and duty of police. 
Every police officer of the city is hereby given authority to watch and observe the conduct of holders of taxicab franchises and licenses and taxicab drivers and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 26-15; Ord. No. 1401, § 29, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-36. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who shall aid, abet or assist in the violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In a prosecution for violation of this article, it shall not be necessary for the complaint to allege, or for proof to be made, that the act was knowingly done; nor shall it be necessary for the complaint to negate any exception contained in this article concerning any prohibited act. 
(Code 1969, § 26-16; Ord. No. 1401, § 31, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-37. - Maximum seating. 
It shall be unlawful to carry in a taxicab more than a maximum of eight passengers in any taxicab, and in no event shall more than two passengers ride in the front seat with the driver. 
(Code 1969, § 26-75; Ord. No. 1401, § 13, 9-13-1982)  
Secs. 90-38—90-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 90-56. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to keep or operate a taxicab, as that term is used herein, without having first obtained a franchise to do so as required by this article. 
(Code 1969, § 26-22; Ord. No. 1401, § 2, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-57. - Term. 
The term of this franchise shall be automatically extended for one year from the expiration date hereof, unless the city council shall, not more than 60 days nor less than 30 days prior to the expiration hereof, give the franchise holder notice in writing that such renewal is not approved. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 3, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-58. - Recognition. 
The city will recognize franchises obtained by any person, firm, association or corporation who has met the requirements for obtaining a franchise in any incorporated municipality within the limits of the county having a population exceeding 100,000 persons according to the most current U.S. Bureau of the Census report. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 4, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-59. - Grant of franchise. 
No franchise shall be granted except when the franchise shall be authorized by ordinance passed by the council after compliance by the applicant with the provisions of this article; provided that no franchise shall ever be granted unless the council finds a public necessity exists for the service and that the applicant is, in the opinion of the council, capable of rendering such service. 
(Code 1969, § 26-31; Ord. No. 1401, § 5, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-60. - Subletting. 
No assignment or subletting of this franchise shall ever be made without the consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 6, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-61. - Application. 
Any person, firm, association or corporation desiring to obtain a franchise to operate a taxicab business in the city who is not presently franchised by a municipality in the county having a population exceeding 100,000 persons according to the most current U.S. Bureau of the Census report shall file a written, verified application directed to the council with the city secretary, setting forth full and complete information on the following matters: 
(1)  The full name and permanent residence and mailing address of the applicant. If a partnership, then such information shall be given on all partners and persons having an interest in the business. If a corporation, the name and location of its principal place of business, the name and address of all the officers, directors and all stockholders in the corporation. 
(2)  The age and customary calling of all persons having an interest in the taxicab business. 
(3)  A certified financial statement of the applicant. The statement shall be furnished on each partner and if a corporation, the statement shall reflect the financial status of the corporation. 
(4)  A complete certified statement of the assets going into the taxicab business for which the application is being made together with full information on liabilities existing against such assets. 
(5)  The address and description of the contemplated headquarters of the taxicab company and location and description of other taxicab stands to be put into operation. 
(6)  The trade name of the taxicab operation in this city. 
(7)  The color scheme of the taxicabs. 
(8)  Description and number of all taxicabs to be put into operation. The name, make and model must be given and ownership of the units given. If units are leased, then that fact must be stated. 
(9)  Describe insurance coverage to be carried together with the name and address of the agent and company. 
(10)  Certified copy of any corporate applicant must be furnished and certified copy of any foreign corporation's permit to do business in this state. 
(11)  An experience record of the applicant. 
(12)  Whether the applicant operates or has an interest in any taxicab business anywhere other than the city and complete information concerning its operation. 
(13)  Such additional factual information as may be required under authority of the city manager to afford complete information to the council when presented to them in considering the application. 
(Code 1969, § 26-24; Ord. No. 1401, § 7, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-62. - Grant or rejection of application. 
Such application shall be acted on by the council at a regular meeting thereof. If rejected by the council, such determination by the council shall be final. If granted, such grant shall in all respects comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 26-31; Ord. No. 1401, § 8, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-63. - Revocation. 
The council shall have the right to revoke any franchise for misrepresentation of facts given in the application, for violation of provisions of this article and state laws, or for inability or refusal to provide the public with 24-hour service contemplated by the franchise. Ten days' written notice to the franchise holder shall be given of a hearing before the council on the question of revocation of the franchise. 
(Code 1969, § 26-33; Ord. No. 1401, § 9, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-64. - General regulations. 
Each franchise holder shall obtain from the city secretary a permit on each taxicab operated by such franchise holder. Such permit shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of issuance. At the time of application has been made with the city secretary for an operating permit, franchise holder shall provide the city secretary a certification that the fare metering devices have been inspected and calibrated for accuracy within one year of this application by a firm or business whose primary business is the certification and calibration of fare metering devices and is acceptable to the city secretary. The city secretary may require a minimum of one reinspection of each fare metering device during the term of the franchise. The fees for the reinspection will be born by the franchise holder. 
(1)  The vehicle shall have a rated seating capacity of no more than eight passengers, excluding the driver. 
(2)  It shall be painted with the color scheme submitted to the council in obtaining its franchise. 
(3)  It shall have the name of the cab company painted with three-inch minimum lettering on either side of such vehicle, together with a number of such cab designed by the franchise holder in lettering at least six inches in height under the name of the company. 
(4)  Such vehicle shall have installed on the roof of the cab a dome light. 
(Code 1969, § 26-43; Ord. No. 1401, § 10, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-65. - Sign or placard within passenger compartment. 
The vehicle shall have displayed within the passenger compartment a sign or placard stating the following information: the taxicab company name; the taxicab unit number; the driver's name; the taxicab company telephone number; a statement to the effect that if a passenger is not satisfied with the taxicab service, he may report his dissatisfaction to a designated taxicab representative for resolution of the problem; the name of the designated representative; that air conditioning and heaters are available; and the service will be provided upon request. The sign or placard will be placed in a manner that provides easy access for the passenger. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1(10), 6-3-1985)  
Sec. 90-66. - Rates, charges and fares. 
The city council shall have the power to fix the rates, charges and fares of all taxicabs operating within the city. There shall be displayed in a prominent place within every taxicab doing business within the city a rate schedule for fare charges. 
(Code 1969, § 26-12.1; Ord. No. 1401, § 11, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-67. - Notice of revocation. 
Repeated violation of any provision of this article by the driver of any taxicab may be grounds for revocation and cancellation of the franchise or license, in addition to any other penalty provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 32, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-68. - Insurance requirements. 
As a condition to the issuance and granting of a franchise under the provisions of this article, the franchise applicant shall carry and maintain in force at all time during the term of the franchise liability insurance with a financially stable insurance company authorized to do business in the state and acceptable to the city. The liability insurance shall be for a minimum coverage of $10,000.00 because of bodily injury or death of any one passenger or other person in any one accident; and, subject to the limit for one person, to a limit of not less than $20,000.00 because of bodily injury or death of two or more passengers or other persons in any one accident, and minimum limits $10,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property in any one accident. 
(Code 1969, § 26-26; Ord. No. 1401, § 33, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-69. - Filing of insurance policy with city secretary. 
The insurance policy required by the preceding section, with riders attached, shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and the coverage afforded by such policy shall be subject to approval by the city attorney, and if there is any question as to the solvency of the insurance company writing such insurance, then the coverage shall be written by a more financially stable company. 
(Code 1969, § 26-27; Ord. No. 1401, § 34, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-70. - Notice of intention to cancel insurance. 
The franchise holder shall be responsible for and shall file with the city secretary written assurance from the insurance company on the policy mentioned in section 90-69 that notice in writing shall be given the city of its intention to cancel such insurance coverage, and shall be signed by a duly authorized agent or representative of such company. 
(Code 1969, § 26-29; Ord. No. 1401, § 35, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-71. - Cancellation of insurance. 
The franchise holder shall be fully responsible for maintaining the insurance required by this article regardless of whether the city has been notified of cancellation of its insurance, and the city shall never be deemed to have assumed any liability by reason of a failure or bankruptcy of any company or by reason of the failure of the franchise holder to keep in force such insurance requirements. Failure to comply with the requirements of this article with regard to insurance may authorize the city council, in its discretion, to revoke the franchise. 
(Code 1969, § 26-35; Ord. No. 1401, § 36, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-72. - Transportation of passengers prohibited during suspension or revocation. 
It shall unlawful for any franchise holder to continue to transport passengers for hire after his permit or franchise has been suspended or revoked as provided by this article. 
(Code 1969, § 26-34; Ord. No. 1401, § 37, 9-13-1982)  
Secs. 90-73—90-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 90-91. - Driver regarded as employee, agent and representative of franchise holder. 
Every person who drives a taxicab in the city, whether the owner of the taxicab is the driver or not, shall be regarded as the employee, agent and representative of the holder of the franchise or operator of the business for whom the taxicab is being operated, regardless of whether the franchise holder or operator owns, leases, contracts for or otherwise legally controls the taxicab so being driven and operated in the taxicab service of the franchise holder or operator. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 16, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-92. - Use of taxicabs for nonbusiness purposes; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any taxicab to use such vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers for hire, or for running errands or delivery of packages customary in the taxicab business for hire. If the owner of any vehicle licenses as a taxicab, under the provisions of the article, during off-duty hours, needs the use of such vehicle for personal affairs, a conspicuous sign with the words "out of service" shall be displayed in a prominent place on the taxicab. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to use a vehicle for taxicab purposes while the "out of service" sign is so displayed and it shall also be unlawful to use such vehicle for any purpose other than the taxicab purposes set forth in section 90-92 unless the "out of service" sign is displayed as required. 
(Code 1969, §§ 26-72, 26-73; Ord. No. 1401, § 17, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-93. - Time limits on parking. 
All taxicabs shall be subject to provisions of this article and state laws concerning parking of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1969, § 26-31; Ord. No. 1401, § 12, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-94. - Receipt and discharge of passengers. 
No driver of a taxicab shall receive or discharge passengers in the roadway of any street, but shall drive to the righthand sidewalk, as nearly as possible, or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme righthand side of the road as nearly as practical, and there receive or discharge passengers. 
(Code 1969, § 26-78; Ord. No. 1401, § 14, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-95. - Failure to pay fare. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab after having hired the taxicab, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any taxicab with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. Further, it shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver or franchise holder to intentionally overcharge any passenger. 
(Code 1969, § 26-77; Ord. No. 1401, § 15, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-96. - Transportation of intoxicating beverages prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to transport intoxicating beverages owned and in the exclusive possession and control of a fare paying passenger, in the taxicab, or for any taxicab driver to have on his person any intoxicating beverage while driving and operating a taxicab in service. 
(Code 1969, § 26-80; Ord. No. 1401, § 18, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-97. - Drinking of intoxicants prohibited in taxicabs. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver or passenger of any taxicab to drink intoxicating beverages of any kind while inside the taxicab. 
(Code 1969, § 26-81; Ord. No. 1401, § 19, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-98. - Prohibited acts or conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver or owner to act in any manner as a panderer or pimp for prostitutes or as a contact for unlawful establishments of any character. 
(Code 1969, § 26-84; Ord. No. 1401, § 20, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-99. - Transportation to prostitute's abode or person committing crime. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver or owner to knowingly transport any passenger to the abode of a prostitute or knowingly to transport any criminal, narcotics peddler, prostitute, bootlegger or any other person in the commission of a crime or infraction of the law in any manner. 
(Code 1969, § 26-83; Ord. No. 1401, § 21, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-100. - Selling liquor. 
No driver or owner of a taxicab shall engage in selling intoxicating liquors or soliciting business for any person selling intoxicating liquors. 
(Code 1969, § 26-82; Ord. No. 1401, § 22, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-101. - Transportation of persons other than passenger for hire. 
No taxicab driver or owner shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in a taxicab, except a passenger for hire. No taxicab driver or owner shall carry any person in such taxicab while on the streets of the city, unless such person has agreed to pay for the use and hire of such taxicab. 
(Code 1969, § 26-85; Ord. No. 1401, § 23, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-102. - Cruising. 
Cruising, as defined in section 90-31, by taxicabs, is prohibited. 
(Code 1969, § 26-70; Ord. No. 1401, § 24, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-103. - Solicitation of business. 
No driver or owner of a taxicab shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any person or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage. 
(Code 1969, § 26-71; Ord. No. 1401, § 25, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-104. - Disposition of property left in taxicab. 
All drivers of taxicabs shall promptly deliver to the police department of the city, or to their employers, all property left in such vehicles by passengers. If a driver delivers such articles to his employer, the latter shall deliver them to the police department. When articles left in taxicabs have been delivered to the office of the chief of police, he shall make an entry of the fact in a book provided for that purpose and shall keep all such articles until claimed by the owner, as the city council may authorize. 
(Code 1969, § 26-86; Ord. No. 1401, § 26, 9-13-1982)  
Sec. 90-105. - Driver required to have state license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab within the city unless he is a duly licensed chauffeur under the laws of the state. 
(Code 1969, § 26-52; Ord. No. 1401, § 30, 9-13-1982)  
Secs. 90-106—90-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION AND SPECIAL SERVICE TRANSPORTATION 
 
Sec. 90-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charter service means any type of service in which a vehicle designed to accommodate more than eight passengers, along with a driver, is furnished for a specific trip or excursion, and which is contracted for orally or in writing by an individual or group so as to obtain exclusive use of the vehicle for an interval of time generally less than 24 hours. 
Director means the director of public works or his representative. 
Driverless vehicle means those vehicles that are leased or rented without drivers being furnished by the person, organization, business or corporation from which they are leased or rented. 
Limousine service means a service which offers chauffeured vehicles, other than properly identified taxicabs, with a seating capacity of not more than eight passengers in addition to a driver, to engage in the commercial transportation of people for compensation and to provide such service in response to advance arrangement and reservation by persons who specify a point of pickup, a time of pickup, and a length of time for which service is to be provided for the exclusive use of such persons; such service being rendered only in response to reservation and prearrangement generally and customarily made at least one hour in advance of the time that such service is to begin. 
Operator means the person or organization which owns, leases, or rents and maintains any vehicle used to carry passengers in the special service transportation category as defined in section 90-134. 
Permit means a leasing permit or special permit as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 26-161) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-132. - Categories. 
For the purpose of this article, vehicles using the streets of the city to carry passengers for hire shall be classified into one of the following categories: 
(1)  General public transportation. 
(2)  Special service transportation. 
(3)  Exempt transportation. 
(Code 1969, § 26-162)  
Sec. 90-133. - General public transportation. 
Vehicles in the category of general public transportation shall be those carrying the general public for hire, and shall consist of: 
(1)  Vehicles carrying passengers along regularly scheduled routes throughout the city, the contiguous unincorporated areas and adjoining municipalities where such passengers either load or unload within the city. 
(2)  Taxicabs regulated under article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 26-163)  
Sec. 90-134. - Special service transportation. 
Vehicles in the category of special transportation shall be as follows: 
(1)  Vehicles carrying passengers for hire between points within the city or from within the city to points outside the city, at regular or irregular intervals, on a contract, trip, time, charter, scheduled fare or other basis, with or without fixed schedules or routes, but other than vehicles described in subsections (2) and (3) of this section. 
(2)  Vehicles carrying passengers between points within the city or from within the city to points outside the city under a limousine service as defined in section 90-131; except limousines used exclusively to carry passengers to and from air terminals over routes, part or all of which are included within the city. 
(3)  Driverless passenger vehicles with a capacity of more than eight passengers, leased or rented by the operator to individuals or groups for business or personal use, to carry passengers between points within the city or from within the city to points outside the city, whether or not such vehicle is used to carry passengers for hire. 
(Code 1969, § 26-164)  
Sec. 90-135. - Exempt transportation. 
The following vehicles, the use of which requires payment of compensation by passengers, shall be in the category of exempt transportation and shall be exempt from the terms of this article: 
(1)  Vehicles owned or controlled by individuals and driven by them, used to transport persons on a pooling or share-the-expenses arrangement from place of residence to place of work, training or schooling and return; except, that such vehicles may not be used to transport more than eight passengers in addition to the individual driver. 
(2)  Vehicles providing service and carrying passengers for hire under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the state railroad commission while in performance of the service authorized by such certificate; except, that the director shall prescribe reasonable routes within the city for such vehicles engaged in inter-city transportation. 
(3)  Driverless vehicles, with a capacity to transport no more than eight passengers, leased or rented by individuals for business or personal use. 
(4)  Vehicles owned or operated by schools, religious and charitable organizations, and government agencies, when carrying passengers associated with the particular organization. 
(5)  Ambulances and special vehicles for use exclusively in connection with funerals. 
(Code 1969, § 26-165)  
Sec. 90-136. - Special service transportation permit—Required. 
(a)  Special service transportation vehicles shall be operated under a permit. Permits shall be of the following two types: 
(1)  Leasing permit which shall grant authority to lease driverless vehicles (as defined in section 90-131) designed to accommodate more than eight passengers, and which in all cases shall be an annual permit. 
(2)  Special permit which shall grant authority to operate types of special service transportation, as described in section 90-134 and in such permit (but exclusive of leasing and charter service), in which the operator furnishes the driver, and which may be issued for one year or for a lesser period if application is made for a permit of shorter duration. 
(b)  No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any vehicle for special service transportation, as defined by this article, without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the terms of this article. The operation of any such vehicle without such a permit shall be a violation of this article and the operator thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided by this article. 
(c)  The operation of special service transportation vehicles shall be limited according to the terms of any permit granted. Such terms may cover any of the following considerations and such other provisions appropriate to the service to be rendered under the permit: Number of vehicles authorized, description of vehicles to be operated, number of passengers that may be carried in each vehicle, the customers to be served, places of loading or unloading passengers, routes and schedules to be followed, fares, rates and charges, and operating procedures. 
(Code 1969, § 26-166)  
Sec. 90-137. - Same—Application. 
Application for a permit for the operation of vehicles in the special service transportation category shall be made in writing to the director and shall contain the applicant's name, address, type of organization, a complete description of the services sought to be provided, full evidence of the applicant's financial ability to perform such services, and the name and address of a person upon whom service of citation may be served in the case of a violation under this article. 
(Code 1969, § 26-167)  
Sec. 90-138. - Same—Special permit; conditions; transferability. 
(a)  An applicant for a special permit, as well as the holder of a special permit, for the operation of vehicles in the special service transportation category, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  File proof of liability insurance coverage, for all vehicles to be used, from an insurance company duly authorized to do business in the state. Such coverage shall be of a character and amount not less than that specified by the state railroad commission for vehicles of comparable size. Such insurance coverage shall be kept in full force and effect at all times during the term of each permit issued. A certificate as to the coverage provided shall be furnished to the city by the insurance carrier, and any such carrier desiring to cancel, modify or change any policy furnished pursuant to this section must give written notice of such desire to the director at least 30 days before such carrier desires its liability insurance to be released. 
(2)  Identify each vehicle to be used, specifying a number for each vehicle, the year, make and model of each vehicle, the motor vehicle identification number, the state license registration number and any other specification deemed necessary by the director. 
(3)  Have each vehicle to be used inspected in a manner approved by the director of public works and condition of maintenance and for compliance with all applicable state and federal laws, prior to the issuance of any permit and at such other times thereafter as may be ordered by the director; provided that, in the event any such vehicle is involved in an accident or collision of any nature during the term of a permit, such information shall be reported immediately to the director, and the vehicle involved shall be reinspected for safety prior to any further operation of such vehicle under the permit by which its use was authorized. The operator may contract for maintenance but shall be responsible for maintenance of all vehicles operated under a permit. 
(4)  File with the director a description of proposed routes and schedule of fares or rates to be adhered to in the service provided under the permit sought. The routes authorized and schedule of fares, rates or charges set forth in any permit issued shall be strictly adhered to, and no discrimination shall be made as to such fares, rates or charges among passengers by an operator under a permit. 
(b)  A special permit for the operation of vehicles in the special service transportation category shall not be transferable without the consent of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 26-168)  
Sec. 90-139. - Same—Leasing permit; conditions; transferability. 
(a)  An applicant for a leasing permit, as well as the holder of a leasing permit, for the operation of vehicles in the special service transportation category shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  File proof of liability insurance coverage for all vehicles to be used, from an insurance company duly authorized to do business in the state. Such coverage shall be of a character and amount not less than that specified by the state railroad commission for vehicles of comparable size and covering the vehicle and passengers regardless of who the driver is. Such insurance coverage shall be kept in full force and effect at all times during the term of each permit issued. A certificate as to the coverage provided shall be furnished to the city by the insurance carrier, and any such carrier desiring to be released from any policy furnished pursuant to this section must give written notice of such desire to the director at least 30 days before such carrier desires its liability to be released. 
(2)  Identify each vehicle to be used, specifying a number for each vehicle, the year, make and model number of each vehicle, the motor identification number, the state license registration number, and any other specification deemed necessary by the director. 
(3)  Have each vehicle to be used under the permit inspected in a manner approved by the director of public works and condition of maintenance and for compliance with all applicable state and federal laws, prior to the issuance of any permit and at such other times thereafter as may be ordered by the director; provided that, in the event any such vehicle is involved in an accident or collision of any nature during the term of a permit, such information shall be reported immediately to the director, and the vehicle involved shall be reinspected for safety prior to any further operation of such vehicle under the permit by which its use was authorized. The operator may contract for maintenance but shall be responsible for maintenance of all vehicles operated under a permit. 
(b)  An annual leasing permit for the operation of vehicles of the special service transportation category shall not be transferable without the consent of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 26-169)  
Sec. 90-140. - Same—Burden of proof. 
Every applicant for a permit to provide special service transportation shall have the burden of proving that the public convenience and necessity require such service and that the applicant is qualified and financially able to provide the service proposed in his application. 
(Code 1969, § 26-170)  
Sec. 90-141. - Same—Public hearing. 
Upon the filing of an application for a permit to provide special service transportation, the director shall promptly fix a time and place for a hearing on the application. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing to the applicant, and to all persons holding permits to provide special service transportation in the city. Notice shall be given to the public by publication once in the official newspaper of general circulation published in the city not less than five nor more than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The director shall receive evidence and hear testimony bearing on the application, in order to have a basis for his recommendation that the permit be issued or denied. 
(Code 1969, § 26-171)  
Sec. 90-142. - Same—Recommendation of director. 
(a)  The director shall consider, but not be limited to, the following factors relating to the adequacy of service, in making his recommendation to the city manager as to whether a permit for special service transportation should be issued: 
(1)  The proximity of loading and unloading points and origin and destination of the prospective passengers to be served by the applicant for a permit. 
(2)  The time required to travel from loading points to unloading points. 
(3)  The times and frequency of scheduling of the service concerning the need for passengers who are employed to be regularly on time at the places of their employment and back to their places of residence within a reasonable time after work. 
(4)  The cost to passengers of transportation considering the distances involved and the number of passengers to be carried. 
(5)  The service requirements of the potential customers of the applicant for a permit under this chapter considering the capability of the applicant. 
(6)  The safety record of the applicant, if he previously has operated a transportation service. 
(b)  If after investigation, the director finds that: 
(1)  The applicant has complied with all requirements for the issuance of a permit. 
(2)  The public convenience and necessity clearly require the operation of the service proposed by the applicant, then he shall promptly submit to the city manager his written recommendation for issuance of a permit to the applicant. 
(c)  If, after investigation, the director finds that all of the requirements in this article have not been met by the applicant, then he shall promptly submit to the city manager his written recommendation for denial of a permit to the applicant. 
(Code 1969, § 26-172)  
Sec. 90-143. - Same—Action on application. 
(a)  Within ten days after receiving the recommendation of the director on an application for a permit to provide special service transportation, the city manager shall note on such recommendation his written approval or disapproval of the application and the date of such action. If the city manager approves the application, the director shall promptly issue a permit to the applicant upon payment of the required fee. The applicant may then begin to operate under such permit on the condition that any appeal from the action whereby the permit was issued, taken in the manner hereinafter provided, may result in revocation of such permit. If the city manager disapproves the application for a permit, the applicant therefor may also appeal, in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(b)  A copy of the recommendation of the director, showing the city manager's action on the application, shall be posted on the official bulletin board in the city hall for ten days, and a copy thereof shall be sent to each "interested party" which term shall include all of the following: 
(1)  The applicant for a permit to provide special transportation. 
(2)  All persons holding permits to provide special service transportation in the city. 
(Code 1969, § 26-173)  
Sec. 90-144. - Same—Amendments and renewals. 
(a)  The holder of a permit for special service transportation that desires to have any change in the permit authorized during the term of such permit shall apply in writing to the director for an amendment to such permit. Thereupon, minor changes in the terms of the permit shall be made at the discretion of the director. The procedure to be followed on an application to change the scope of a permit substantially shall be the same as that provided in this chapter with respect to an application for an original permit. However, a permit, as amended, shall expire on the same day as the original permit. All permits shall expire on January 2 of each succeeding year. 
(b)  An operator may apply to the director for renewal of a permit. Such application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days in advance of the expiration date of the permit sought to be renewed. Upon investigation, if the director finds that the operator has satisfactorily performed under the terms of his permit, that there have been no valid objections received during the interval of this current permit, that the service provided continues to be necessary or desirable, and that the operator continues to meet all the terms of this chapter, he may recommend permit renewal to the city manager without the necessity of a public hearing. All action taken on an application for renewal shall be in the same manner as provided in section 90-143. However, if the director determines that valid objections have been made, or if for other reasons he does not recommend renewal as outlined in this section, the application for renewal shall be investigated in light of current conditions, and a hearing shall be required as in an original application. 
(c)  An interested party that objects to the action of the city manager upon an application for renewal of a permit to provide special service transportation shall have the right, within ten days from the date of such action, to file a written appeal in the same manner as provided in section 90-145. 
(Code 1969, § 26-174)  
Sec. 90-145. - Same—Appeals. 
(a)  Any interested party, as defined in section 90-143, that objects to the action of the city manager on an application for a permit to provide special service transportation shall have the right, within ten days from the date of such action, to file a written appeal to the city council with the city secretary. The appellant shall set forth the specific reasons for his objections in the appeal. All interested parties shall be notified by the city secretary in writing, within ten days after receipt of the appeal, as to the time and place of a hearing on the appeal by the city council, which shall be within 30 days of the receipt of the appeal. Such notice shall also be published once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city not less than five nor more than 15 days prior to such hearing. 
(b)  The determination of the city council on any appeal pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be final and binding on all parties. 
(Code 1969, § 26-175)  
Sec. 90-146. - Same—Fees; inspection of business records; indemnity. 
(a)  An annual fee shall be charged for each permit, including vehicles providing service and carrying passengers for hire under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the state railroad commission for special service transportation, issued as follows: 
(1)  The fee for an annual leasing permit shall be in amounts established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code, and shall be paid to the city before the permit is issued. 
(2)  The annual fee for a special permit shall be in amounts established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code, payable before a permit is issued. 
(b)  Where a permit issued under this article is amended during its term to increase the number of vehicles to be used in the permit, the fee shall be in an amount established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code. No refund of a permit shall be made. 
(c)  A franchise fee established by the city and listed in appendix A of this Code provided during the term of such permit shall be paid to the city to cover expenses of administration and permitting of such operator, and use of public streets by such operator, payable 30 days after such permit expires. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to inspect and audit the operator's business records to ensure that the stated amount of gross receipts is as the operator claims. The operator shall, at the request of the director or his agent, submit all such business records to the director or his agent. 
(e)  The city shall never be liable for the manner of use or operations by the operator and the operator agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the city because of any cause of action brought against the city or any judgment awarded against the city by reason of the operator's operations or acts. 
(Code 1969, § 26-176)  
Sec. 90-147. - Inspections. 
The director shall designate the place and the times when vehicles operated under permit for special service transportation shall be inspected. The operator who has such a permit shall be liable for the reasonable cost of any reinspection necessitated by other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 26-177)  
Sec. 90-148. - Information to be supplied upon request of director. 
A permit holder under this article shall, upon request of the director, submit to the director any of the following: 
(1)  Current consolidated equipment list. 
(2)  Current financial statement which includes a balance sheet and income statement. 
(3)  Names of current officers, owners and managers. 
(4)  Current list of drivers employed with their state license numbers indicated. 
(Code 1969, § 26-178)  
Sec. 90-149. - Failure to pay ad valorem taxes. 
An applicant for a permit to provide special service transportation shall not be issued a permit if any ad valorem taxes upon any vehicle, equipment or other property of the applicant used or operated, directly or indirectly, in connection with the proposed service, are delinquent. Where a permit has been issued and ad valorem taxes on such property thereafter become delinquent, the permit shall be subject to cancellation. 
(Code 1969, § 26-179)  
Sec. 90-150. - Transportation for unlawful purposes. 
No operator or driver shall knowingly, without duress, provide transportation for any person in furtherance of the commission of a criminal offense by such person. 
(Code 1969, § 26-180)  
Sec. 90-151. - Intoxicated or incapacitated driver. 
No person shall drive a vehicle authorized to operate on the public streets of the city by the terms of this article while under the influence of intoxicants or drugs or otherwise incapacitated or unable to drive such vehicle properly and safely. 
(Code 1969, § 26-181)  
Sec. 90-152. - Solicitation of passengers. 
No person operating vehicles subject to the terms of this article or connected with the operation thereof shall, by speaking or loud talking, seek to induce persons to patronize such vehicles or become passengers thereon. 
(Code 1969, § 26-182)  
Sec. 90-153. - Enforcement and administration of article. 
Enforcement and administration of this article shall be functions of the director or his representatives, and of such officers and employees of the city as may be designated by the city manager. The director and such other designated employees shall exercise the powers necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 26-183)  
Sec. 90-154. - Penalties for violations of article. 
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00 for each offense or violation, and each day's failure to comply with any such provisions shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 26-184)  
Sec. 90-155. - Procedure for revoking permit. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties prescribed by section 90-154 for violation of any provisions of this article, the holder of any permit for special service transportation issued by the director may have such permit revoked by the city, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in any application for such permit. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the operation of service authorized by the permit. 
(3)  Operation of services not authorized by the permit. 
(4)  Violation of any provision of this article. 
(5)  Conviction of the holder of such permit for any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(b)  A permit issued under this article shall not be revoked until a hearing thereon shall have been held by the director and his recommendation thereon be acted upon by the city manager. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served upon the holder of the permit at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall also contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revocation of the permit. 
(c)  At the hearing before the director, the permit holder involved shall be confronted by the witness complaining against him, and he shall be given the opportunity to answer and thereafter be heard. Upon due consideration and deliberation by the director, the charges may be dismissed, in which case such action by the director shall be final. If the director concludes that the charges have been substantiated and sustained, he shall without unreasonable delay forward to the city manager his recommendation for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after receiving such recommendation, the city manager shall note thereon his written approval or disapproval and the date of such action. The director shall promptly forward to the permit holder involved a copy of such recommendation and action of the city manager. 
(d)  Any person whose permit has been revoked under subsection (c) of this section shall have the right, within ten days from the date of such action by the city manager, to file with the city secretary a written appeal to the city council. The appellant shall set forth in the appeal the specific grounds and reasons to be relied upon his appeal. The appellant shall be notified by the city secretary within ten days after receipt of the appeal, as to the time and place of a hearing on the appeal by the city council, which shall be within 30 days of the receipt of such appeal. The determination of the city council on any appeal pursuant to this subsection shall be final and binding on all parties. 
(Code 1969, § 26-185)  
Sec. 90-156. - Vehicles, operators and drivers subject to all applicable laws. 
All vehicles and operators and drivers thereof operating under permits as provided in this article shall be subject to all other laws, civil or criminal, governing the use of vehicles within the city and state. 
(Code 1969, § 26-186)  
Chapter 94 - ZONING[1] 
APPENDIX A: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES 
APPENDIX B: SPECIFIC USE PERMITS 
APPENDIX C: MAPS 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Historical Preservation and Restoration Board, § 2-101 et seq.; fence regulations, § 22-261 et seq.; numbering of buildings, § 22-661 et seq.; regulations regarding single-family rental housing businesses, § 26-71 et seq.; apartment complex rental business, § 26-111 et seq.; sexually oriented businesses, § 26-211 et seq.; erosion and sedimentation control regulations, § 34-31 et seq.; junked, wrecked, abandoned vehicles, § 34-201 et seq.; noise regulations, § 34-246 et seq.; nuisances, § 34-284 et seq.; flood damage prevention, § 42-31 et seq.; property maintenance standards,§ 56-1 et seq.; garage sales, § 58-31 et seq.; signs, ch. 62. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
1.1 - APPLICABILITY 
A.  The provisions of this Chapter apply to the use and development of all land within the incorporated limits of the City. 
B.  Except as provided in this Chapter, no person shall erect, construct, or proceed or continue with, the erection or construction of any building or structure within the City in a manner that does not comply with this Chapter. 
C.  All land, buildings, structures or building appurtenances within the City which are occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, demolished or converted shall be used, removed, placed and erected in conformance with the development and use regulations applicable to the zoning district in which such land or building is located. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
1.2 - SHORT TITLE 
This Chapter is to be known as the "Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas" and is sometimes referred to herein as "this zoning ordinance" or "this Chapter." 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
1.3 - EFFECTIVE DATE 
This Chapter was adopted on January 24, 2017 became effective on January 24, 2017. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
1.4 - PURPOSE 
The regulations and districts established in this Chapter have been: 
A.  Enacted in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan for promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the City; 
B.  Designed to lessen the congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; and 
C.  Made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the district, and its suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City consistent with a Comprehensive Plan. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
1.5 - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 
The requirements of this Chapter shall constitute the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare within the City. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
1.6 - CONFLICTING PROVISIONS 
A.  The provisions of this zoning ordinance shall not interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties. 
B.  Where this zoning ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon property than that imposed by other resolutions, rules, regulations, easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall govern. 
C.  All development within the City must comply with relevant Federal and State regulations. Whenever any provision of this zoning ordinance impose a greater requirement or a higher standard than is required in any Federal or State statute or regulation, the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall control unless preempted by Federal or State law. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
1.7 - ANNEXED LAND 
A.  All territory annexed to the City shall be temporarily classified as R-1, One-Family Residence District until permanent zoning is established by the City Council. The procedure for establishing permanent zoning on annexed territory shall conform to the procedure established by law for the adoption of original zoning regulations. 
B.  In an area temporarily classified as R-1, One-Family Residence District: 
1.  No person shall erect, construct or proceed or continue with the erection or construction of any building or structure or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory to the City without first applying for and obtaining a Building Permit from the City Manager Designee. 
2.  No permit, other than a permit that will allow the construction of a building permitted in R-1, shall be issued for the construction of a building or use of land unless and until such territory has been classified in a zoning district other than R-1 by the City Council in the manner provided by law except as provided in Section 1.7B.3. 
3.  An application for a permit for any use other than that specified in Section 1.7B.2 received by the City shall be referred to the Commission for consideration and recommendation to the City Council. In making its recommendation to the City Council concerning any such permit, the Commission shall take into consideration the appropriate land use for the area and the Comprehensive Plan. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
1.8 - PLATTING PROPERTY NOT PERMANENTLY ZONED 
A.  The Commission shall not approve any plat of any subdivision within the city limits until the area within the boundaries of the proposed plat is permanently zoned by the City Council. 
B.  The Commission of shall not approve any plat of any subdivision within any area where a petition or ordinance for annexation or a recommendation for annexation to the City is pending before the City Council unless and until such plat has been approved by resolution by the City Council. 
C.  If the Commission holds a hearing regarding a proposed annexation, the Commission may concurrently hold a hearing upon the permanent zoning to be assigned to the area or tract to be annexed and make a recommendation on both matters to the City Council so that the City Council, if it desires, may act on the matter of permanent zoning and annexation at the same time. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
1.9 - PRESERVING RIGHTS IN PENDING LITIGATION AND VIOLATIONS UNDER EXISTING ORDINANCES 
No use that was an illegal use or a legal but nonconforming use on the effective date of this Chapter shall not be deemed to have become a permitted use unless the property on which such use is occurring is located within a zoning district where the use is a permitted use. No offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time the existing zoning ordinance was repealed and this Chapter adopted, shall be discharged or affected by such repeal; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties, or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
1.10 - VALIDITY 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this Chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this Chapter as a whole or any part or provisions, other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
1.11 - CREATION OF BUILDING SITE 
No permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any property within the City shall be issued until a building site, building tract or building lot has been created in compliance with the following conditions: 
A.  The property is within the boundaries of a recorded final plat approved by the City and filed in the Official Public Records of Dallas County; or 
B.  The property is all or part of a site plan adopted as part of the regulations of a Planned Development District, which shows all utility and drainage easements, alleys, streets and other public improvements necessary to satisfy the requirements for obtaining approval of a final plat in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance as well as the designation of building areas and such required easements, alleys and streets have been dedicated and the necessary public improvements constructed and accepted by the City; or 
C.  The property is located within a Light Industrial ("LI") Zoning District, has a total FAR of 0.5 or greater and is contained within a site plan for the property that has been approved by the City Council after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, that shows all utility and drainage easements, alleys, streets, and other public improvements, the designation of uses, building areas, other public and private easements, landscaping, signage, accessory buildings, ingress and egress, parking areas, building heights, screening walls, refuse collection areas, and other items as may be required to comply with all applicable City Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
1.12 - COMPLETION OF BUILDING UNDER CONSTRUCTION 
No change shall be required in the plans, construction or designated use of a building actually under construction on the effective date of this Chapter. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
1.13 - MINIMUM ACCESS STANDARDS 
A.  To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, to lessen the congestion of the streets, and to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, minimum standards of primary access to various types of uses are established. 
B.  Minimum right-of-way and street surfacing standards shall not be less than required by the City's Thoroughfare Plan, Subdivision Regulations or other City ordinances or policies. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
ARTICLE 2. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND USES 
 
2.1 - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 
The following zoning districts are established and are applied to property within the City as set forth on the Zoning District Map. 
ABBREVIATED DESIGNATION 	ZONING DISTRICT 
R-1 	One-Family Residence District -1 
R-2 	One-Family Residence District -2 
R-3 	One-Family Residence District -3 
R-4 	One-Family Residence District -4 
R-5 	One-Family Residence District -5 
R-6 	One-Family Residence District -6 
D-1 	Two-Family Residence District 
D-2 	Two-Family Residence District 
MF-1 	Multiple-Family Residence District -1 
MF-2 	Multiple-Family Residence District -2 
MF-3 	Multiple-Family Residence District -3 
MF-4 	Multiple-Family Residence District -4 
I-RU 	Institutional-Religious Uses 
District 
O 	Office District 
LR-1 	Local Retail District -1 
LR-2 	Local Retail District -2 
C 	Commercial District 
LI 	Light Industrial District 
HI 	Heavy Industrial District 
PD 	Planned Development District 
 
Note: An "FP" prefix to any district designation as it appears on the Zoning District Map designates a sub-district subject to the flood plain provisions of Section 5.1. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
2.2 - ZONING DISTRICT MAP 
A.  Zoning Map Incorporated 
1.  The boundaries of the zoning districts are delineated upon the Zoning District Map that is incorporated as part of this zoning ordinance. 
2.  Three original, official and identical copies of the Zoning District Map are hereby adopted bearing the signature of the Mayor and attestation of the City Secretary. The official originals of the Zoning District Map shall be filed and maintained as follows: 
a.  One copy shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary, retained as the original record of the City and shall not be changed in any manner. A new original shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary following each amendment to the Zoning District Map. 
b.  One copy shall be filed with the Building Official and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting all changes and subsequent amendments for observation in issuing Building Permits, Certificates of Occupancy and Compliance and for enforcing this Chapter. 
c.  One copy shall be filed with the Planning Director for reference purposes and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting all changes and subsequent amendments. 
B.  Rules of Interpretation 
The boundary lines of zoning districts shown on the Zoning District Map are usually located along streets, alleys, property lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of a zoning district as shown on the Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply. 
1.  Zoning district boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
2.  Zoning district boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
3.  Zoning district boundaries indicated as approximately following the boundary lines of the city limits shall be construed as following such boundary lines. 
4.  Zoning district boundaries indicated as following railroad rights-of-way shall be construed to be the centerline of such right-of-way or, if no centerline is established, the boundary shall be interpreted to be midway between the boundaries of the right-of-way. 
5.  Zoning district boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines. In the event of a change in the shoreline, the zoning district boundary shall be construed as following the relocated shoreline. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the zoning district boundary is shown to follow a shoreline, but the property line of the property on which the body of water is located extends beyond the shoreline located on the property, the zoning district boundary shall be construed as extending to the property line of said property. 
6.  Zoning district boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the zoning district boundary is shown to follow the centerlines of a stream, river, lake or other body of water, and the centerline later changes, but the property line of the property located on the stream, river, lake or other body of water extends beyond the adjusted centerline, the zoning district boundary shall be construed as extending to the property line of said property. 
7.  Zoning district boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Section 2.2B.1 through 2.2B.5 shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning District Map shall be determined from the graphic scale on the Zoning District Map. 
8.  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council, or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or way, and all area so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended zoning districts. 
9.  Where physical features of the ground differ from information shown on the Zoning District Map, or the application of Section 2.2B.1 through Section 2.2B.8 cannot resolve the uncertainty of how or if a property is zoned, the property shall be deemed to be located where the majority of the area of the property is located. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
2.3 - INTERPRETATION OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE 
The City Manager and his designees are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and shall have the authority to render interpretations of this Chapter. Interpretations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this Chapter and no interpretation shall have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Chapter. Interpretations or determinations made by the City Manager or his designee may be appealed as provided in Section 6.1C. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
2.4 - PERMITTED USES 
A.  Classification of New and Unlisted Uses 
The classification of any form of land use which is not defined in this Chapter or which is defined in this Chapter but has not been classified by placement in the Permitted Use Tables in Section 2.4.C (i.e., a "new or unlisted use") shall be defined and/or classified as follows: 
1.  The Director of Community Services or designee shall refer the question of any new or unlisted use to the Commission requesting an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which such use should be placed accompanied by a statement of facts listing the following: 
a.  the general description of the use; 
b.  whether the contains a residential component; 
c.  with respect to non-residential components of the use, a general description of the types of sales, processing, or manufacturing and the goods to be sold, processed, or manufactured; 
d.  if intended as a type of office use, a general description of the services to be provided; 
e.  whether the use requires a storage component, the amount or nature of such storage, and whether the storage areas is enclosed or open; 
f.  anticipated number of employees; 
g.  transportation requirements, including the nature of the public street access required for the use, and the types of vehicles which such use will likely require for its operations; 
h.  the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material and vibration likely to be generated by the use; and 
i.  the general requirements for public utilities such as water and sanitary sewer which the use will need for its operations. 
2.  The Commission shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the zoning district or districts within which such use should be permitted or permitted upon grant of a specific use permit. 
3.  The Commission shall forward its findings and recommendations to the City Council as to the classification proposed for any new or unlisted use. The City Council shall consider the recommendation of the Commission and make a final determination concerning the classification of such use. 
B.  Use of a Residential Property for Non-Residential Purposes 
It is unlawful to use any building, structure or property located in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, D-1, D-2, MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, MF-4 zoning or in residential use PD districts for a non-residential purpose except as a home occupation or as otherwise authorized in this Chapter or other City ordinance. 
C.  Use Table 
1.  Classification of Uses. The uses for property within the City are classified as "Permitted," "Specific Use Permit Required," or "Not Permitted." Uses for which classifications have been established are set forth in the Use Table set forth in Section 2.4.C.2. 
2.  Use Table Key 
a.  Use Permitted (X) 
An "X" indicates that a use is allowed in the respective zoning district subject to a use standard, if applicable. Such use is also subject to all other applicable requirements of this Chapter. 
b.  Specific Use Permit Required (S) 
An "S" indicates a use may be permitted in the respective zoning district only where approved by the City Council in accordance with Section 6.5, Specific Use Permit. Specific uses are subject to all other applicable requirements of this Chapter, including all applicable use standards, except where such use standards are expressly modified by the City Council as part of the specific use permit approval. 
c.  Temporary Use (T) 
A "T" indicates a use may be permitted in the respective zoning district but for a limited duration, as determined by the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance or the Director of Planning or his designee. 
d.  Use Not Permitted 
A blank cell indicates that a use is not allowed in the respective zoning district. 
e.  Use Standard 
The column of the Use Table marked "Use Stds" indicates a cross-reference to a provision of this Chapter where compliance with additional development and use regulations may be required prior to a use being permitted or permitted following the grant of a Specific Use Permit. 
																				
USE 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-5 	R-6 	D-1 	D-2 	MF-1 	MF-2 	MF-3 	MF-4 	I-RU 	O 	LR-1 	LR-2 	C 	LI 	HI 	Use Stds 
Key: X = Use Permitted  S = Specific Use Permit Required  T = Temporary Use  Blank Cell = Use Not Permitted 
Agricultural Type Uses 																				
Animal Clinic or Hospital (No outside runs, play area or pens allowed) 																S 	S 	X 	X 	
Animal Clinic, Hospital or Kennel w/ outside runs, play area or pens 																		S 	X 	
Community Garden 															S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Farm or Ranch 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Farmers Market 															S 	X 	X 	X 		
Greenhouse or Plant Nursery (Commercial) 																	S 	S 	X 	
Commercial Type Uses 																				
Alcohol Sales (Wholesale) 																		X 	X 	
Bakery (Wholesale) 																	X 	X 	X 	
Bakery (Retail) 														X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Beauty Salon 														S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Brewery 																S 		X 	X 	
Brewpub 																		X 	X 	
Building Material Sales 																	X 	X 	X 	
Cabinet and Upholstery Shop 																	X 	X 	X 	
Catering Services 																	X 	X 	X 	
Dry Cleaning and Laundry Plant 																	X 	X 	X 	
Feed Store 																	X 	X 	X 	
Food Processing 																		X 	X 	
Heavy Construction Equipment Rental 																		S 	X 	
Heavy Machinery Sales and Storage 																		X 	X 	
Job Printing or Newspaper Printing 																	X 	X 	X 	
Lab, Medical or Dental 														S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Lab, Scientific or Research 														S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	
Lawn Mower Sales, Service, and Repair (Small Engine) 																S 	X 	X 	X 	
Manufacture or Light Compounding or Fabrication 																		X 	X 	
Milk Depot, Dairy or Ice Cream Plant 																	X 	X 	X 	
Paint Shop 																	X 	X 	X 	
Petroleum Products Storage -Wholesale 																		X 	X 	
Plumbing Shop 																	X 	X 	X 	
Radio/TV/Cable Broadcast Studio 																	X 	X 	X 	
Self-Storage Facility 																		S 	X 	
Trailer Rental or Sales 																	S 	S 	X 	
Transfer, Storage & Baggage Terminal 																	X 	X 	X 	
Wholesale Office and Showroom 																	X 	X 	X 	
Educational & Institutional Uses 																				
Adult Day Care 													S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		
Art Gallery or Museum 														S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Benevolence Storage and Distribution 													S 							
Cemetery or Mausoleum 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	
Crematorium 																			X 	
Community Center (Public) 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 		X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Day Camp 													S 	S 	S 	S 		X 		
Driving School 																S 		X 	X 	
Fraternal Organization, Lodge or Civic Club 														S 		X 	X 	X 	X 	
Home for Care of Alcoholic, Narcotic, or Psych 											S 			S 			X 	X 	X 	
Hospital (Acute Care) 													X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Hospital (Chronic Care) 														S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	
Institutions of Religious or Philanthropic Nature 					S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 	S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	
Library (Public) 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 		X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Local Government Public Facilities 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Mortuary or Funeral Home 														S 	S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	
Nursing or Residence Home for Aged 					S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	
Park or Playground 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 		X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Rectory, Monastery or Convent 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
School, Business or Trade 														S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
School, Nursery, Kindergarten (or Day Care) 			S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	S 		
School, Denominational (or Day Care) 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	S 	X 	X 	X 	S 	S 	S 	
School, College or University 			S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		X 	X 	X 	S 	S 	S 	
School, Private Primary or Secondary 			S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	S 	S 	S 	
School, Public 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 		X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Temporary Use of Civic or Philanthropic Nature 	By Resolution of City Council 	
Test Preparatory School 															X 	X 				
Worship Facility 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Manufacturing and Industrial Uses 																				
Light Manufacturing or Industrial Uses as outlined by Article 4 Performance Standards as meeting performance standards for light industrial classification 																		X 	X 	4.5 
Heavy Manufacturing or Industrial Uses as outlined by Article 4 as meeting performance standards for heavy industrial classification 																			X 	4.5 
Natural Resource Storage and Extraction 																				
Extraction and Storage of Sand, Caliche, Stone or Gravel 																	S 	S 	S 	
Mining or Storage or Mining Wastes 																		S 	S 	
Recreational and Entertainment Uses 																				
Amusement, Commercial (Indoors) 																S 	S 	X 	S 	
Amusement, Commercial (Outdoors) 																	S 	S 	S 	
Country Club (Private) with Golf Course 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Golf Course (Public) 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 		X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Park or Playground (Public) 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 		X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Playfield or Stadium (Public) 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 		X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Private Club 												S 		S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	2.6 
Shooting Range (Indoor) 																		S 	S 	
Stable 																	S 	X 	X 	
Swim or Tennis Club 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 		X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Temporary Carnival or Circus 	By Resolution of City Council 	
Theater, Drive-In 																	S 	S 	S 	
Theater, Indoor 															S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	
Residential Uses 																				
Boarding or Rooming House 									S 	S 	S 	S 					X 			
Home Occupation 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 												
Multiple-Family Dwelling or Apartment 									X 	X 	X 	X 								
One-Family Detached 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 								
One-Family Attached 						X 	X 		X 	X 	X 	X 								
Two-Family Dwelling 							X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 								
Live/Work Units 															S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	
Guest/Servants Quarters 	S 	S 																		2.9 
Retail and Service Type Uses 																				
Antique Shop 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Bank or Financial Institution 														S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Beer and Wine Package Sales Establishment 1 	Beer and Wine Sales Overlay Zones (BW) Only) 	
Bicycle sales and service 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Check Cashing businesses, Payday Advance/Loan businesses or Car Title Loan businesses 																S 				2.5 
Consignment Store 																	X 	X 	X 	
Dry Cleaners (Full Service) 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Dry Cleaning/Laundry Pickup Station 														X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Gun (Firearm) Sales 																S 		X 	X 	
Florist 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Furniture Store (New) 															S 	S 	X 	X 		
Garden and Nursery Sales 															S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	
Hookah/Vapor Lounge 																				
Hotel 														S 			S 	S 	S 	2.5B 
Household Appliance Repair 																X 	X 	X 	X 	
Household Appliance Sales 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Laundromat (Self Service) 															S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	
Massage Business 														S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Mortuary or Funeral Parlor 														S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Offices, Medical & Dental Offices and Clinics 														X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Offices, Professional and Administrative 														X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Optical Store 														X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Outside Sales (Permanent) 																S 	S 	S 	S 	
Outside Sales (Temporary) 															T 	T 				
Paint, Wallpaper and Related 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Pawn Store 																	X 	X 	X 	
Pet Store, Small Animals and Related, No Outside Runs 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Pet Store with Outside Runs 																	S 	S 	X 	
Pharmacy 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Prepackaged Retail Sales (Drive Through) 																				
Printing or copy center 														X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Reflexology (Hand and Foot Massage) 															S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Restaurant, General 														S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Restaurant, with Drive-through Service 															S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	
Restaurant, with Drive-in Service 																S 	S 	S 	S 	
Restaurant, Qualifying 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	2.6 
Retail, General 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Retail, Personal Services 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Retail, Warehouse 																S 	X 	X 	X 	
Retail Store Consisting Primarily of Specialty and Novelty Items 																S 	S 	S 	S 	
Small Handtool and Hand Carried Equipment (Indoor Display and Storage) 																S 	X 	X 	X 	
Studio for Photographer, Musician, Artist or Health 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Supermarket 															S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	
Temporary Real Estate Office (model home) 	Approved administratively on a case-by-case basis 	Temp. 
Tobacco Sales (Including E-Cigarette) 																X 	X 	X 	X 	
Tattoo Studio 																S 	S 	S 		2.5C 
Tool, Equipment, Trailer Rental 																	S 	S 	X 	
Travel Agencies 														X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Used Merchandise 																	X 	X 	X 	
Sexually Oriented Business 																				
Adult Arcade 																		S 	S 	2.5D 
Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store 																		S 	S 	2.5D 
Adult Cabaret 																		S 	S 	2.5D 
Adult Motel 																		S 	S 	2.5D 
Adult Motion Picture Theater 																		S 	S 	2.5D 
Adult Theater 																		S 	S 	2.5D 
Escort Agency 																		S 	S 	2.5D 
Nude Modeling Studio 																		S 	S 	2.5D 
Sexual Encounter Center 																		S 	S 	2.5D 
Special Industrial Processes 																				
Batching Plant (Permanent) Asphalt or Concrete 																		S 	X 	4.5 
Batching Plant Temporary On-Site 	Allowed in any Zoning District, not to exceed 60 days 	4.5 
Batching Plant Temporary Off-Site 	Allowed in any Zoning District, not to exceed 60 days 
(Requires Resolution of City Council) 	4.5 
Bottling Plant 																		X 	X 	4.5 
Cement or Hydrated Lime Manufacture 																			X 	4.5 
Dump or Sanitary Fill Area 																		S 	X 	4.5 
Gas Wells and Gas Compressor Stations 																				2.7 
Inside Paper Sorting and Bailing for Recycling 																		S 	X 	4.5 
Meat Packing Plant 																		S 	X 	4.5 
Recycling Plant (non-putrescent materials only) 																		X 	X 	4.5 
Smelter or Refinery 																			X 	4.5 
Welding or Machine Shop 																	S 	X 	X 	4.5 
Transportation Related Uses 																				
Airport Landing Field 																			X 	
Bus Station or Terminal 																	X 	X 	X 	
Hauling or Storage Company (no outdoor storage) 																		X 	X 	
Heliports 																		S 	X 	
Motor Freight Terminal 																			X 	
Railroad Freight Terminal 																	S 	S 	X 	
Railroad Passenger Station 																X 	X 	X 	X 	
Railroad Track or Right-of-Way 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Switching Yard 																			X 	
Utility, Accessory & Incidental Uses 																				
Accessory Building 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	2.9 
Community Center (Private) 											X 	X 			X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Electrical Generating Plant 																	S 	X 	X 	
Electrical Substation 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Electrical Transmission Line 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Field or Construction Office (Temporary) 	Subject to Approval and Control by the Building Official 	
Fire Station or Similar Public Safety Building 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 		X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Gas Transmission Line 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Gas Metering Station 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Lift Station (Sewage) 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Local Utility Distribution Lines 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Municipal Water Tower 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Private Utility Shop or Storage 																	X 	X 	X 	
Public Building, Shop or Yard of Local, State or Federal Government 							S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	
Telecom (Cellular) Tower 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	
Sewage Treatment Plant 																	S 	S 	X 	
Sign- Off Premise (Billboard) 																			X 	
Telephone Exchange, Switching Relay and Transmitting Equipment 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Water Reservoir, Pumping Station or Well 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Vehicle Related Uses 																				
Boat Sales 																	S 	S 	X 	
Car Wash 																S 	S 	S 	S 	
Commercial Parking Lot for Automobiles 														S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	X 	
Commercial Parking Lot for Trucks 																		S 	X 	
Gasoline Service Station 																S 	S 	S 	S 	
Enclosed Vehicle Storage Facility 																		S 	X 	
Off-Street Parking Incidental to Main Use 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Tires and Wheel Accessories 																S 	S 	X 	X 	
Towing Impound Yard 																				
Vehicle Maintenance (diagnostic, lube, brakes, state inspections, glass repair, paintless dent repairs, installation of accessories) 																X 	X 	X 	X 	
Vehicle Parts and Accessory Sales (Indoor) 															X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Vehicle Rental 																	S 	S 	X 	
Vehicle Repair (general repair and reconditioning, paint and body, engine rebuild, undercoating, mufflers, exhaust, custom shop) 																		S 	X 	
Vehicle Sales and Leasing (New) 																	S 	S 	X 	
Vehicles Sales and Leasing (Used) 																	S 	S* 	S 	
Wrecking and/or Salvage Operation 																			S 	
*Use is allowed with a Specific Use Permit (SUP), except in the Eastside Business District. 
1 In no case shall a Pre-Packaged Retail Sales (Drive Through) which is also a Beer and Wine Package Sales Establishment be permitted in any zoning district, it being the intent of this ordinance to expressly prohibit the use and development of all Pre-Packaged Retail Sales (Drive Through) uses within the City. 
 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3629 , § 1(A), 2-18-2020)  
2.5 - LAND USES REQUIRING SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
A.  Check Cashing, Payday Advance/Loan, and Car Title Loan Businesses 
Approval of a specific use permit is required prior to the development and use of property for a check cashing business, payday advance/loan business, car title loan business and all related activities subject to the following: 
1.  No check cashing business, payday advance/loan business or car title loan business may be located within 1,000 feet of another check cashing business, payday advance/loan business. 
2.  No check cashing business, payday advance/loan business or car title loan business may be located within 500 feet of the right-of-way of US Interstate 35 East, US Interstate 635 (LBJ Freeway) President George Bush Tollway or the Dallas North Tollway. 
3.  For the purposes of this Section 2.5.A, the measurement of the distances described in paragraphs 1 and 2, shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
a.  With respect to paragraph 1, from the nearest portion of the property line of the property where the existing business is located to the nearest portion of the property line of the property where the new business is proposed; and 
b.  With respect to paragraph 2, from the nearest portion of the right-of-way line of US Interstate 35 East, US Interstate 635 (LBJ Freeway), President George Bush Tollway, or the Dallas North Tollway to the property line of the property where the new business is proposed. 
B.  Hotel/Motel 
Approval of a specific use permit is required prior to the development and use of property for a hotel or motel subject to the following: 
1.  Following receipt of a recommendation from the Commission, the City Council finding that: 
a.  The type of hotel or motel use proposed is compatible and consistent with, and will have no adverse effect on, existing uses located on developed properties in the area; 
b.  The proposed use is equal to or exceeds development and operation standards of other hotels or motels or other uses in the area; and 
c.  The proposed hotel or motel use will not adversely affect the future ability to locate additional uses that are allowed within the zoning district within the area of the proposed hotel or motel use. 
2.  To better ensure that a proposed hotel/motel development is equal to or exceeds the standards established by existing structures in the area, the characteristics of the surrounding area, and with future development plans of the neighboring properties, following the recommendation of the Commission, the City Council may require the application for specific use permit include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following information: 
a.  A market study designed to determine the viability of a hotel or motel in a specific area and the impact on surrounding areas; 
b.  Information such as franchise agreements and operation plans; and 
c.  Security measures and plans. 
3.  To better ensure that a proposed hotel/motel development is equal to or exceeds the standards established by existing structures in the area, the characteristics of the surrounding area, and with future development plans of the neighboring properties, following the recommendation of the Commission, the City Council may include the following as conditions to be satisfied in a specific use permit granted for a hotel or motel use: 
a.  The specification of the materials for the exterior walls and roof of the hotel or motel structure; 
b.  The installation of additional landscaping, such as, shrubs, trees, or earthen berms, in accordance with a landscape plan; 
c.  The inclusion of plans, specifications, and other materials as necessary to depict the proposed hotel or motel development of sufficient detail to allow a determination that the facility will be equal to or exceed standards of the area and that it will be compatible with existing and future development; and 
d.  Installation of a fire protection system, if not otherwise required by other City ordinances. 
4.  A hotel or motel shall be located on a lot with an area of not less than four acres; provided, however, a hotel or motel may be developed on a lot with an area of less than four acres upon a finding by the City Council, following receipt of the recommendation of the Commission and after review of submitted data and facts, that the proposed hotel or motel is an appropriate use, design and lay-out for the building site and area. 
5.  A specific use permit may be granted for a hotel or motel which provides access from other than a central interior corridor upon a finding of the City Council, following receipt of the recommendation of the Commission, and after review of submitted data and facts, that the proposed design of the hotel or motel is appropriate for the area. 
C.  Tattoo Studio Regulations 
Approval of a specific use permit is required prior to the development and use of property for a tattoo studio, which shall be subject to the following: 
1.  No specific use permit shall be granted for use of property for a tattoo studio if the premises where the tattoo studio is to be operated is located within 1,000 feet of any worship facility, public or private school or the zoning district boundary of any R-1 through I-RU zoning district. 
2.  The distance referenced in paragraph 1, above, shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a tattoo studio is to be operated, to the nearest property line of the premises of a worship facility or school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected residential district, or residential lot. 
3.  The 1,000-foot separation distance required by paragraph 1, above, may be reduced or waived by the City Council upon the City Council's finding that operation of the tattoo studio would not be detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or general welfare, or otherwise offensive to the neighborhood. 
4.  This Section 2.5.C. does not apply to a medical facility licensed under state law or an office or clinic of a person licensed by the Texas Medical Board. 
5.  A business primarily operated as a barber shop, beauty shop, skin care or cosmetics salon, nail salon, or similar business which provides the service of applying permanent cosmetics or makeup solely as an incidental use of the business shall be exempt from this Section 2.5.C, if the property may otherwise be developed and used as a barber shop, beauty shop, skin care or cosmetics salon, nail salon, or similar business in accordance with the Use Table (Section 2.4.C.). 
6.  Tattoo studios shall at all times be in full compliance with all requirements of state laws and regulations applicable to tattooing and operation of a tattoo studio. 
D.  Sexually Oriented Businesses 
Approval of a specific use permit is required prior to the development and use of property for a sexually oriented business; provided, however, no specific use permit shall be granted for such use until a permit for the proposed sexually oriented business pursuant to Chapter 26, Article IV of the Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
E.  Garden and Nursery Sales (Outdoors) 
The following standards shall be used in the design, location and siting of Garden and Nursery Sales (Outside). A comprehensive site plan shall be submitted for approval by the Building Official prior to permit approval. Garden and Nursery Sales (Outside) sites shall comply with the following: 
1.  Location - The site shall be adjoining the building in which the primary business is conducted. No sales shall be located in front of the building. The site shall be located in such a manner so that it will not impede or hinder traffic flow. 
2.  Screening - The sales area shall be screened from public view by a minimum six-foot-high, maximum eight foot high screening fence. No merchandise may be stacked above the fence. No merchandise may be displayed outside the sales area. Fencing shall be of a material consistent with the exterior of the building. Visual openings may be allowed in the fence provided the opening does not exceed four inches in width with a minimum of eight feet between openings. Visual openings in the fence shall be constructed of wrought iron with no space larger than six feet, measured in any direction. Tree limbs may extend above the required fence. 
3.  Roof - A roof shall be required over the sales area. The roof shall be consistent with materials and construction methods approved by the Building Code. 
4.  Accessibility - The sales area shall have ingress and egress only through the main building. 
5.  Deliveries and Customer Pick-up - An opening ten feet wide, equipped with a gate, may be allowed only on the side or the rear of the sales area for deliveries and customer pick-up of merchandise. This opening may not be used as an entrance to the sales area, except as indicated in this section. 
6.  Drainage - A 12-inch high concrete curb shall be placed on all sides of the sales area to prevent drainage of chemicals into the public storm sewer system. An onsite drainage system with a dilution basin shall be installed when required by the Plumbing Code. 
7.  Exceptions - Exceptions to these operation standards may be requested by the applicant. Exceptions must be submitted on a site plan and approved by the Commission and City Council. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
2.6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES IN RESTAURANTS AND PRIVATE CLUBS 
A.  Compliance with Additional Regulations 
The sale of alcoholic beverages in a restaurant or private club on any property within the City, whether by right or pursuant to a specific use permit, shall be in compliance with this section. 
B.  Definitions 
Whenever used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below unless specifically defined otherwise: 
1.  Private Club: An association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated under the laws of the State of Texas, that is the holder of a valid and subsisting private club permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission and whose stated purpose is for the promotion of some common object and whose members must be passed upon by a committee made up of members of the club. 
2.  Qualifying Restaurant: An existing or proposed eating establishment whose gross sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages shall constitute at least 50% of the establishment's combined gross sales of food, non-alcoholic and alcoholic beverages quarterly. 
3.  Restaurant: Unless specifically indicated otherwise, the term "restaurant" shall mean a qualifying restaurant where the operator is the holder of a mixed beverage permit or a private club permit. 
4.  Holder of a Mixed Beverage Permit: Holder of a mixed beverage permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission pursuant to Chapter 28 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
C.  Continuation of Existing Private Clubs. All existing and legal private clubs are declared legal and valid and may continue to operate as legal and valid operations after the effective date of this ordinance. 
D.  Eleemosynary Corporations. No application for a specific use permit for an applicant claiming to be an eleemosynary corporation, may be considered or approved until, based on data and information provided by the applicant, the City Attorney has determined the applicant is an eleemosynary corporation as defined in Section 2.6B.5. 
E.  Structural and Building Requirements 
1.  No qualifying restaurant may be located in a hotel unless such hotel: 
a.  Has at least 200 sleeping rooms; or 
b.  Has at least 160 sleeping rooms and meeting space in excess of 2,000 square feet. 
2.  Exterior signs or signs visible from the restaurant's exterior that advertise the sale of alcoholic beverages are prohibited. 
3.  No qualifying restaurant shall be located within 300 feet of a church, school (public or private), or public hospital. The method for measuring distance shall be as determined in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code §109.33(b), as amended. 
F.  Food service. 
1.  Qualifying restaurants shall provide regular food service for their customers. 
2.  All qualifying restaurants shall receive from the sale of food at least 50 percent of the restaurant's gross sales at that location which sales figures shall be accurately reflected on a quarterly basis, subject to verification by the city in accordance with section 2.6J. 
3.  Only attached patios or gardens that occupy an area greater than or equal to 50 percent of the total floor area occupied by the enclosed portion of a qualifying restaurant shall be included in the calculation of minimum required parking. 
4.  No drive-in, drive-through, or curb service of alcoholic beverages is permitted. 
5.  The qualifying restaurant shall designate a portion of its total combined floor area for food preparation and storage adequate to service customers in a manner that permits and allows the qualifying restaurant to maintain the prescribed food to alcoholic beverage sales ratio prescribed herein. 
6.  A private club or mixed beverage serving area located in a hotel or motel will be allowed in an area totally separate from the restaurant area subject to the following: 
a.  The qualifying restaurant must be located within the same building as the hotel or motel. 
b.  Not less than 2,000 square feet of floor area shall be occupied by qualifying restaurant facilities (total qualifying restaurant operations). 
c.  The floor area devoted to the sale of alcoholic beverages within the qualifying restaurant does not exceed the floor area devoted to food service. 
d.  The qualifying restaurant will designate a portion of its total combined floor area for food preparation and storage adequate to service customers in a manner that permits and allows the qualifying restaurant to maintain the prescribed food to alcoholic beverage sales ratio prescribed in this chapter. 
e.  The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages may be permitted within the restaurant area. 
f.  Pursuant to Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 28.01(b), the holder of a mixed beverage permit for a qualifying restaurant in a hotel zoned pursuant to this Chapter may deliver mixed beverages, including wine and beer, to individual rooms of the hotel or to any other location in the hotel building or grounds, except a parking area on the licensed premises or another alcoholic beverage establishment, without regard to whether the place of delivery is part of the licensed premises. A permittee in a hotel may allow a patron or visitor to enter or leave the licensed premises, even though the patron or visitor possesses an alcoholic beverage, if the beverage is in an open container and appears to be possessed for present consumption. 
G.  Application Time Limit 
In the event an application for a building permit for a qualifying restaurant is not made within one year from the granting of the specific use permit for service of alcoholic beverages in a qualifying restaurant, the City Council may direct the Commission to call a public hearing for the purpose of considering the rezoning and termination of such Specific Use Permit. 
H.  Application and Submission Requirements 
The following information shall be submitted to the City at the time an application for building permit, a certificate of occupancy (if no building permit is required), and/or a specific use permit, if required, for service of alcoholic beverages in a qualifying restaurant is made: 
1.  A site plan comparable in graphic content to that normally required for development in a PD district and that also includes a drawing indicating the distance from all uses stated in Section 2.6E.3. 
2.  A floor plan showing location, square footage, and arrangement of areas designated for: 
a.  Private club or sale of alcoholic beverages; 
b.  Eating; 
c.  Kitchen and food preparation; 
d.  Bar/holding area (not to exceed 20% of the restaurant); 
e.  Dancing and/or live entertainment; 
f.  All other proposed uses within the restaurant. 
I.  Remodeling and Alterations 
Any proposed remodeling or change to the original floor plan and bar layout of the original approved site plan, which requires issuance of a building permit, shall be reviewed and subject to approval of the Director. If changes to the original approved plans are determined to constitute an amendment to the specific use permit, if approval of a specific use permit was originally required, approval by the City Council shall be required following the procedures required for an amendment to the zoning regulations for the property. 
J.  Food Sales Compliance 
1.  The operator of the qualifying restaurant shall be responsible for complying with Section 2.6G.2 and shall maintain and keep records necessary to demonstrate such compliance. 
2.  Upon notice from the City Manager or the City Manager's designee, the operator of a qualifying restaurant shall make available for inspection any and all records necessary to confirm compliance with Section 2.6G.2. as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 30 days after receipt of the notice from the City Manager. 
K.  Alcohol Awareness Program 
The applicant for a specific use permit to allow the sale of alcoholic beverages in a qualifying restaurant shall submit an alcohol awareness program with the specific use permit application. Any such alcohol awareness program shall be commensurate with the size and character of the restaurant operation for which the specific use permit is being requested. The submitted alcohol awareness program shall be used as criteria in considering the Specific Use Permit. 
L.  Non-Compliance 
Violation of any provision of the terms of this section and/or any additional regulations set forth in a specific use permit regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages in a qualifying restaurant shall be cause for the City Council to direct the Commission to hold a public hearing to make a recommendation whether such specific use permit or certificate of occupancy should be amended, changed or revoked. 
M.  Amusement Devices 
Installation and use of gaming or amusement devices, such as billiard (pool) tables, pinball, or any other coin-operated or electronic game machines shall comply with the City's ordinances governing such operations. 
N.  Hours of Operation 
Applicable state law shall be strictly enforced relative to the hours of operation of the service of alcoholic beverages in a qualifying restaurant. 
O.  Brewpubs. A qualifying restaurant may operate as a brewpub if the qualifying restaurant is located within a zoning district where a brewpub is otherwise a permitted use. 
P.  Private Clubs Operating Pursuant to a Lawful Zoning Ordinance Prior to October 6, 1986 
Private Clubs lawfully operating prior to October 6, 1986, pursuant to a City ordinance authorizing such Private Club use shall have the option to operate with either a private club permit or a mixed beverage permit. All such clubs and restaurants shall comply with the definition of qualifying restaurants whose gross sale of food shall constitute at least 50% of the establishment's quarterly gross sales. The operator of such Private Club shall notify the City prior to the change in use from Private Club to a Mixed Beverage Permit by making application for a Certificate of Occupancy. 
Q.  Eleemosynary Corporations 
Eleemosynary corporations shall not be required to comply with Sections 2.6F.1, 2.6F.4, 2.6F.6 and 2.6M; provided, however, eleemosynary corporations: 
1.  shall be allowed to operate only with a private club license and not with a mixed beverage permit, and 
2.  shall at all times provide food service during the time that alcohol beverages are served and consumed. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3636 , § 1(A), 6-9-2020)  
2.7 - GAS WELLS 
A.  Gas Wells Allowed 
Natural gas wells and all related gas exploration activity, other than a transmission pipeline, shall be allowed subject to approval of a specific use permit in accordance with Section 6.5 and issuance of a Gas Well Permit pursuant to Ch. 34, Art. X of the Code of Ordinances, as amended, and only within the following zoning districts: 
1.  Planned Development No. 22 
2.  Planned Development No. 24 
3.  Planned Development No. 25 
4.  Planned Development No. 50 
5.  Planned Development No. 61 
6.  Planned Development No. 72 
7.  Planned Development No. 77 
8.  Planned Development No. 78 
9.  Planned Development No. 81 (excluding the Mixed-Use Residential District) 
10.  Planned Development No. 88 (Commerce Sub District only) 
B.  Specific Use Permit Required 
An application for a specific use permit for a gas well site shall include, at a minimum, the following additional documents and information: 
1.  A proposed transportation route for equipment, chemicals, and waste products used on the gas well site, which shall also include all ingress and egress from the site to public streets. 
2.  Location and description of all improvements and structures within 600 feet of the gas well site measured as required by Section 2.7C.8. 
3.  A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of all improvements and equipment, including the location of the proposed gas well and other facilities including, but not limited to, tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators and storage tanks of storage sheds, and outside storage areas. 
4.  Location of the 100-year flood limits where applicable. 
5.  Preliminary drainage plan. 
6.  The X, Y, and Z (elevation) coordinates in reference to the NAD 83 Texas State Plane Coordinate System for the proposed Gas Well site. 
7.  Copies of all appropriate Texas Railroad Commission approved forms, such as the W-1 and P-4 related to the gas well. 
8.  A signed right-of-way maintenance and repair agreement with the City. 
9.  A copy of the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for the gas well site. 
10.  A copy of the Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasure Plan (SPCC) for the site. 
11.  A Tree Survey and Preservation Plan that identifies all trees that are six caliper inches in diameter or larger on the site. This plan shall also address where new vegetative screening shall be installed within the site. 
12.  A copy of the Hazardous Materials Management Plan for the site. 
13.  A copy of the Emergency Response Plan for the site. 
14.  A map showing the location of all existing and proposed gas pipelines serving the site and the location of the existing or proposed connection to the high volume gas transmission gas line. 
C.  Distance Requirements 
It shall be unlawful to drill, re-drill, deepen, re-enter, activate or convert any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located: 
1.  Within 600 feet of any playground, athletic field, swimming pool, water slide and playground, concession stand, pavilion or picnic area within a public park, or any other park facilities or similar improvements as determined by the City Manager or his designee. 
2.  Within 600 feet of any residence, worship facility, public building, hospital building or school or for which a building permit has been issued prior to the date of the application for a Gas Well Permit is filed with the City. 
3.  Within 300 feet of any retail or commercial building, hospital building (including parking structures) or for which a building permit has been issued prior to the date the application for a Gas Well Permit is filed with the City. 
4.  Within 200 feet of any commercial or industrial building not designed for human occupancy (such as a pump house or switching station) or for which a building permit has been issued prior to the date the application for a Gas Well Permit is filed with the City. 
5.  Within 300 feet of an existing active water well. 
6.  Within 100 feet of any property line or right-of-way. Replatting the property may be required to meet this requirement. 
7.  Within 200 feet of any river, creek, stream or existing body of water. 
8.  The measurement of all distances shall be calculated from the proposed well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest point of the object listed above in Sections 2.7C.1 through 2.7C.4. A Registered Professional Land Surveyor shall prepare the above calculations. 
9.  Tank batteries, separators, and gas lift compressors shall be located at least 300 feet from any playground, athletic field, picnic area within a public park, or from any residence, worship facility, public building, hospital building or school, or any other building used, or designed for and intended to be used, for human occupancy, for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a Gas Well Permit is filed. The distance shall be calculated from the closest tank batteries, separators or compressors, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest part of the playground, athletic field, picnic area, residence, worship facility, public building, hospital building or school, or any other building used or designed and intended to be used to human occupancy. 
10.  Gas compressors, other than gas lift compressors, shall be fully enclosed. All gas compressors, including gas lift compressors, shall be designed and/or installed with sufficient soundproofing so that no gas compressor shall produce a sound level greater than 5 dB(a) when measured at a distance of 300 feet from the compressor. Enclosed gas compressors shall be located at least: 
a.  600 feet from playground, athletic field, picnic area within a park, or from a residence, worship facility, public building, hospital or school; 
b.  200 feet from any nonresidential structure intended for human occupancy; 
c.  100 feet from any nonresidential structure not intended for human occupancy (such as a pump house or switching station). 
11.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, gas wells or compressor stations may be located less than 600 feet but no closer than 300 feet from an existing residence if the owner of such residence provides written consent signed and acknowledged by a notary public agreeing to allow such well to be drilled within the proposed distance from the owner's property. Written consent is required from the owners of all residential property located less than 600 feet of a proposed well bore prior to an application, and shall be included in the application for a specific use permit submitted to the Planning Division. 
12.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, gas wells or compressor stations may be located less than 300 feet but no closer than 200 feet from an existing retail or commercial structure if the owner of such property provides written consent signed and acknowledged by a notary public agreeing to allow such well to be drilled within the proposed distance from the owner's property. Written consent is required from the owners of all retail and commercial property located less than 300 feet of a proposed well bore prior to an application, and shall be included in the application for a specific use permit submitted to the Planning Division 
13.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section: 
a.  New residential units may be built no closer than 600 feet from an existing gas well or existing fully enclosed compressor station; 
b.  New nonresidential buildings intended for human occupancy may be built no closer than 200 feet from an existing gas well or existing fully enclosed compressor station; and 
c.  New nonresidential buildings not intended for human occupancy may be built no closer than 100 feet from an existing gas well or existing fully enclosed compressor station. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
2.8 - ANTENNAS 
A.  Satellite Antennas 
1.  A ground mounted satellite antenna may be installed in any zoning district with a building permit provided it meets the following criteria: 
a.  The antenna shall not exceed ten feet in height from the ground to the highest point of the station. 
b.  The antenna shall not exceed ten feet in diameter. 
c.  The antenna shall be located in the rear yard and comply with all building setbacks for the applicable zoning district. 
d.  The antenna shall be screened on at least three sides by a solid fence or wall or dense screening hedge to a minimum height of six feet as approved by the Director. The screening shall be of a material that is compatible with the building materials in the area. 
e.  The antenna shall meet all building and electrical codes, including proper grounding and wind load design. 
f.  The antenna shall not be portable or movable. 
2.  A roof mounted satellite antenna may be installed in any R-1 through MF-4 district, with a building permit, provided it meets the following: 
a.  Only one roof top unit shall be allowed per premise. 
b.  Roof top units shall be limited to 30 inches maximum dimension. 
c.  Screening for roof units shall not be necessary unless specifically required by the City. 
d.  The antenna shall comply with building and electrical codes as specified for ground mounted units above. 
3.  One roof mounted satellite antenna may be installed in any R-1 through MF-4 district, with a building permit, provided that: 
a.  The antenna does not exceed ten feet in diameter or ten feet above the tallest portion of the roof; 
b.  The antenna is not located within 500 feet of residential property or developed City owned park; and that the antenna is screened from public street rights-of-way on at least three sides. 
c.  Any antenna structure attached to the building that exceeds the height of the eaves shall be construed to be roof mounted. 
4.  Antenna installations in compliance with this section may be installed in any zoning district as an accessory use. Variances to the above standards may be considered and granted by the Board of Adjustment. 
B.  Mounted Antennas 
1.  General 
a.  A mounted antenna is an arrangement of wires or metal rods, including housings for the arrangements, used in transmission, retransmission and/or reception of radio, television, electromagnetic, or microwave signals. 
b.  An apparatus constructed of solid, mesh, or perforated materials of any configuration that is used to receive and/or transmit microwave signals from a terrestrial or orbitally located transmitter or transmitter relay (i.e., satellite dishes) shall not be considered a mounted antenna. 
c.  Antennas that vary from the requirements of this section shall not be considered a mounted antenna and shall require approval of a specific use permit prior to installation. 
d.  Mounted antennas may be installed in an O, LR-1, LR-2, C, LI or HI district with a building permit and in a PD district with site plan approval and a building permit provided it complies with Section 2.8B.2. 
e.  Mounted antennas may only be installed within any R-1 through MF-4 district following approval of a specific use permit and with a building permit. Mounted antennas may be installed within the I-RU district with a building permit; provided, however, if the subject property is located adjacent to any R-1 through D-2 district, then the mounted antenna may only be installed following approval of a specific use permit. A site plan drawing shall be submitted and reviewed as a component of the specific use permit application. 
f.  All commercial signs, flags, lights and attachments other than those required for communications operations, structural stability, or as required for flight visibility by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Federal Communication Commission (FCC) shall be prohibited on any antenna or antenna support structure. 
2.  Mounted Antenna Standards 
a.  The mounted antenna, including mounting equipment, shall not exceed 15 feet in length measured from the point on the structure at which the antenna is mounted. 
b.  Mounted antennas shall only be attached to electrical transmission towers, multi-story buildings, or water towers at a height of not less than 75 feet above grade; provided, however, the mounted antenna may be placed at any height within any structure if totally enclosed by the architectural elements of the structure such that no part of the antenna is visible from the exterior of the structure. 
c.  An exterior mounted antenna must be painted or have a surface finish compatible with the structure to which it is attached. 
d.  No more than three mounted antennas shall be attached to any building or water tower. 
e.  Only one mounted antenna is permitted per electrical transmission tower. 
f.  The antenna shall comply with all building and electrical codes. 
g.  The mounted antenna shall include mounting equipment, devices, and platforms necessary to attach and secure the antenna to a structure. 
3.  Auxiliary Structures 
a.  A mounted antenna auxiliary structure, which houses electronic equipment needed for operation of the antenna and the associated communication system, and which is located at ground level adjacent to an elevated water storage tank, electrical transmission tower or multi-story building or adjacent to or on a rooftop of a multi-story building shall be permitted as an accessory use to a mounted antenna when meeting the criteria below. 
b.  Only one auxiliary structure is permitted per mounted antenna site. 
c.  Auxiliary structures installed on a rooftop of a building shall be screened so that they are not visible from all street rights-of-way and neighboring properties. 
d.  The auxiliary structure shall not exceed a maximum of seven feet in height and 55 square feet in area. 
e.  All auxiliary structures shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet from any street right-of-way or located behind the established building line and shall comply with all other property setbacks for the zoning district in which the auxiliary structure is located. 
f.  The following standards may be imposed by the City Manager or appointed designee to ensure that an auxiliary structure is compatible architecturally with adjacent structures, with the characteristics of the surrounding area, and is consistent with future development plans of the neighboring properties. 
i.  The exterior walls of an auxiliary structure shall be comprised of materials as determined and approved by the City Manager or appointed designee. 
ii.  The City Manager or appointed designee may require an auxiliary structure be screened by landscaping such as a dense screening hedge of shrubs (e.g., red tip photinias) or by a masonry screening fence or wall to a minimum height of six feet or by a combination of earthen berm, landscaping and masonry walls. 
iii.  All auxiliary structures must be setback a minimum of 20 feet from any adjoining R-1 through MF-4 district and all fans, air conditioning units, and similar equipment shall be installed on the auxiliary structure wall located farthest from any R-1 through MF-4 district. 
iv.  All required landscape screening shall be supplied with an underground automatic irrigation system. 
C.  Communication Antenna and Tower Regulations 
1.  Applicability 
This Section 2.8C. shall apply to the location and operation of all telephonic, radio, television, microwave, communication antenna and towers located within the City. 
2.  Specific Use Permit 
A specific use permit approved in accordance with Section 6.5 is required for the installation of any telephonic, radio, television or microwave, communication antennas and towers in any zoning district of the City, except as otherwise provided in Sections 2.8A and 2.8B. 
3.  Height 
The maximum height of any telephonic, radio, television or microwave, communication antennas and towers shall be the height set forth in the approved specific use permit regardless of location or zoning district. 
4.  Definitions 
a.  Telephonic, radio, television or microwave and communication antennas means an arrangement of wires, metal rods, including housings for the arrangements, used in transmission, retransmission and/or reception of telephonic, radio, television, electromagnetic, or microwave signals. 
b.  Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers, for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio spectrum, but excluding noncommercial antenna installations for home use of radio or television. The term includes telephonic, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, telephone towers and the like. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
2.9 - ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES 
A.  R-1 to R-6 and D-1 to D-2 Districts. All accessory buildings in the R-1 through D-2 zoning districts shall comply with the following: 
1.  General Requirements. 
a.  An accessory building may not be used for operation of a business except in association with a home occupation or as a guest/servants quarters except as permitted in Section 2.9.A.2. 
b.  Accessory buildings shall not be used for rental purposes or barter exchange. 
2.  Guest/Servants Quarters. An accessory building may be used as a dwelling only in an R-1 or R-2 zoning district after approval of a specific use permit for such purpose and subject to the following: 
a.  The accessory building may be occupied only by immediate family members, a personal guest and/or full-time domestic service worker or service workers of the owner or lessee of the property on which the accessory building is located. The family of a live-in service worker may reside in the accessory building only if all adult members of the family are employed as full-time domestic service workers by the owner or lessee of the property; 
b.  The accessory building must comply with the minimum standards established in the Building Code and the Minimum Housing Code for habitable space; and 
c.  The accessory building must otherwise comply with the regulations of this Section 2.9. 
3.  Additional Development Standards. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all accessory buildings shall comply with the following development standards: 
a.  Accessory buildings may be furnished with utility sinks and water; and 
b.  Accessory buildings may be furnished with a bathroom, including those permitted in Section 2.9A.2. 
c.  Gas and/or electricity for an accessory building shall not be served by a separate utility meter from the utility meter(s) through which service is provided to the main building on the property; 
d.  The vehicle driveway providing vehicle ingress and egress to an accessory building used as a garage, carport, or similar vehicle storage structure and designed to be entered from an alley or street must be not less than ten feet (10.0') in width; 
e.  No trailers, containers, commercial boxes or other similar structures shall be used as storage or accessory buildings; 
f.  Accessory buildings shall be limited to one story in height except as provided in Sections 2.9A.4.b and 2.9A.5.f; 
g.  The Director may authorize the location of a temporary accessory building or portable building on a property provided such use is solely for construction purposes and such building is removed from the property after completion of construction of the project not later than the date designated by the Director; 
h.  Accessory buildings constructed with at least one full wall with or without window and/or door openings (excluding guest/servants quarters) shall, cumulatively, not exceed a floor area of 200 square feet per lot or lot of record, including, but not limited to, workshops, storage buildings, pool houses, and similar structures; 
i.  Accessory buildings constructed with no full walls (i.e., open on four sides with not more than one half-wall) shall, cumulatively, not exceed a floor area of 600 square feet per lot or lot of record, including, but not limited to, open sided gazebos, outdoor kitchens, pergolas, and similar open sided structures; 
j.  Notwithstanding Sections 2.9A.3.h and 2.9A.3.i, no accessory building other than a detached garage, carport or similar vehicle storage structure shall be allowed to be installed or constructed on any lot or lot of record that exceeds Section 3.3J.b and/or results in the maximum lot coverage authorized by this Chapter for the zoning district in which the lot or lot of record is located to be exceeded; 
k.  An accessory building with a floor area greater than 100 square feet must be constructed on a permanent concrete foundation, designed and constructed with materials similar to the main structure, and be architecturally compatible with the main structure; 
l.  An accessory structure with a floor area of less than 100 square feet is exempt from the requirements in Section 2.9A.3.k.; 
m.  Accessory buildings may be located in easements only with the prior written consent of the owner(s) of the easement(s): provided, however, no accessory building may be located in a drainage easement prior to review and approval of the proposed location by the City Engineer or designee; and 
n.  The roof overhang of an accessory building may project no greater than 18 inches into the required side or rear yard setback. 
4.  Attached Accessory Buildings. Attached accessory buildings shall comply with the provisions of Section 2.9.A.3 and the following development standards: 
a.  The location of an attached accessory building shall comply with the front, side, and rear setback requirements of the main building on the property; 
b.  The height of an attached accessory building shall not exceed the allowable height of the main structure to which it is physically connected; and 
c.  An attached accessory building shall be architecturally compatible with the main building and shall be constructed on a permanent concrete foundation. 
5.  Detached Accessory Building Regulations. Detached accessory buildings shall comply with the provisions of Section 2.9.A.3 and the following development standards: 
a.  Detached accessory buildings shall be located more than 10 feet from the main structure on the property or the lot or lot of record; 
b.  No equipment or appurtenances other than eaves, cornices and other architectural features normally found on the main building on the property may be located within the area between the main structure and the detached accessory building; 
c.  The main building and the detached accessory building may be connected by a breezeway or covered walk provided all structures are in compliance with Section 2.9A.6; 
d.  Detached accessory buildings shall observe a side yard setback measured to the wall of the building that is: 
i.  Not less than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line or easement line (except as allowed in Section 2.9A.3.m); or 
ii.  A side yard setback equal to the main structure from a street facing side lot line; 
e.  Except as allowed in Section 2.9A.3.m, detached accessory structures shall be set back not less than three feet (3') from the rear property line, alley line or easement line measured to the wall of the building or structure; and 
f.  A detached accessory building used for vehicle storage (i.e. garage, carport or similar vehicle storage structure) with a floor area greater than 200 square feet shall not exceed a height of twenty feet (20') measured to the tallest point of the building. 
6.  Breezeways or Covered Walks. A breezeway or covered walk may connect a main building with a detached accessory building subject to the following: 
a.  The breezeway or covered walk is a one-story unenclosed passageway not exceeding ten feet (10.0') in height and six feet (6.0') in cross-sectional width (measured between supports) and having eaves or roof overhang not exceeding twenty-four inches (24.0"); 
b.  The detached accessory building is constructed in compliance with Section 2.9A.5; 
c.  The breezeway is designed and constructed to be architecturally compatible with the main structure; and 
d.  The breezeway is constructed with a minimum of two draft stops to prevent fire from transferring from one structure to another. 
7.  Location of Mechanical Equipment. Air conditioning compressors, cooling towers, pool and spa equipment, and other similar accessory equipment shall be located as follows: 
a.  At all times behind the front setback line: 
b.  If located in the rear half of the lot, not less than three feet from the side lot line and rear lot line; 
c.  If located in the front half of the lot, the equipment shall observe the setbacks for attached accessory structures set forth in Section 2.9A4; and 
d.  If located in the side yard of a corner lot, adjacent to a side street, or in the front half of the lot, such equipment shall be screened from view by a fence, wall, or shrubbery. 
8.  Swimming Pools. All swimming pools and spas shall be located behind the required front building line. No swimming pool, spa or other similar body of water shall be located less than five feet (5.0) from a side or rear property line to the water's edge. 
B.  MF-1 to MF-4 Districts 
1.  Generally. Accessory buildings located in any MF-1 through MF-4 zoning district shall comply with all of the accessory building regulations established in Sections 2.9A.1 through 2.9A.5. 
2.  Area. The area of the accessory buildings and the area of the main buildings located in the rear half of a lot located in any MF-1 through MF-4 zoning district shall not exceed 50% of the total area of the rear half of the lot. 
C.  Nonresidential Zoning Districts. All accessory buildings in any I-RU, O, LR-1, LR-2, C, LI or HI zoning district, or a PD district which does not allow residential uses, shall comply with the following: 
1.  Accessory buildings shall be used solely as an incidental use subordinate to the main use located on the same platted lot or lot of record; 
2.  Accessory buildings shall be constructed on a permanent concrete foundation and be designed and constructed to be architecturally compatible with the main building; 
3.  Accessory buildings shall comply with the setback requirements for the main building; 
4.  Portable or movable accessory buildings, regardless of their size, shall not be permitted; 
5.  No trailers, containers, commercial boxes or other similar structures shall be used as storage or accessory buildings; provided, however, the Director may grant permission based on good and satisfactory reasons for the temporary use of shipping containers, commercial boxes or similar containers for a limited time period, provided the temporary use does not adversely affect the adjoining property and no safety or nuisance hazards are created and 
6.  The Director may authorize the location of a temporary accessory building or portable building provided such use is solely for construction purposes and such building is removed from the property after completion of construction of the project not later than the date designated by the Director. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3582 , § 1, 7-23-2019)  
ARTICLE 3. - ZONING DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
 
3.1 - APPLICABILITY 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every building or structure, or part of a building or structure, erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in the zoning district in which the building or structure is located must comply with this Article. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
3.2 - GENERAL 
A.  Location of Dwellings and Buildings 
1.  Except as other authorized pursuant to an approved site plan, no more than one main building for one-family, two-family or multiple-family use with permitted accessory buildings may be located upon a lot. 
2.  Each dwelling shall face or front upon a public street, or approved place, other than an alley, which means of access shall have a dedicated right-of-way width of not less than thirty feet (30.0'). 
3.  More than one main building may be located upon a lot located within a PD zoning district which allows for residential, retail, commercial or industrial use or within property for which a site plan has been approved provided the buildings conform to all the open space, parking and density requirements applicable to the uses and districts where the lot is located. 
4.  Subject to approval of a site plan as required by this chapter, a single lot may be developed with two or more main buildings, or portions of buildings that do not face upon a public street; provided, however, no parking area, storage area, or required open space for any one of such buildings shall be computed as being part of the required open space, yard or area for any other building. 
B.  Building Separation 
1.  Apartment buildings shall be constructed with an exterior wall separation of not less than: 
a.  Twenty feet (20.0'), if adjacent walls are equal to or less than thirty-five feet (35.0') long; and 
b.  Thirty feet (30.0') if adjacent walls are greater than thirty-five feet (35.0') long. 
 
 
2.  Subject to prior approval of the Building Official and Fire Marshall, balconies and patios may encroach into the separation area described in Paragraph 1, above, provided not less than 15 feet of open clearance is maintained for emergency access if otherwise allowed by applicable construction codes. No obstructions encroaching upon said 15 foot clearance area is permitted. 
C.  Courts 
The faces of all opposite walls within an inner court created by the construction of one or more apartment buildings shall be a minimum distance of thirty feet (30.0') apart, and no balcony or canopy shall extend into such court area for a distance greater than five feet (5.0'). 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
3.3 - MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS 
A.  Description 
This section identifies and explains forms of measurement used throughout this Chapter and exceptions thereto. 
B.  Height of Building 
1.  The "height" of a building shall be the vertical distance of a building measured from the average established grade at the street line or from the average natural front yard ground level, whichever is higher, to: 
a.  The highest point of the roofs surface; or 
b.  To the peak for hip, mansard and gable roofs. 
2.  Within the I-RU district only, building height shall be measured from the average established grade prior to development. 
3.  Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, above, height encroachments are permitted to the extent authorized by Section 3.3C., below. 
C.  Height Encroachments 
All buildings must comply with the height encroachment restrictions set forth in this Article 3 applicable to the zoning district in which the building is located. "Height encroachments" shall include, but not be limited to, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouse, tanks, water towers, radio towers, ornamental cupolas, domes and spires, steeples, and parapet walls. Additionally, water stand pipes and tanks, steeples, domes and spires, and school and institutional buildings located within a residential district may be constructed up to the maximum height allowed within the zoning district provided that the side and rear yard setbacks for such lot shall be increased by one foot (1.0') for each one foot (1.0') that such structures exceed 28 feet in height. 
D.  Story Height 
The "height of a story" when "story" is used to mean the number of floors in a building means the height between the successive floors of a building or from the top floor to the roof. The standard height for a story is 14 feet. 
E.  Lot Area 
1.  "Lot Area" or "area of a lot" means the number of square feet contained within the property lines of a parcel of land. 
2.  All property developed within the City must comply with the lot area requirements set forth in this Article 3 applicable to the zoning district in which the building is located; provided, however, a lot which was a Lot of Record may be developed and used as a one-family dwelling with less than the minimum lot area required for the zoning district in which the lot is located. No lot which existed at the time of adoption of this Chapter shall be reduced below the minimum lot area. 
F.  Lot Width 
1.  "Lot width" means the distance between the side property lines measured at the front building line. 
2.  All property developed within the City must comply with the lot width requirements set forth in this Article 3 applicable to the zoning district in which the building is located; provided, however, a lot which was a Lot of Record may be developed and used as a one-family dwelling with less than the minimum lot width No lot which existed at the time of adoption of this Chapter shall be reduced below the minimum lot width. 
 
G.  Lot Depth 
1.  "Lot depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
2.  All property developed within the City must comply with the lot depth requirements set forth in this Article 3 applicable to the zoning district in which the building is located; provided, however, a lot which was a Lot of Record may be developed and used as a one-family dwelling with less than the minimum lot depth. No lot that existed at the time of adoption of this Chapter shall be reduced below the minimum lot depth. 
 
H.  Front Yard 
1.  "Front Yard" means the open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and from the main building to the front lot or street line with the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building line as specified for the zoning district in which it is located. 
2.  All property developed within the City must comply with the front yard requirements set forth in this Article 3 applicable to the zoning district in which the building is located except as follows: 
a.  Where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is divided by two or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire frontage. 
 
b.  Where a building line has been established by plat or City ordinance and such line requires a greater or lesser front yard setback than is prescribed by this Chapter for the zoning district in which the building line is located, the required front yard shall comply with the building line so established by such City ordinance or plat. 
c.  Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a building line for accessory buildings has been established along one frontage on the plat or by prior ordinance, in which event only one required front yard need be observed. 
 
d.  If buildings along the frontage of any street in a residential block have been constructed with an average setback that is greater or lesser in dimension than the minimum front yard established in the zoning district, the minimum front yard for lots within that block shall be the average front yard of all buildings in the block. Solely, for purposes of the foregoing calculation, all vacant lots along the same street frontage shall be assumed to have been constructed subject to the minimum front yard specified by this Article for the zoning district. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this Paragraph d. shall not be applied in a manner to require a front yard of more than 50 feet or require any building to be constructed with a setback exceeding 10 feet greater than the minimum front yard setback applicable to any adjacent lot. 
e.  The minimum front yard for property located within an MF-4 Zoning District shall be the greater of (i) 30 feet and (ii) the distance from the centerline of the street on which a building fronts to the front face of the building be less than one-half the height of the building; but in no case shall a front yard setback of more than 50 feet from the property line be required. 
f.  In addition to setbacks required elsewhere in this Chapter, the building setback line along both sides of Dallas Parkway shall be 100 feet from the centerline of Dallas Parkway. Appeals from this setback requirement shall be heard by the City Council. 
g.  Unless expressly allowed by other City ordinance, in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, D-1, D-2 and I-RU Districts, no building, structure, fence or improved parking area shall be located, erected or placed in the required front yard; provided, however, driveways, circular driveways, and landscaping shall be allowed within the required front yard. 
h.  If 75% of the buildings that front any street in a residential block do not have garage doors that face the street in the front half of the lot, then the front facing garage doors must maintain a minimum setback of ten feet greater than that of the main structure and be designed in a manner not to dominate the front facade of the structure. A maximum of (i) two single car garage doors, each being no greater than ten feet wide, or (ii) one double car garage door no more than 22 feet wide shall be allowed. This paragraph h applies only to residential units with existing street-oriented driveways constructed on lots with less than 81 feet of street frontage located within an R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6 zoning district. 
i.  The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed 5 feet and subsurface structures may not project into the front yard to a height greater than 40 inches. 
 
I.  Side Yard 
1.  "Side yard" means the open, unoccupied space or spaces on one side or two sides of a main building and on the same lot with the building, situated between the building and a side line of the lot and extending through from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line, not the rear line, or a front line, shall be deemed a side line. 
2.  All property developed within the City must comply with the side yard requirements set forth in this Article 3 applicable to the zoning district in which the building is located except as follows: 
a.  Multiple family dwellings not exceeding two stories in height shall be located on a lot to provide a minimum side yard between all building walls and any side lot line as follows; 
i.  The side yard adjacent to a building face or wall less than or equal to 35 feet in width shall be not less than 10 feet; and 
ii.  The side yard adjacent to a building face or wall greater than 35 feet in width shall be not less than 15 feet. 
 
b.  Multiple Family Dwellings exceeding two stories in height shall be located on a lot in a manner to provide a side yard between all building walls and any side lot line as follows: 
i.  If the building face or wall has openings for light, air, or access, the side yard adjacent to such wall shall be not less than 1 foot for every 2 feet of building height adjacent to such side yard, but in no case shall the side yard be required to exceed 50 feet; and 
ii.  If the building face or wall contains no openings for access, light or air, the side yard adjacent to such wall shall not be less than 10 feet. 
 
c.  On a corner lot platted after February 24, 1969, and used for a one-family or two-family dwelling, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards; provided, however, a side yard building line of 10 feet or more designated and shown on a plat approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission after February 24, 1969, shall control over a conflict with this paragraph c. 
d.  The minimum side yard adjacent to a side street on a Lot of Record shall be 10 feet. 
 
e.  The side yard adjacent to a side street of a lot developed with a one-family attached dwelling shall be not less than 30 feet. The end of each one-family attached dwelling complex shall have a side yard of not less than 10 feet so that the end of any two adjacent building complexes shall be at least 20 feet apart. 
f.  Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed except for permitted accessory buildings and the permitted encroachment of architectural features of the main structure, which encroachment shall not exceed: 
i.  1 foot for window sills, belt courses, and cornices; and 
ii.  2 feet for roof eaves. 
g.  A side yard adjacent to a street of a corner lot developed with a multiple-family dwelling not exceeding two stories in height shall not be less than 30 feet. No balcony, porch, or any portion of the building may extend into such required side yard, except that a roof may overhang such side yard up to 4 feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a side yard established by other ordinances or plat on a lot of record shall control if in conflict with this paragraph g. 
J.  Rear Yard 
1.  "Rear Yard" means the open, unoccupied space, except for permitted accessory buildings, extending across the rear of a lot from one side lot line to the other side lot line and having a depth between the building and the rear lot line as specified in the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
2.  All property developed within the City must comply with the rear yard requirements set forth in this Article 3 applicable to the zoning district in which the building is located except as follows: 
a.  In all residential zoning districts, no main residential building may be constructed closer than 15 feet to (i) the rear property line or (ii) if a public or private utility or drainage easement is located on the lot adjacent to the rear lot line, the boundary of such easement, whichever is the farthest distance from the rear lot line. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings (subject to the provisions of Section 2.9) shall cover no more than 50% of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a projected line joining the mid-point on one side lot line with the mid-point of the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Multiple-family dwellings exceeding two stories in height must be located on the lot in such a manner as to provide a rear yard equal to 1 foot for every 2 feet of building height; provided, however, such rear yard shall not be required to exceed 50 feet. 
K.  Lot Coverage and Floor Area Ratio 
1.  "Lot Coverage" means the percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the base (first story or floor) of buildings located on the lot or the area determined as the maximum cross-sectional area of the building. 
2.  "Floor Area Ratio (FAR)" means the ratio between the total square feet of floor area in a structure and the total square feet of land in the lot or tract on which the structure is located. 
3.  The development of all property within the City must comply with the lot coverage and floor area ratio requirements for the respective zoning districts as set forth in this Article 3; provided, however, a building constructed before February 24, 1969, that exceeds the maximum lot coverage or floor area ratio set forth in this zoning ordinance shall be considered a conforming structure. 
L.  Floor Area per Dwelling Unit 
1.  "Floor Area" means the total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building inclusive of all floor levels, but excluding cellars, carports or garages. 
2.  "Dwelling Unit" means a building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping for one family. 
3.  Minimum floor area of a dwelling unit shall be computed exclusive of breezeways, garages, open porches, carports, or accessory buildings or accessory space not designed and used directly and specifically for dwelling purposes. 
4.  All property development within the City with a dwelling unit must comply with the minimum area per dwelling unit requirements for the respective zoning districts as set forth in this Article 3 except as follows: 
a.  A structure designed or erected for multiple-family occupancy shall contain no more than 6,000 square feet per floor. In determining the maximum floor area permitted by this paragraph a, all covered halls, walks, and parking areas shall be included when the structure is attached to another building, or shall be limited to a maximum of 6,000 square feet when the structure is not attached to another building. 
b.  The location of more than one dwelling structure for one family, two family or multiple family use on a single lot or tract approved in accordance with Section 3.2.A.4 shall comply with this Sections 3.3L.4.a. 
M.  Building Length. No single wall or side of any multiple dwelling structure shall exceed 200 feet in length. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3548 , § 1, 1-8-2019; Ord. No. 3626 , § 1, 1-21-2020)  
3.4 - R-1 (ONE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT-1) 
Description 
The R-1 District is intended to accommodate one-family detached houses on large individual lots. Compatible civic and institutional uses are also permitted. Houses have a minimum floor area of 2,200 square feet. The minimum lot size of one acre generates a low density development pattern, the lowest of the R-districts. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is predominately one-family detached houses on large individual lots or where such a pattern is desired in the future. 
 
Notes 
1. For placement of structures, parking areas and driveways in front yards, see Section 3.3H.2.g. 1. For placement of structures, parking areas and driveways in front yards, see Section 3.3H.2.g. 
2. Average front setback may apply, see Section 3.3H.2.d. 
3. For allowed encroachments, see Section 3.3C. 
4. For setbacks on corner lots, see Section 3.3I.2.c. and d. 
5. For rear yard and lot coverage requirements, see Section 3.3J.2.a. and b. 
6. For location and regulation of accessory structures, see Section 2.9. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3548 , § 1, 1-8-2019)  
3.5 - R-2 (ONE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT-2) 
Description 
The R-2 District is intended to accommodate one-family detached houses on medium-sized individual lots. Compatible civic and institutional uses are also permitted. Houses have a minimum floor area of 1,900 square feet. The minimum lot size of 13,000 square feet generates a low density development pattern that is more dense than R-1. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is predominately one-family detached houses on medium-sized individual lots or where such a pattern is desired in the future. 
 
Notes 
1. For placement of structures, parking areas and driveways in front yards, see Section 3.3H.2.g. 
2. Average front setback may apply, see Section 3.3H.2.d. 
3. For allowed encroachments, see Section 3.3C. 
4. For setbacks on corner lots, see Section 3.3I.2.c. and d. 
5. For rear yard and lot coverage requirements, see Section 3.3J.2.a. 
6. For location and regulation of accessory structures, see Section 2.9. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3548 , § 1, 1-8-2019)  
3.6 - R-3 (ONE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT-3) 
Description 
The R-3 District is intended to accommodate one-family detached houses on medium sized individual lots. Compatible civic and institutional uses are also permitted. Houses have a minimum floor area of 1,800 square feet. The minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet generates a low density development pattern that is more dense than those allowed in the R-2 district. R-3 allows the same density as R-4, but the minimum floor area of a house in R-3 is greater than in R-4. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is predominately one-family detached houses on medium-sized individual lots or where such a pattern is desired in the future. 
 
Notes 
1. For placement of structures, parking areas and driveways in front yards, see Section 3.3H.2.g. 
2. Average front setback may apply, see Section 3.3H.2.d. 
3. For allowed encroachments, see Section 3.3C. 
4. For setbacks on corner lots, see Section 3.3I.2.c. and d. 
5. For rear yard and lot coverage requirements, see Section 3.3J.2.a. 
6. For location and regulation of accessory structures, see Section 2.9. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3548 , § 1, 1-8-2019)  
3.7 - R-4 (ONE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT-4) 
Description 
The R-4 District is intended to accommodate one-family detached houses on medium-sized individual lots. Compatible civic and institutional uses are also permitted. Houses have a minimum floor area of 1,600 square feet. The minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet generates the same density as R-3, but the minimum floor area of a house in R-4 is less than in the R-3 district. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is predominately one-family detached houses on medium-sized individual lots or where such a pattern is desired in the future. 
 
Notes 
1. For placement of structures, parking areas and driveways in front yards, see Section 3.3H.2.g. 
2. Average front setback may apply, see Section 3.3H.2.d. 
3. For allowed encroachments, see Section 3.3C. 
4. For setbacks on corner lots, see Section 3.3I.2.c. and d. 
5. For rear yard and lot coverage requirements, see Section 3.3J.2.a. 
6. For location and regulation of accessory structures, see Section 2.9. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3548 , § 1, 1-8-2019)  
3.8 - R-5 (ONE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT-5) 
Description 
The R-5 District is intended to accommodate one-family detached houses on small individual lots. Compatible civic and institutional uses are also permitted. Houses have a minimum floor area of 1,500 square feet. The minimum lot size of 8,700 square feet generates a low density development pattern that is higher than other R-districts. R-5 allows the same density as R-6, but the minimum floor area for a house in R-5 is greater than in R-6. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is predominately one-family detached houses on small individual lots or where such a pattern is desired in the future. 
 
Notes 
1. For placement of structures, parking areas and driveways in front yards, see Section 3.3H.2.g. 
2. Average front setback may apply, see Section 3.3H.2.d. 
3. For allowed encroachments, see Section 3.3C. 
4. For setbacks on corner lots, see Section 3.31.2.c. 
5. For rear yard and lot coverage requirements, see Section 3.3J.2.a. 
6. For location and regulation of accessory structures, see Section 2.9. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3548 , § 1, 1-8-2019)  
3.9 - R-6 (ONE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT-6) 
Description 
The R-6 District is intended to accommodate one-family detached houses on small individual lots. Compatible civic and institutional uses are also permitted. Houses have a minimum floor area of 1,300 square feet. The minimum lot size of 8,700 square feet generates a low density development pattern. R-6 allows the same density as R-5, but the minimum floor area for a house in R-6 is greater than in the R-5 district. The R-6 district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is predominately one-family detached houses on small individual lots or where such a pattern is desired in the future. 
 
Notes 
1. For placement of structures, parking areas and driveways in front yards, see Section 3.3H.2.g. 
2. Average front setback may apply, see Section 3.3H.2.d. 
3. For allowed encroachments, see Section 3.3C. 
4. For setbacks on corner lots, see Section 3.3I.2.c. and d. 
5. For rear yard and lot coverage requirements, see Section 3.3J.2.a. 
6. For location and regulation of accessory structures, see Section 2.9. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3548 , § 1, 1-8-2019)  
3.10 - D-1 (TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT-1) 
Description 
The D-1 District is intended to accommodate duplexes and one-family houses on individual lots and provide two housing options within the same district. Compatible civic and institutional uses are also permitted. Each dwelling unit has a minimum floor area of 1,200 square feet. Lot sizes are medium and vary with building type. Lot sizes are larger than in D-2 and density is lower. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is a mixture of duplexes and one-family houses or where such a pattern is desired in the future. 
 
Notes 
1. For placement of structures, parking areas and driveways in front yards, see Section 3.3H.2.g. 1. For placement of structures, parking areas and driveways in front yards, see Section 3.3H.2.g. 
2. Average front setback may apply, see Section 3.3H.2.d. 
3. For allowed encroachments, see Section 3.3C. 
4. For setbacks on corner lots, see Section 3.3I.2.c. and d. 
5. For rear yard and lot coverage requirements, see Section 3.3J.2.a. 
6. For location and regulation of accessory structures, see Section 2.9. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3548 , § 1, 1-8-2019)  
3.11 - D-2 (TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT-2) 
Description 
The D-2 District is intended to accommodate duplexes and one-family houses on individual lots and provide two housing options within the same district. Compatible civic and institutional uses are also permitted. Each dwelling unit has a minimum floor area of 1,000 square feet. Lot sizes are medium and vary with building type. Lot sizes are smaller than in D-1 and density is greater. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is a mixture of duplexes and one-family houses or where such a pattern is desired in the future. 
 
Notes 
1. For placement of structures, parking areas and driveways in front yards, see Section 3.3H.2.g. 
2. Average front setback may apply, see Section 3.3H.2.d. 
3. For allowed encroachments, see Section 3.3C. 
4. For setbacks on corner lots, see Section 3.3I.2.c. and d. 
5. For rear yard and lot coverage requirements, see Section 3.3J.2.a. 
6. For location and regulation of accessory structures, see Section 2.9. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3548 , § 1, 1-8-2019)  
3.12 - MF-1 (MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT-1) 
Description 
The MF-1 District is intended to accommodate a variety of housing opportunities up to two stories including multi-family, duplex, one-family attached, and one-family detached houses. Compatible civic and institutional uses are also permitted. The intent of the district is to create a mix of higher density housing options in a two-story urban environment. Floor area per unit varies by housing type and number of bedrooms. Floor area per unit is generally greater than the other MF districts and density lower. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is predominantly urban in character or where residential infill is desired in the future. 
Height (see Section 3.3 for additional height provisions) 
 

	Height (max 2 stories)   
	Height of Building (max 40 ft)   
	Height of Encroachments (max 50 ft)   
 
Siting (see Section 3.3 for additional lot and yard provisions) 
 

	Lot Area per Dwelling Unit (min sq ft) 
	 One Family Detached (min 7,500 sq ft) 
	 One Family Attached (min 2,500 sq ft) 
	 Two Family (min 3,750 sq ft) 
	Lot Width   
	 1-Family, detached (min 60 ft) 
	 1-Family and 2-Family, attached (min 25 ft) 
	 Multiple Family (min 70 ft) 
	Lot Depth   
	 1-Family and 2-Family (min 110 ft) 
	 Multiple Family (min 120 ft) 
	Front Yard (min 30 ft)   
	Side Yard (min 10% of lot width)   
	Rear Yard (min 15 ft)   
 
Floor Area Per Unit: 
One Family, Two Family (min 1,200 sq ft) 
Multiple Family, 1 BR (min 800 sq ft) 
Multiple Family, 2 BR (min 1,000 sq ft) 
Multiple Family, 3 BR (min 1,150 sq ft) 
Multiple Family, 4 BR (min 1,300 sq ft) 
Notes 
1. For allowed encroachments for 2 story buildings, see Section 3.3C. 
2. For side setbacks for multiple family structures not exceeding 2 stories, see Section 3.3I.2.a. 
3. For side setbacks for multiple family structures on corner lots, not exceeding 2 stories, see Section 3.3I.2.gg. 
4. For setbacks for one or two family dwellings on corner lots, see Section 3.3I.2.c. 
5. For side setbacks for one family attached dwellings, see Section 3.3I.2.e. 
6. For rear yard and lot coverage requirements, see Section 3.3J.2.a. 
7. For floor area requirements for multiple family structures, see Sections 3.3L.4.a. 
8. For building separation of apartments, see Section 3.2B.1. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
3.13 - MF-2 (MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT-2) 
Description 
The MF-2 District is intended to accommodate a variety of housing opportunities up to two stories including multi-family, duplex, one-family attached, and one-family detached houses. Compatible civic and institutional uses are also permitted. The intent of the district is to create a mix of higher density housing options in a two-story urban environment. Floor area per unit varies by housing type and number of bedrooms, and is generally less than MF-1. Density is greater than MF-1. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is predominantly urban in character or where residential infill is desired in the future. 
Height (see Section 3.3 for additional height provisions) 
 

	Height (max 2 stories)   
	Height of Building (max 40 ft)   
	Height of Encroachments (max 50 ft)   
 
Siting (see Section 3.3 for additional lot and yard provisions) 
 

	Lot Area per Dwelling Unit 
	One Family Detached (min 7,500 sq ft) 
	 One Family Attached (min 2,500 sq ft) 
	 Two Family (min 3,750 sq ft) 
	 Multiple Family (min 3,500 sq ft) 
	Lot Width   
	One Family Detached (min 60 ft) 
	Two Family (min 25 ft) 
	One Family Attached (min 25 ft) 
	Multiple Family (min 70 ft) 
	Lot Depth   
	One Family, Two Family (min 110 ft) 
	Multiple Family (min 120 ft) 
	Front Yard (min 30 ft)   
	Side Yard, (min 10% of lot width)   
	Rear Yard (min 15 ft)   
	Lot Coverage (max 40%) 
	Floor Area Per Unit 
	 One Family, Two Family (min 1,200 sq ft) 
	 Multiple Family, 1 BR (min 800 sq ft) 
	 Multiple Family, 2 BR (min 1,000 sq ft) 
	 Multiple Family, 3 BR (min 1,150 sq ft) 
	 Multiple Family, 4 BR (min 1,300 sq ft) 
 
Notes 
1. For allowed encroachments for 2 story buildings, see Section 3.3C. 
2. For side setbacks for multiple family structures not exceeding 2 stories, see Section 3.3I.2.a. 
3. For side setbacks for multiple family structures on corner lots, not exceeding two stories, see Section 3.3I.2.g. 
4. For setbacks for one or two family dwellings on corner lots, see Section 3.3I.2.c. 
5. For side setbacks for one family attached dwellings, see Section 3.3I.2.e. 
6. For rear yard and lot coverage requirements, see Section 3.3J.2.a. 
7. For floor area requirements for multiple family structures, see Sections 3.3L.4.a. 
8. For building separation of apartments, see Section 3.2B.1. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
3.14 - MF-3 (MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT-3) 
Description 
The MF-3 District is intended to accommodate a variety of housing opportunities up to three stories including multi-family, duplex, one-family attached, and one-family detached houses. Compatible civic and institutional uses are also permitted. The intent of the district is to create a mix of higher density housing options in an urban environment that includes three story buildings. Floor area per unit varies by housing type and number of bedrooms, and is generally less than MF-2. Density is greater than MF-2. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is predominantly urban in character or where residential infill is desired in the future. 
Height (see Section 3.3 for additional height provisions) 
 

	Height (max 3 stories)   
	Height of Building (max 50 ft)   
	Height of Encroachments (max 60 ft)   
 
Siting (see Section 3.3 for additional lot and yard provisions) 
 

	Lot Area per Dwelling Unit 
	 One Family Detached (min 7,500 sq ft) 
	 One Family Attached (min 2,500 sq ft) 
	 Two Family (min 3,750 sq ft) 
	 Multiple Family (min 1,800 sq ft) 
	Lot Width   
	 One Family Detached (min 60 ft) 
	 Two Family (min 25 ft) 
	 Multiple Family (min 25 ft) 
	 One Family Attached (min 25 ft) 
	Lot Depth   
	 One Family, Two Family (min 110 ft) 
	 Multiple Family (min 120 ft) 
	Front Yard (min 30 ft)   
	Side Yard, (min 10% of lot width)   
	Rear Yard (min 15 ft)   
	Lot Coverage (max 40%) 
	Floor Area Per Unit 
	 One Family, Two Family (min 1,100 sq ft) 
	 Multiple Family, 1 BR (min 650 sq ft) 
	 Multiple Family, 2 BR (min 825 sq ft) 
	 Multiple Family, 3 BR (min 1,000 sq ft) 
	 Multiple Family, 4 BR (min 1,175 sq ft) 
 
Notes 
1. For allowed encroachments for 2 and 3 story buildings, see Section 3.3C. 
2. For side setbacks for multiple family structures not exceeding 2 stories, see Section 3.3I.2.a. 
3. For side setback for apartment buildings over 2 stories, see Section 3.3I.2.b. 
4. For side setbacks for multiple family structures on corner lots, not exceeding two stories, see Section 3.3I.2.g. 
5. For setbacks for one or two family dwellings on corner lots, see Section 3.3I.2.c. 
6. For side setbacks for one family attached dwellings, see Section 3.3I.2.e. 
7. For rear yard and lot coverage requirements, see Section 3.3J.2.a. 
8. For rear setback for multiple family structures over 2 stories, see Section 3.3J.2.c. 
9. For floor area requirements for multiple family structures, see Sections 3.3L.4.a. 
10. For building separation of apartments, see Section 3.2B.1. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
3.15 - MF-4 (MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT-4) 
Description 
The MF-4 District is intended to accommodate a variety of housing opportunities up to twenty stories including high rise apartment buildings, and permitting multi-family, duplex, one-family attached, and one-family detached houses. Complimentary civic and institutional uses are also permitted. The intent of the district is to create a mix of higher density housing options in a dense urban environment which includes high-rise apartments. Floor area per unit varies by housing type but is generally the lowest of the MF districts. MF-4 has the highest density of the MF districts. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is densely urban in character or where residential infill is desired in the future. 
Height (see Section 3.3 for additional height provisions) 
 

	Height (max 20 stories)   
	Height of Building (max 280 ft)   
	Height of Encroachments (max 290 ft)   
 
Siting (see Section 3.3 for additional lot and yard provisions) 
 

	Lot Area per Dwelling Unit 
	 One Family Detached (min 7,500 sq ft) 
	 One Family Attached (min 2,500 sq ft) 
	 Two Family (min 3,750 sq ft) 
	 Multiple Family, 1-2 stories (min 1,800 sq ft) 
	 Multiple Family, over 2 stories (min 600 sq ft) 
	Lot Width   
	 One Family Detached (min 60 ft) 
	 Two Family, Multiple Family (min 60 ft) 
	 One Family Attached (min 25 ft) 
	Lot Depth   
	 One Family, Two Family (min 110 ft) 
	 Multiple Family (min 120 ft) 
	Front Yard (min 30 ft)   
	Side Yard, (min 10% of lot width)   
	Rear Yard (min 15 ft)   
	 Lot Coverage (max 40%) 
	 Floor Area Ratio (4:1 max) 
	 Floor Area Per Unit 
	  One Family, Two Family (min 1,100 sq ft) 
	  Multiple Family, 1 650 BR 
	  Multiple Family, 2 BR (min 825 sq ft) 
	  Multiple Family, 3 BR (min 1,000 sq ft) 
 
Notes 
1. For allowed encroachments for 2 and 3 story buildings, see Section 3.3C. 
2. For setbacks for 1 or 2 family dwellings on corner lots, see Section 3.3I.2.c. 
3. For special front setback requirements, see Section 3.3H.2.e. 
4. For side setbacks for multiple family structures not exceeding 2 stories, see Section 3.3I.2.a. 
5. For side setbacks for multiple family structures on corner lots, not exceeding two stories, see Section 3.3I.2.g. 
6. For side setback for apartment buildings over 2 stories, see Section 3.3I.2.b. 
7. For side setbacks for one family attached dwellings, see Section 3.3I.2.e. 
8. For rear yard and lot coverage requirements, see Section 3.3J.2.a. 
9. For rear setback for multiple family structures over 2 stories, see Section 3.3J.2.c. 
10. For floor area requirements for multiple family structures, see Sections 3.3L.4.a. 
11. For building separation of apartments, see Section 3.2B.1. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
3.16 - I-RU (INSTITUTIONAL-RELIGIOUS USES DISTRICT) 
Description 
The I-RU District is intended to accommodate structures used by religious organizations or congregations that provide religious worship, religious training, or education of their members. Accessory uses such as rectories, convents, or monasteries for the housing of religious organization personnel, meeting halls, offices for administration of the institution, day care facilities, education or schools, recreation associated with schools or day care facilities, cemeteries and mausoleums may be allowed only in conjunction with a worship facility and on the same platted lot. The district should be applied to areas that house religious, institutional, and civic uses that do not easily assimilate into other zoning districts. 
1.  If a rezoning application is submitted to the City requesting to rezone a property to the I-RU District, the area of the property shall be not less than two acres, not including any portions of the property dedicated as public rights-of-way. 
2.  If a rezoning application is submitted to the City requesting to rezone two or more properties to the I-RU District, the properties must be contiguous and have a total area of not less than two acres, not including any portions of the property dedicated as public rights-of-way. 
3.  Outdoor recreational facilities may be developed in association with the use of the property as a worship facility only following approval of a site plan by the City Manager or appointed designee. 
4.  No outdoor playground area located within 50 feet of an R-1 or R-2 zoning district may be developed in association with the use of property as a worship facility without the prior approval of a site plan by the City Manager or appointed designee. 
5.  No outdoor recreational facilities or outdoor playground area may be lighted for night use without the prior approval of a site plan by the City Manager or appointed designee. 
6.  An applicant may appeal the decision of the City Manager or appointed designee to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council to deny a site plan required by this Section 3.16. An appeal request shall be submitted in writing to the Director of Planning no later than 15 days after receipt of the final decision of the City Manager or designee. 
Height (see Section 3.3 for additional height provisions) 
 

	Height (no max stories)   
	Height of Building (max 60 ft)   
	Height of Encroachments (max 75 ft)   
 
Siting (see Section 3.3 for additional lot and yard provisions) 
 

	Lot Area (min 2 acres) 
	Lot Width (min 50 ft)   
	Lot Depth (no min depth)   
	Front Yard (min 20 ft)   
	Side Yard (min 10 ft)   
	Rear Yard (min 15 ft)   
	Lot Coverage (max 50%) 
 
Notes 
1. Height shall be measured in accordance with Section 3.3B.2. 
2. Authorized encroachments for 2 and 3 story buildings shall comply with Section 3.3C. 
3. Structures over 28 feet in height must add 2 feet to side setback and 2 feet to rear setback for every foot above 28 feet in height. 
4. Maximum finished floor height of the highest occupied story is 25 feet for offices, classrooms, meeting rooms, nurseries, fellowship halls, and similar places, unless a specific use permit is granted pursuant to Section 6.5. 
5. Worship facilities require a lot area of not less than two acres, not including portions of the property dedicated for public rights-of-ways. 
6. Minimum street frontage is 50 feet. Street frontage must be adjacent to and accessible from a street that has minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet and a minimum pavement width of 41 feet. 
7. Main access to the property must be from a street with a minimum right-of-way of 60 feet and minimum pavement width of 41 feet. 
8. The placement of structures, parking areas and driveways in front yards must comply with Section 3.3H.2.g. 
9. Parking requirements shall comply with Section 4.3. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
3.17 - O (OFFICE DISTRICT) 
Description 
The O District is intended to be within close proximity to residential uses. This low intensity district should act as a buffer area between residential and commercial land uses with a neighborhood friendly range of professional office uses. The district is intended to accommodate offices that do not engage in significant on-site retail activity. 
Height (see Section 3.3 for additional height provisions) 
 

	Height (max 2 stories)   
	Height of Building (max 35 ft)   
	Height of Encroachments (max 45 ft)   
 
Siting (see Section 3.3 for additional lot and yard provisions) 
 

	Lot Area (no min sq ft) 
	Lot Width (no min)   
	Lot Depth (no min)   
	Front Yard (min 25 ft)   
	Side Yard (no min)   
	Rear Yard (min 10 ft)   
	Floor Area Ratio (1:2 max) 
 
Notes 
1. Encroachments for a two story buildings are allowed in accordance with Section 3.3C. 
2. If the lot abuts a residential lot, a 10 foot minimum side setback is required on the side abutting the residential lot unless another provision of this zoning ordinance requires a greater side setback, in which case the other provision shall control. 
3. Parking requirements shall comply with Section 4.3. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
3.18 - LR-1 (LOCAL RETAIL DISTRICT-1) 
Description 
The LR-1 District is intended to accommodate lower intensity retail and service type uses and neighborhood-oriented commercial facilities. The intent of the district is to provide small-scale service establishments close to dwelling units and to ensure these uses are compatible with the character of nearby neighborhoods. The district permits fewer uses and retail establishment types than LR-2. The district may be used as a transition between major roads and established residential neighborhoods. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern has retail locations close to residential areas or where such a pattern is desired in the future. 
Height (see Section 3.3 for additional height provisions) 
 

	Height (max 2 stories)   
	Height of Building (max 40 ft)   
	Height of Encroachments (max 50 ft)   
 
Siting (see Section 3.3 for additional lot and yard provisions) 
 

	Lot Area (no min sq ft) 
	Lot Width (no min)   
	Lot Depth (no min)   
	Front Yard (min 25 ft)   
	Side Yard (no min)   
	Rear Yard (min 10 ft)   
	Floor Area Ratio (1:2 max) 
 
Notes 
1. Encroachments for two story buildings are allowed in accordance with Section 3.3C. 
2. If a lot abuts a residential lot, a 10 foot minimum side setback is required on the side abutting the residential lot unless another provision of this zoning ordinance requires a greater side setback, in which case the other provision shall control. 
3. Parking requirements shall comply with Section 4.3. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
3.19 - LR-2 (LOCAL RETAIL DISTRICT-2) 
Description 
The LR-2 District is intended to accommodate retail and service type uses and neighborhood-oriented commercial facilities. The intent of the district is to provide a wide range of service establishments close to dwelling units and to ensure these uses are compatible with the character of nearby neighborhoods. The district permits more uses and retail establishment types than LR-1. The district may be used as a transition between major roads and established residential neighborhoods. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern has retail locations close to residential areas or where such a pattern is desired in the future. 
Height (see Section 3.3 for additional height provisions) 
 

	Height (max 2 stories)   
	Height of Building (max 40 ft)   
	Height of Encroachments (max 50 ft)   
 
Siting (see Section 3.3 for additional lot and yard provisions) 
 

	Lot Area (no min sq ft) 
	Lot Width (no min)   
	Lot Depth (no min)   
	Front Yard (min 25 ft)   
	Side Yard (no min)   
	Rear Yard (min 10 ft)   
	Floor Area Ratio (1:2 max) 
 
Notes 
1. Encroachments for two story buildings are allowed in accordance with Section 3.3C. 
2. If a lot abuts a residential lot, a 10 foot minimum side setback is required on the side abutting the residential lot unless another provision of this zoning ordinance requires a greater side setback, in which case the other provision shall control. 
3. Parking requirements shall comply with Section 4.3. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
3.20 - C (COMMERCIAL DISTRICT) 
Description 
The C District is intended to accommodate a broad range of retail, service and commercial uses to promote economic viability and encourage employment growth in specific areas. The district promotes compatibility with nearby residential areas by restricting heavy machinery and industrial uses. The district may be used as a transition between industrial districts and less intense commercial areas and established residential neighborhoods. The district should be applied in areas where the land use pattern is predominantly commercial or where such a pattern is desired in the future. 
Height (see Section 3.3 for additional height provisions) 
 

	Height (max 20 stories)   
	Height of Building (max 280 ft)   
	Height of Encroachments (max 290 ft)   
 
Siting (see Section 3.3 for additional lot and yard provisions) 
 

	Lot Area (no min) 
	Lot Width (no min)   
	Lot Depth (no min)   
	Front Yard (min 25 ft)   
	Side Yard (no min)   
	Rear Yard (min 10 ft)   
	Floor Area Ratio (2:1 max) 
 
Notes 
1. Encroachments for 2 and 3 story buildings are allowed in accordance with Section 3.3C. 
2. If lot abuts a residential lot, a 10 foot minimum side setback is required on the side facing residential lot unless another provision of this zoning ordinance requires a greater side setback, in which case the other provision shall control. 
3. Parking requirements shall comply with Section 4.3. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
3.21 - LI (LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT) 
Description 
The LI District is intended to accommodate offices, light manufacturing, research and development, warehousing, wholesale, processing and commercial uses in order promote economic viability, encourage employment growth, and limit the encroachment of non-industrial development within established industrial areas. Facilities in the district should be operated in a relatively clean and quiet manner, and should not be obnoxious to nearby residential or commercial uses. The district should be applied in established industrial areas or where such a land use pattern in desired in the future. 
Height (see Section 3.3 for additional height provisions) 
 

	Height (no max stories)   
	Height of Building (Set by FAA)   
	Height of Encroachments (max 10 ft)   
 
Siting (see Section 3.3 for additional lot and yard provisions) 
 

	Lot Area (no min) 
	Lot Width (no min)   
	Lot Depth (no min)   
	Front Yard (no min)   
	Side Yard (min 5 ft)   
	Rear Yard (no min)   
	Floor Area Ratio (1:1 max) 
 
Notes 
1. Buildings may be built to any height not prohibited by other laws and ordinances. 
2. Buildings constructed on a lot fronting on a street with a right-of-way with a width of 100 feet or greater must have a front yard setback of at least 30 feet. For corner lots, frontage along both streets are considered front yards. 
3. Except along secondary streets where automobile parking areas are allowed within six (6) feet of the front property line, front yards must be kept free and clear of structures, parking areas, accessory buildings, fences, and other uses, unless allowed in other sections of this zoning ordinance. 
4. Loading docks located on the front of the building must be set back not less than 60 feet. 
5. The area between the lot line and the minimum side yard line must be kept free and clear of accessory buildings and storage areas, but may be paved and used as driveways. 
6. When retail, commercial, or industrial uses back to a common lot line with a residential district, a 10 feet rear setback is required unless another provision of this zoning ordinance requires a greater rear setback, in which case the other provision shall control. 
7. When commercial or industrial uses do not back upon an alley or easement with a width of at least 20 feet, a 10 foot rear setback is required. 
8. Parking requirements shall comply with Section 4.3. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3636 , § 1(B)(1), 6-9-2020)  
3.22 - HI (HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT) 
Description 
The HI District is intended to accommodate a broad range of high-impact manufacturing, industrial or other uses, including extractive and waste-related uses, that by their nature create some nuisance, and which are not properly associated with or are not compatible with nearby residential districts or other less intense districts. The district should be applied in established heavy industrial areas or where such a land use pattern in desired in the future. 
Height (see Section 3.3 for additional height provisions) 
 

	Height (no max)   
	Height of Encroachments (no max)   
 
Siting (see Section 3.3 for additional lot and yard provisions) 
 

	Lot Area (no min) 
	Lot Width (no min)   
	Lot Depth (no min)   
	Front Yard (no min)   
	Side Yard (min 5 ft)   
	Rear Yard (no min)   
	Floor Area Ratio (1:1 max) 
 
Notes 
1. Buildings may be built to any height not prohibited by other laws and ordinances. 
2. Gasoline pumps must be set back not less than 18 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
3. Buildings constructed on a lot fronting on a street with a right-of-way with a width of 100 feet or greater must have a front yard setback of at least 30 feet. For corner lots, frontage along both streets are considered front yards. 
4. Except along secondary streets where automobile parking areas are allowed within 6 feet of the front property line, front yards must be kept free and clear of structures, parking areas, accessory buildings, fences, and other uses, unless allowed in other sections of zoning ordinance. 
5. Loading docks located on the front of the building must be set back not less than 60 feet. 
6. The area between the side lot line and the minimum side yard line must be kept free and clear of accessory buildings and storage areas but may be paved and used as driveways. 
7. When retail, commercial, or industrial uses back to a common lot line with a residential district, a 10 foot rear setback is required unless another provision of this zoning ordinance requires a greater rear setback, in which case the other provision shall control. 
8. When commercial or industrial uses do not back upon an alley or easement with a width of least 20 feet, a 10 foot rear setback is required. 
9. Parking requirements shall comply with Section 4.3. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3636 , § 1(B)(2), 6-9-2020)  
3.23 - PD (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT) 
Description 
The PD District is intended to accommodate master-planned residential communities, commercial, industrial, office, civic and mixed use developments. Developments that include residential may contain a mix of housing types including associated amenities with appropriate perimeter buffering and open space. This district should be applied to large-scale projects that require either additional flexibility not available in the residential districts or greater scrutiny by the City due to their scale. See individual Planned Development District Ordinances for specific Development Standards.  
ARTICLE 4. - SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
4.1 - LANDSCAPING 
A.  Applicability 
This Section 4.1 shall apply to all districts except R-districts. 
B.  Objectives 
The objective of this section is to improve the surrounding neighborhoods and promote the general welfare by providing for the installation and maintenance of landscaping for screening and other public benefits. 
C.  Planned Development Districts 
This section shall be a minimum standard and shall apply to all zoning districts, except residential and multiple family districts, unless landscape standards have been established by separate ordinance. 
D.  Landscape Plans 
1.  Plan 
a.  Prior to the issuance of any Building Permit in any zoning district other than R-1 through D-2, a landscape plan shall be submitted to the Community Services Department for approval. 
b.  The landscape plan shall be drawn to a scale large enough to adequately show the details of the plan. 
c.  The drawings will consist of plans and elevation views plus detailed plans of special structural elements such as walls, fountains, raised planters, and berms. 
2.  Specifications 
Accompanying the plan will be a set of specifications which must include the following: 
a.  Common and scientific names of all plant material. 
b.  Size and quantity of plant materials. 
c.  Bed preparation procedure and required materials. 
d.  Specifications for developing all supporting structural elements. 
E.  Minimum Landscape Requirements 
1.  Prescribed Area 
a.  A minimum of five percent of the entire lot area not covered by buildings and not a part of any right-of-way shall be landscaped in accordance with this section. 
b.  Each modular area of land 50 feet by 50 feet not covered by buildings shall contain 150 square feet or more of landscaped area in accordance with this section. These modules shall collectively comprise the five percent total landscaped area in paragraph a, above. Rear areas not open to view may be approved for exclusion from the landscaping requirements. 
c.  Parking areas visible from the street shall be broken up with vertical landscaping and shown on the landscaping plan. A minimum of five percent of the total property area shall be landscaped between the building and all street right-of-way lines. 
d.  When a driveway intersects a public right-of-way or when the property abuts the intersection of two or more rights-of-way, all landscaping within sight triangular areas shall provide unobstructed cross-visibility. Except for required grass or ground cover, landscaping shall not be located closer than three feet from the edge of any driveway pavement. 
e.  The area between the property line and the street curb shall be included on the landscape plan, and shall be maintained by the abutting property owner. 
f.  All landscaping shall be maintained in a living growing condition. Any landscaping that is removed must be replaced with the same or comparable species and caliper plant, as when it was originally installed. 
2.  Plant Requirements 
a.  Trees 
i.  At the time of planting, trees required as part of the landscaping plan shall be not less than three inch diameter measured at a height of five feet above the ground. One tree for each 25 feet of street frontage, or one tree per each 50 by 50 foot module, whichever is greater, shall be planted within the areas from the front of the building to the front property line. The trees may be planted within the street right-of-way when approved by the Director. An exception may be granted where larger turf areas exist and grouping of trees is desirable. 
ii.  Plants not considered trees but grown to tree form (example: Crape Myrtle, Ligustrum, etc.) and which can be substituted for trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height at time of planting. 
b.  Screen Plantings 
Plantings that are to serve as a living screen shall be not less than four feet high with a minimum spacing of five feet apart at time of planting. 
c.  Shrubs 
Shrubs planted as part of the approved landscape plan shall be no smaller than three gallon containers and, where used for continuous hedge effect, shall be spaced so that the shrubs grow to fill in all gaps with two- years after planting. 
d.  Ground Cover Plants 
No minimum size is required; provided, however, planting shall be sufficiently dense to develop full coverage of the area to be covered as shown on the landscape within 18 months after planting. 
3.  Structural Requirements 
All structural elements in the landscape plan are to support the living landscape development and not replace it. Each element will be judged on its individual merits. Structural elements will be defined as walks, walls, fountains and will also include artificial plants, gravel and various surface treatments. 
F.  Establishment 
All landscape materials shown on the landscape plan shall be developed within 18 months after planting. The owner or his agent in control of the property shall maintain the landscape in a healthy, living condition and free of all plants not included in the plan. All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available water supply with at least one outlet located within 100 feet of all plant materials to be maintained. 
G.  Changes or Redevelopment 
When the landscaped areas of a property subject to previously approved landscape plans requires change or redevelopment, approval of the Community Services Department will be required. 
H.  Special Conditions 
No Building Permit shall be issued in any zoning district other than R-1 through D-2 prior to the approval of the landscape plan by the Director, which landscape plan shall be in substantial compliance with the minimum landscape requirements set forth in this Chapter and any adopted planned development regulations and detailed site plan applicable to the property. Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy, all approved screening and landscaping must be in place, or if seasonal considerations prohibit the completion of the landscape, a Certificate of Occupancy subject to the written authorization of the City Manager that sets forth the date by which the installation of all required landscaping must be completed. Failure to complete the installation of required landscaping by the date required by the City Manager shall be a violation of this zoning ordinance. 
I.  Buffer 
Any lot or tract zoned for any purpose other than one-family or two-family residences and lying immediately adjacent to a tract or lot zoned for one-family or two-family residences shall have a solid structural masonry wall not less than six feet in height designed by a Texas Registered Professional Engineer separating the two different uses. 
J.  Recommended Plant Materials 
The following list of recommended plant materials is intended to assist in the selection of plant materials but is not an inclusive list. These plants have been identified as well suited for the soils found in the city. 
• Quercus virginiana 	Live Oak 
• Quercus buckleyi shurmardi 	Red Oak 
• Quercus muhlenbergii 	Chinquapin Oak 
• Pistacia chinensis 	Chinese Pistache 
• Ulmus parvifolia 	Lacebark Elm 
• Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis 	Thornless Honey Locust 
• Taxodium distichum 	Bald Cypress 
• Taxodium ascendens 	Pond Cypress 
• Carya illinoinensis 	Pecan 
• Quercus macrocarpa 	Bur Oak 
• Magnolia grandiflora 	Magnolia 
• Cercis canadensis var. texensis 	Texas redbud 
• Cercis x texensis 	Oklahoma Redbud 
• Sophora affi nis 	Eve's Necklace 
• Ilex vomitoria 	Yaupon Holly 
• Ginkgo biloba 	Ginkgo (male only) 
• Lagerstromia Indica 	Crepe Myrtle 
 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
4.2 - REFUSE CONTAINERS. 
Garbage, trash or refuse containers located on property used for any purpose other than single family residential use shall not be located in front of the main building and must be screened from view of the public. The container screening enclosure shall consist of a minimum six foot high masonry screening wall designed by a Texas registered professional enginner in which the exterior of the wall shall be architecturally consistent with the primary building and solid opaque metal gates shall be provided, primed and painted to match the masonry screening walls. In addition to the screening walls, shrubs, trees or other landscaping shall be required as approved by the Director or as required by any applicable planned development regulations or approved detailed site plan. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
4.3 - PARKING AND LOADING 
A.  Applicability 
No building or structure or part of a structure shall be erected, altered, or converted for any use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located unless there shall be provided on the lot or tract or within 150 feet of such buildings or structures, vehicle parking in the ratio of vehicle spaces for the uses specified in the designated districts as set forth in Section 4.2.C. or as otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance. No existing vehicle parking developed in connection with any use as of February 24, 1969, may be reduced below the minimum number of spaces required as of said date. 
B.  Parking Space 
For purposes of determining compliance with this Section 4.2, a "parking space" shall mean an enclosed or unenclosed all-weather surfaced area, measuring approximately nine (9) feet by 18 feet, not located on a public street or alley, together with an all-weather surfaced driveway connecting the area with a street or alley permitting free ingress and egress without encroachment on the street or alley. Any parking space adjacent to a public street where maneuvering on the public street is required to access and enter the parking space shall not be classified as an off-street parking space when computing the parking requirements for any use. 
C.  Parking Ratios 
1.  Calculation 
a.  In computing the parking requirements for any building or development, the total parking requirements shall be the sum of the specific parking space requirements for each class of use included in the building or development. 
b.  The floor area of a structure devoted to off-street parking shall be excluded from the total building area when computing the off-street parking requirements of any use. 
2.  Residential Uses 
The minimum off-street parking spaces required for residential zoning districts are as follows: 
Zoning District 	Parking Spaces 
R-1, One-Family Res. District 	3 spaces per dwelling unit 
R-2, One-Family Res. District 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
R-3, One-Family Res. District 	
R-4, One-Family Res. District 	
R-5, One-Family Res. District 	
R-6, One-Family Res. District 	
D-1, Two-Family Res. District 	
D-2, Two-Family Res. District 	
MF-1, Multi Family Res. District 	2¼ spaces per dwelling unit in apartment structure, 2 spaces all other dwelling units 
MF-2, Multi Family Res. District 	
MF-3, Multi Family Res. District 	
MF-4, Multi Family Res. District 	
PD, Planned Development District 	2¼ spaces per dwelling unit plus additional requirements as may be specified by the amending ordinance 
 
3.  Non-Residential Uses 
The minimum off-street parking spaces required for the identified non-residential zoning districts are as follows: 
Use 	Minimum Parking Spaces Required 
Adult Day Care Center 	One space per 500 sq ft of gross floor area 
Bank, Savings and Loan or similar financial establishment 	One space per 300 sq ft of gross floor area 
Bowling Alley 	6 per lane 
Worship Facilities 	One space per 3 seats in main place of assembly 
Clinics or Doctors' Offices 	One space per 300 sq ft of gross floor area (minimum of five spaces) 
Commercial Outdoor Amusement 	20 spaces plus one space per 100 sq ft of gross floor area over 1,000 sq ft 
Convalescent Home or Home for Aged 	One space per 6 rooms or beds 
Furniture Store 	One space per 800 sq ft of gross floor area. 
Gasoline Service Station 	Minimum of 6 spaces 
Golf Course 	Minimum of 30 spaces 
High School, College or University 	One space per classroom, laboratory or instruction area plus one space per 2 students in the institution 
Hospitals 	One space per 2 beds 
Hotel or Motel 	One space per room, unit or guest accommodation plus requirements for clubs, restaurants and other uses 
Institutions of a philanthropic nature 	10 spaces plus one space per employee 
Library or Museum 	10 spaces plus one per 300 sq ft of gross floor area 
Manufacturing, processing or repairing 	One space per 2 employees or one space per 1,000 sq ft of gross floor area, whichever is greater 
Offices, general 	One space per 300 sq ft of gross floor area (minimum 5 spaces) 
Places of public assembly not listed 	One space per 3 seats 
Recreational, private or commercial area or building (other than listed) 	One space per 3 persons normally accommodated in the establishment 
Restaurant or Cafeteria 	One space per 3 seats under maximum seating arrangement (minimum of 5 spaces) 
Retail or personal service 	One space per 200 sq ft of gross floor area (minimum of 5 spaces) 
Schools, Elementary or Junior High 	One space per classroom plus one space per 4 seats in any auditorium, gymnasium, or other place of assembly 
Storage or warehousing 	One space per 2 employees or one space per 1,000 sq ft of gross floor area, whichever is greater 
Theaters, meeting rooms and places of public assembly 	One space per 3 seats 
 
4.  Parking Requirements for New and Unlisted Uses 
a.  The Director shall determine the minimum off-street parking requirements for any use not specifically listed in Sections 4.2.C.2 or 3. 
b.  If the minimum parking requirements cannot be readily determined by the Director for a new or unlisted use, or an owner disagrees with the determination of the Director made pursuant to paragraph a, above, the minimum off-street parking requirement shall be established in accordance with the process for classifying new and unlisted uses as provided in Section 2.4A. 
D.  Additional Parking Requirements 
1.  Parking Location 
a.  Required off-street parking spaces shall be located in a manner that allows a person to maneuver a motor vehicle from each space to the nearest adjacent public street or alley without encroachment on other off-street parking spaces. 
b.  The required off-street parking spaces for new residences in the R-1 through D-2 zoning districts shall (i) be located behind the front building line, (ii) be enclosed in a garage structure suitable for vehicle storage, and (iii) not be located within the required side yard. 
c.  All one-family and two family residences with required parking spaces located in the front yard existing as of August 24, 1970, may retain and maintain the required parking in the required front yard provided the existing garage or carport is not converted into space other than vehicle storage space. 
2.  Commercial Vehicle Parking 
a.  In any R-1 through MF-4 zoning district, or a PD district with a base zoning consisting any of the R-1 through MF-4 zoning districts, no off-street parking space, garage, carport or other automobile storage space or structure shall be used for the parking or storage of any commercial motor vehicle, including but not limited to a commercial type truck, panel truck, box truck, commercial type van, or box van, and truck, van or other vehicle that exceeds a 3/4 ton capacity. A vehicle is deemed to have been "stored" if parked continuously for 48 hours or longer on the same property. 
b.  In the O, LR-1 and LR-2 districts, no parking space or other automobile storage space which is visible from the street shall be used for the storage of any commercial type vehicle including, but not limited to, commercial type truck, panel truck, box truck, commercial type van, box van, and trucks, vans or other vehicle that exceeds a 3/4-ton capacity. 
c.  The provisions of paragraphs a. and b., above, shall not apply to the following: 
i.  Pickup trucks or passenger vans used for personal noncommercial purposes without commercial advertisement and rated one ton or less may be legally parked or stored on property in any R-1 through MF-4 district. 
ii.  One pickup truck or van not exceeding a 3/4-ton capacity, with commercial signage, may be parked, but not stored, on property in any R-1 through MF-4 district. 
3.  Carport and Garages 
a.  Where existing garages or carports are closed in or converted into space for use other than vehicular storage or converted to provide additional living area in a dwelling, the required number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided behind the front building line and an enclosed garage structure suitable for vehicle storage shall be constructed which shall be capable of storing the same number of vehicles as the existing garage or carport. Head-in or dead-end parking spaces in the required front yard shall not be permitted. 
b.  In all zoning districts allowing one-family, two-family or multiple family dwelling units, garages, carports, or other similar structures originally intended and constructed for the parking of motor vehicles, boats, trailers or other similar items may not be converted, temporarily or permanently, to use for human habitation, storage, or any other use or purpose other than originally intended. 
c.  Where driveways are located in the front yard after closing in or converting a garage or carport, the driveway shall be removed or reconfigured to provide access to the required parking spaces behind the front building line. No head-in or dead-end parking spaces in the required front yard shall be permitted. 
4.  Screening 
Where parking for other than one-family or two family dwellings is constructed adjacent to one-family or two family dwellings, a structural masonry wall of at least six feet in height shall be erected. 
E.  Loading 
1.  All retail commercial, industrial and service structures shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for receiving and loading merchandise, supplies and materials within a building or on the lot or tract. 
2.  Off-street loading space may be adjacent to a public alley or private service drive or may consist of a truck berth within the structure. 
3.  Off-street loading space or truck berth shall consist of a minimum area of 10 feet by 45 feet. 
4.  For retail, commercial sales, service or industrial use buildings and establishments, off-street loading facilities shall be provided as set forth below. 
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in Structure 	Minimum Required Spaces or Berths 
0 to 5,000 	None 
5,000 to 15,000 	1 
15,000 to 40,000 	2 
40,000 to 65,000 	3 
65,000 to 100,000 	4 
Each Additional 50,000 	1 Additional 
 
5.  For hotels, office buildings, restaurants and similar establishments, off-street loading facilities shall be provided as set forth below in accordance with the following schedule: 
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in Structure 	Minimum Required Spaces or Berths 
0 to 10,000 	None 
10,000 to 50,000 	1 
50,000 to 100,000 	2 
100,000 to 200,000 	3 
Each Additional 50,000 	1 Additional 
 
6.  The Director shall determine the minimum off-street loading requirements for any circumstances not otherwise specified in this Section 4.2.E. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
4.4 - SIGNS 
Signs shall be permitted for specified uses in appropriate zoning districts as indicated by Chapter 62 "Signs, Advertising and Merchandise Display" of the Code of Ordinances and as permitted in the respective Planned Development Districts. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
4.5 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
A.  Applicability 
1.  All uses in all zoning districts shall conform in operation, location, and construction to the performance standards specified for noise, odorous matter, toxic and noxious matter and glare set forth in this Section 4.5. 
2.  All uses in the C, LI, HI, or PD zoning districts shall conform in operation, location and construction to the performance standards specified for noise, odorous matter, toxic and noxious matter, glare, smoke, particulate matter and other air contaminants, fire and explosive or hazardous matter, vibration, open storage, planting, waste materials, and sanitation set forth in this Section 4.5. 
B.  C, LI and PD Districts 
1.  Applicability 
The provisions of this Section 4.5.C. shall apply only within the C, LI, and PD zoning districts. 
2.  Noise 
At no point at the bounding property line of any use shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant exceed the decibel limits specified in the Octave Bands groups designated in the following table: 
a.  The maximum permissible daytime octave band-decibel limits at the bounding property line shall be as follows: 
Octave Band 
(Cycles per Second) 	37 -75 	75 - 150 	150 - 300 	300 - 600 	600 - 1200 	1200 - 2400 	2400 - 4800 	4800 - 9600 	A Scale 
Decibel Band Limit (dB re 0.0002 micro-bars) 	86 	76 	70 	65 	63 	58 	55 	53 	70 
 
Note: Scale levels are provided for monitoring purposes only and are not applicable to detailed sound analysis. 
b.  The following corrections shall be made to the table of octave band-decibel limits in determining compliance with the noise level standards: 
i.  When noise is present at nighttime: subtract -7 dB. 
ii.  When noise contains strong pure-tone components or is impulsive, that is, when meter changes at 10 decibels or more per second: subtract -7 dB. 
iii.  When noise is present for not more than ½ minute in any ½-hour period, 1 minute in any 1-hour period, 10 minutes in any 2-hour period, or 20 minutes in any 4-hour period: add 10 dB. 
c.  Measurement of noise shall be made with a sound level meter or Octave band analyzer meeting the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. 
3.  Smoke and Particulate Matter 
No operation or use shall cause, create or allow the emission for more than three minutes in any one hour of air contaminants which at the emission point or within the property are: 
a.  As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 2 on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7118; 
b.  Of such opacity as to obscure an observers view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed in Section 4.5B.3.a above except that; when the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure to comply or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into the outside atmosphere, the standards in Sections 4.5B.3.a and 4.5B.3.b shall not apply; 
c.  The emission of particulate matter from all sources shall not exceed 0.5 pounds per acre of property within the 0.5 pounds per acre of property within the plan site per any one-hour; or 
d.  The open storage and open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements which are the source of wind or airborne dust or other particulate matter, or which involves dust or other particulate air contaminant generating equipment such as used in paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage, or sand blasting, shall be so conducted that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the boundary line of the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding 4 grains per 1,000 cubic feet of air. 
4.  Odorous Matter 
a.  No use shall be permitted which involves the emission of odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds the odor threshold at the bounding property line or any point beyond the tract on which such use or operation is located. 
b.  The odor threshold shall be determined by observation by on or more people. In any case, where uncertainty may arise, the operator or owner of an odor emitting use may disagree with the enforcing officer, or specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and procedures as specified by American Society for Testing Materials A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57 titled "Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres" shall be used as the standard for determining the odor threshold, which standards are incorporated herein by reference. 
5.  Fire and Explosive Materials 
No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted except that chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorous and similar substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the City's Fire Department. 
6.  Toxic and Noxious Matter 
No operation or use shall emit across the bounding property line of the tract on which such operation or use is located a concentration of toxic or noxious matter which will exceed ten percent of the concentration (exposure) considered as the threshold limit for an industrial worker as set forth by the Texas State Department of Health in Threshold Limit Values Occupational Health Regulation No. 3, a copy of which is incorporated herein by reference and is on file in the office of the Director. 
7.  Vibration 
No operation or use shall at any time create earth-borne vibrations which, when measured at the bounding property line of the source of operation, exceed the limits of displacement set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified. 
Frequency (Cycles per Second) 	Displacement (In Inches) 
0-10 	.0010 
10-20 	.0008 
20-30 	.0005 
30-40 	.0004 
40 & Over 	.0003 
 
8.  Open Storage 
a.  Open storage shall be permitted as an accessory use to a main use which is located in a building in a C, LI or PD district allowing uses and standards in accordance with the LI zoning district. 
b.  The area designated as open storage shall not exceed 15% of the total gross square foot of the building located on the same lot as the open storage prior to approval of a specific use permit in accordance with Section 6.5. 
c.  Open storage shall be located on the rear one-half of the lot. 
d.  No open storage shall be located in front of the main building. 
e.  No open storage may be used for a wrecking, junk or salvage yard prior to approval of a specific use permit Section 6.5 authorizing such use. 
f.  All open storage areas shall be screened from view of the public by a masonry wall not less than six feet nor greater than eight feet in height, and shrubs, trees or other landscaping as approved by the Director. 
g.  Items stored in an authorized open storage area shall not extend above the required screening fence or wall. 
9.  Glare 
No use or operation shall be located or conducted so as to produce intense glare or direct illumination across the bounding property line from a visible source of illumination nor shall any such light be of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent property. 
C.  HI District 
1.  Applicability 
The provisions of this Section 4.5.C shall apply only to property located within the HI zoning districts. 
2.  Noise 
a.  At no point at the bounding property line of any use shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant exceed the decibel limits specified in the Octave Band groups designated in the following table. Maximum permissible daytime octave band-decibel limits at the bounding property line shall be as follows: 
Octave Band (Cycles per Second) 	37 -75 	75 - 150 	150 - 300 	300 - 600 	600 - 1200 	1200 - 2400 	2400 - 4800 	4800 - 9600 	A Scale 
Decibel Band Limit (dB re 0.0002 micro-bars) 	90 	80 	74 	69 	65 	62 	60 	58 	70 
 
Note: Scale levels are provided for monitoring purposes only and are not applicable to detailed sound analysis. 
b.  The following corrections shall be made to the table of octave band-decibel limits in determining compliance with the noise level standards: 
i.  When Noise is present at nighttime: subtract -7 dB. 
ii.  When Noise contains strong pure-tone components or is impulsive, that is, when meter changes at 10 decibels or more per second: subtract -7 dB. 
iii.  When Noise is present for not more than ½ minute in any ½-hour period, 1 minute in any 1-hour period, 10 minutes in any 2-hour period, or 20 minutes in any 4-hour period: add 10 dB. 
c.  Measurement of noise shall be made with an Octave band analyzer meeting the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. 
3.  Smoke and Particulate Matter 
No operation or use shall cause, create, or allow the emission for more than 3 minutes in any 1 hour of air contaminants which at the emission point or within the bounds of the property are: 
a.  As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 2 on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines Information Bulletin 7118. 
b.  Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed in Section 4.5C.3.a above except that; when the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure to comply or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into the atmosphere, the standards specified in Sections 4.5C.3.a and 4.5C.3.b shall not apply. 
c.  The emission of particulate matter from all sources shall not exceed 1.0 pounds per acre of property within the plant site per any one hour. 
d.  The open storage and open processing operations including on site transportation movements which are the source of wind or airborne dust or other particulate air contaminants generating equipment such as used in paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage, or sand blasting shall be so conducted that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the boundary line of the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding 4 grains per 1,000 cubic feet of air. 
4.  Odorous Matter 
a.  No use shall be located or operated which involves the emission of odorous matter from a source operation where the odorous matter exceeds a concentration at the bounding property line or any point beyond which, when diluted with an equal volume of odor free air, exceeds the odor threshold (two odor units). 
b.  The odor threshold and odor unit shall be determined by observation by one or more people. In any case where uncertainty may arise, the operator or owner of an odor emitting use may disagree with the enforcing officer, or specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and procedures specified by the American Society for Testing Materials, A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57 titled Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmosphere shall be used as the standard for determining the odor threshold, which standards are incorporated herein by reference. 
5.  Fire or Explosive Hazard Material 
a.  No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted except when such use is in conformance with all other City ordinances and has been approved by the City's Fire Department. 
b.  The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the standards and regulations of City's Fire Department. 
6.  Toxic and Noxious Matter 
No operation or use shall emit across the bounding property line of the tract on which such use or operation is located a concentration of toxic or noxious matter which will exceed ten percent of the concentration (exposure) considered as the threshold limit for an industrial worker as such standards are set forth by the Texas State Department of Health in Threshold Limit Values Occupational Health Regulation No. 3, a copy of which is incorporated herein by reference and on file in the office of the Director. 
7.  Vibrations 
No operation or use shall at any time create earthborne vibrations which, when measured at the bounding property line of the source operation, exceeds the limit of displacement set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified: 
Frequency (Cycles per Second) 	Displacement (In Inches) 
0-10 	.0020 
10-20 	.0016 
20-30 	.0010 
30-40 	.0006 
40 & Over 	.0005 
 
8.  Open Storage 
a.  Open storage shall be permitted as an accessory use to a main use which is located in a building in an HI district or a PD district allowing uses and standards in accordance with the HI zoning district. 
b.  The area designated as open storage shall not exceed the total gross square foot of the building located on the same lot as the open storage area without the prior approval of a specific use permit in accordance with Section 6.5. 
c.  Open storage shall be located on the rear one-half of the lot. 
d.  No open storage shall be located in front of the main building. 
e.  No open storage area shall be used as a wrecking, junk or salvage yard prior to approval of as a specific use permit in accordance with Section 6.5 authorizing such use. 
f.  All open storage areas shall be screened from view of the public by a masonry wall not less than six feet nor greater than eight feet in height, and shrubs, trees or other landscaping as approved by the Director. 
g.  Items stored in an authorized open storage area shall not extend above the required screening wall or fence. 
9.  Waste Materials 
No use or operation shall discharge onto the ground or into any driveway, open pit, pond or into any street or street right-of-way, any waste materials, liquids, residue or by products for storage, decomposition, disposal or fill, unless approved by the Director. 
D.  "Daytime" and "Bounding Property Line" 
1.  "Daytime" As used in Sections 4.5.B. and C., "daytime" means the hours between sunrise and sunset on any given day. 
2.  "Bounding Property Line" 
As used in Sections 4.5.B. and C., "bounding property line" means (i) the far side of any street, alley, stream or other permanently dedicated open space from the noise source when such open space exists between the property line of the noise source and adjacent property, and (ii) when no such open space exists, the common line between two parcels of property. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
ARTICLE 5. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 
 
5.1 - FLOOD PLAIN 
A.  Flood Plain Prefix 
To provide for the appropriate use of land that has a history of inundation or is determined to be subject to flood hazard, and to promote the general welfare and provide protection from flooding, portions of certain districts are designated with a Flood Plain Prefix, "FP." Areas designated on the Zoning District Map by an "FP" Prefix shall be subject to the following provisions: 
B.  Uses Permitted 
The permitted uses in that portion of any district having a Flood Plain ("FP") prefix shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Agricultural activities including the ordinary cultivation or grazing of land and legal types of animal husbandry. 
2.  Off-street parking incidental to any adjacent main use permitted in the district. 
3.  Electrical substation. 
4.  All types of local utilities including those requiring Specific Use Permits when approved as provided in Section 6.5. 
5.  Parks, community centers, playgrounds, public golf courses. 
6.  Private open space. 
7.  Heliport when approved by specific use permit as provided in Section 6.5. 
C.  Flood Plain Requirements 
In addition to the provisions of this zoning ordinance applicable to the zoning district in which the subject land is located, the use and development of land located within an area of special flood hazard or controlled flood protection shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 42 of the Code of Ordinances, as amended. In the event of any irreconcilable conflict between the provisions of this zoning ordinance and said Chapter 42, the provisions of said Chapter 42 shall control. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
5.2 - HISTORIC LANDMARK PRESERVATION 
A.  Historic Landmark 
1.  Any zoning district designation appearing on the Zoning District Map may be followed by the suffix "H" indicating a Historic Landmark subdistrict. Such subdistrict may include buildings, land, areas, or districts of historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural importance or value which merit protection, enhancement, and preservation in the interest of the culture, prosperity, education, and welfare of the people. 
2.  The "H" designation shall apply to those premises, lots, or tracts designated through procedures set forth in this zoning ordinance. Additional uses may be permitted in any specific "H" subdistrict and shall be enumerated in the ordinance establishing such subdistrict. Such suffix shall not affect the legal use of the property except as provided in the ordinance establishing the subdistrict. 
B.  Defined 
As used in this section, the term "Historic Landmark" shall mean any buildings, land, areas or districts of historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural importance or value, which the City Council determines shall be protected, enhanced, and preserved in the interest of the culture, prosperity, education and welfare of the people. 
C.  Declaration of Policy 
The City Council finds and declares as a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement, preservation and use of historic landmarks is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the culture, prosperity, education and welfare of the people. 
D.  Designation 
1.  The City Council may designate certain buildings, land, areas, and districts in the City as historic landmarks and define, amend and delineate the boundaries by establishing a historic landmark designation in the same manner as required to amend, repeal or alter the zoning on a tract or parcel of land. 
2.  The suffix "H" shall indicate the zoning subdistrict designation of those buildings, land, areas and districts which the City Council has designated historic landmarks. 
3.  Such designation shall be in addition to any other zoning district designation established in the zoning ordinance. All Zoning District Maps shall reflect the designation of a historical landmark subdistrict by the letter "H" as a suffix. 
E.  Criteria to Be Used in Determination 
In making such designation as set forth in Section 5.2D, the City Council and the Commission shall consider one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  Character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City of Farmers Branch, State of Texas, or the United States; 
2.  Identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the City; 
3.  Location as the site of a significant historic event; 
4.  Exemplifications of the cultural, economic, social, or historical heritage of the City; 
5.  Relationship to other distinctive buildings, sites, or areas which are eligible for preservation according to a plan based on historical, cultural or architectural motif; 
6.  Unique location of singular physical characteristics representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community or the City; 
7.  Value as an aspect of community sentiment or public pride. 
F.  Removal, Demolition or Substantial Alteration 
1.  If an application is received by the Building Department for demolition, removal, razing or substantial reconstruction of any designated historic landmark, the Commission shall hold a public hearing, and make a recommendation to the City Council on whether to grant or deny the application. 
2.  No permit shall be issued to demolish, remove, raze or substantially alter or reconstruct until such matter is resolved. 
3.  The Commission shall conduct a hearing within 30 days of receipt of the application by the Director. 
4.  After the public hearing, the Commission shall recommend to the City Council whether to grant or deny the application. 
G.  Council Action 
The City Council shall consider the Commission's recommendation not later than 30 days after the Commission close of the meeting at which the Commission voted on its recommendation. The City Council, after conducting a public hearing and taking into consideration all of the factors presented, may approve or disapprove the application for a permit to demolish, remove, raze, or substantially alter or reconstruct. The Council's action shall be final. 
H.  Present Use Not Affected 
Use classifications of all property included in a historic landmark subdistrict shall continue to be governed by this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
5.3 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PD) 
A.  Creation 
A Planned Development District may be created relating to the use and development of property within the City for any one or more uses which are otherwise permitted within the City but which use requires the adoption of customized use and development regulations in order to provide a development which will be appropriate given the location of the property and the uses of property within close proximity to the property being developed. 
B.  Comprehensive Site Plan 
1.  Prior to beginning development within a Planned Development District established in accordance with this section, the developer shall obtain approval of a Comprehensive Site Plan of the development from the City Council after review and recommendation by the Commission. 
2.  No building permit shall be issued for property located in a Planned Development District until approval of a Comprehensive Site Plan for the property on which the permit is sought. 
3.  A Comprehensive Site Plan shall set forth the requirements for ingress and egress to the property, public and/or private streets or drives, adequate right-of-way to conform to the City's thoroughfare plan, sidewalks, utilities, drainage, parking space, height of building, maximum lot coverage, yards and open spaces, screening walls or fences, landscaping, building locations, recreation areas and protective requirements considered necessary to create a reasonable transition to and protection of the adjacent property, including varying the uses allowed, and their locations, within the district. 
C.  Approval 
1.  Every Planned Development District approved under the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall constitute an amendment to the zoning ordinance as applicable to the property within the boundaries of the proposed district. 
2.  In approving a Planned Development District, the City Council may impose conditions relative to the standard of development, which may include conditions to which compliance must be obtained before a building permit and/or certificate of occupancy is issued for the construction and/or use of the land or any structure which constructed on property within the Planned Development District. Such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the approval of the zoning amendment, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a building permit and/or certificate of occupancy, as the case may be. 
3.  All Planned Development Districts approved in accordance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be referenced on the Zoning District Map and a list of such Planning Development Districts together with the category of permitted uses shall be maintained in Appendix A of this zoning ordinance. 
4.  A public hearing may be held on any site plan required as a condition of a Planned Development District when such plan is submitted or whenever significant changes are proposed in such plan and the public hearing shall be subject to the same procedure of notice as is specified for amending the zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
5.4 - EAST SIDE BUSINESS DISTRICT 
A.  Purpose 
The purpose of the East Side Business District is to effectively manage vehicle sales within the City by requiring all used vehicle sales, regardless of its indoor or outdoor status, to be located within either a Light Industrial or Heavy Industrial zoning district. The East Side Business District was created to stimulate design-related retail activity in the area. 
B.  Location 
East Side Business District means all properties within the City subject to the development and use regulations of the Light Industrial District (including any planned development with a base zoning of LI "Light Industrial") located within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at a point in the east right-of-way of Midway Road 200 feet north of the intersection of Midway Road and Spring Valley Road; then easterly to the northeast corner of property described as Lot 1, Block A, J. L. Williams Industrial Park No. 1, (also known as 4601 Spring Valley Road); then southerly along the east property line of said 4601 Spring Valley Road to the north right-of-way line of Spring Valley Road; then westerly along the north right-of-way line of Spring Valley Road to its intersection with Welch Road; then southerly along the east right-of-way line of Welch Road to its intersection with the south right-of-way line of Olin Road; then easterly along the southern right-of-way line of Olin Road and continuing along the same line to the east line of the railroad right-of-way (being also the west property line of a parcel within Lot B, Block 3, Metropolitan Industrial Park, Section No. 1 also known as 14107 Inwood Road); then southerly along the eastern line of the railroad right-of-way to its intersection with Alpha Road, then continuing across Alpha Road and following the split in the railroad right-of-way that curves to the southwest, then westerly along the southern line of the railroad right-of-way to the northeast corner of a 2.9 acre parcel being part of Lot B, Block 2, Metropolitan Industrial Park, Section No. 1 (also known as 13524 Welch Road), then southerly along the east property line of said 13524 Welch Road and crossing Simonton Road to a point in its south right-of-way line; then west along the south right-of-way line to the northeast corner of the property described as a 2.315 acre tract out of Lot C, Block 1, Metropolitan Industrial Park, Section No. 1 (also known as 4600 Simonton Road); then southerly along the east property line of said 4600 Simonton Road to the southeast corner of said property; then westerly along the south property line of said 4600 Simonton Road, continuing westerly across Welch Road, and along the south property lines of properties described as (i) a 7.631 acre tract out of Metropolitan Industrial Park Section No. 2 (also known as 4552 Simonton Road), (ii) a 3.5352 acre tract out of Revised Metropolitan Industrial Park, Section 2 (also known as 4430 Simonton Road), (iii) an 8.1841 acre tract out of Revised Metropolitan Industrial Park, Section No. 2 (also known as 4248 Simonton Road), and (iv) a 3.3082 acre tract (per Dallas Central Appraisal District records) out of Revised Metropolitan Industrial Park, Section No. 2 (also known as 13400 Midway Road) to the east right-of-way line of Midway Road; then northerly along the east right-of-way line of Midway Road to the point of beginning, said boundaries being generally depicted on Appendix C of this zoning ordinance. For purposes of this definition, all subdivisions referenced herein are additions to the City of Farmers Branch, Dallas County, Texas. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
5.5 - BEER AND WINE SALES OVERLAY DISTRICT 
A.  Purpose 
A Beer and Wine Sales Overlay District ("BW") is an area designated within the City where property located within the district's boundaries may be developed and used as a Beer and Wine Package Sales Establishment. Because the sale of alcoholic beverages has been prohibited in all zoning districts except in Heavy Industrial (HI) Districts by right and in Light Industrial ("LI") Zoning Districts by specific use permit since 1972, the Beer and Wine Sales Overlay District is intended, consistent with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, to lessen the 1972 restrictions on the location of establishments which may sell beer and wine for off-premises consumption to specific areas within existing zoning districts where such establishments may be located in addition to the uses allowed within such zoning districts. The use and development of property located within a Beer and Wine Sales Overlay District shall continue to be subject to the applicable use and development regulations of the base zoning district, but may additionally be used and developed as Beer and Wine Package Establishment. The designation of a Beer and Wine Sales Overlay District is intended to substantially advance a legitimate governmental interest that includes enhancing the quality of life in City, to regulate the character of growth within the Beer and Wine Sales Overlay District, and to ensure the careful and orderly growth of such establishments. 
B.  Location 
1.  Any zoning district designation appearing on the Zoning District Map may be followed by the suffix "BW" indicating a Beer and Wine Sales Overlay subdistrict. 
2.  Designated Beer and Wine Sales Overlay Districts 
The following described areas of the City shall each constitute a Beer and Wine Sales (BW) Overlay District, each of which may consist of two or more subdistricts as described below: 
Beer and Wine Sales (BW) Overlay District 1: 
BW Subdistrict 1-A: Being an area bounded on the west by Interstate Highway 35E; on the north by the common city limit line between the City of Farmers Branch and the City of Carrollton; on the east by Denton Drive; and on the south by Valwood Parkway. 
BW Subdistrict 1-B: Being all of Lot 1, Block 1, Daltex Addition, an area that is bounded on the north by Valwood Parkway; on the west by Interstate Highway 35E; on the east and south by Lot 2-A, Block 1, Daltex Addition No. 2. 
BW Subdistrict 1-C: Being all of Lot 2-B, Block 1, Daltex Addition No. 2, an area that is bounded on the north by Valwood Parkway; on the east by Denton Drive; and on the west and south by Lot 2-A, Block 1 Daltex Addition No. 2. 
BW Subdistrict 1-D: Being all of M&G Produce aka M.S. Subdivision No. 1, and all of American Petrofina Subdivision, an area that is bounded on the north by Valwood Parkway; on the west by the DART rail right-of-way; on the east by Distribution Way; and on the south by the north line of S.U.M Subdivision that is approximately 150 south of Valwood Parkway. 
BW Subdistrict 1-E: Being Lot 1, Block 1, Valwood Distribution Industrial Park addition bounded on the north by Valwood Parkway; on the west by Distribution Way; on the south by K.D. Industrial Park Subdivision, and on the east by Lot 2, Block 1, Valwood Distribution Industrial Park addition. 
Beer and Wine Sales (BW) Overlay District 2: 
BW Subdistrict 2-A: Being an area bounded on the north by Valley View Lane; on the west by the DART rail right-of-way; on the east by Bee Street; and on the south by Pike Street. 
BW Subdistrict 2-B: Being an area bounded on the north by Valley View Lane; on the west by Bee Street; on the south by Pepperwood Street and Krause-Braack Addition; and bounded on the east by Lot 1, Block 1, First Baptist Church Addition and Goodland Street. 
Beer and Wine Sales (BW) Overlay District 3: Being an area bounded on the west by Treeview; on the south by LBJ Freeway; on the east by Webb Chapel and on the north by Maybrook Drive. 
Beer and Wine Sales (BW) Overlay District 4 (Four Corners): 
BW Subdistrict 4-A (Southwest corner): Being an area bounded on the north by Valley View Lane; on the east by Josey Lane; on the south by Tara Place Addition; on the west by a north/south line located approximately 660 feet west of Josey Lane that extends from the north line of said Tara Place Addition a distance of approximately 800 feet northward to a point on the south right-of-way line of Valley View Lane that is approximately 660 feet west of Josey Lane. 
BW Subdistrict 4-B (Northwest corner) : Being an area bounded on the south by Valley View Lane; on the west by Wilmington Drive and also bounded on the west by a 1.394 acre parcel of land at the northeast corner of Valley View Lane and Wilmington Drive known as Tract 1, J.C. Whitten Addition; and bounded on the north by Lots 1 through 11, Block B, Revised Parkway South addition; and also bounded on the north by a 0.938 acre tract of land conveyed to the City of Farmers Branch by deed recorded in Volume 71024, Page 0882, Deed Records, Dallas County, Texas; and bounded on the east by Josey Lane. 
BW Subdistrict 4-C (Northeast corner) : Being an area bounded on the west by Josey Lane; on the south by Valley View Lane; on the east by Green Meadows Estates addition; and on north by Shelly Square Addition. 
BW Subdistrict 4-D (Southeast corner) : Being an area bounded on the north by Valley View Lane; on the west by Josey Lane; on the east by Veronica Road, and also bounded on the east by a 0.9811 acre tract of land described in deed recorded as Instrument No. 201000048029, Deed Records, Dallas County, Texas, said tract being part of the Valley View Village Shopping Center addition; and bounded on the south by Lots 1 through 8, Block E, Valley View Estates No. 1 Addition. 
Beer and Wine Sales (BW) Overlay District 5 (The Beltline Corridor) : Being an area within the city limits of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas, known as The Beltline Corridor, and being comprised of subdivisions and tracts of land generally having frontage on Belt Line Road, Webb Chapel Road, Marsh Lane, Venture Drive, Trend Drive, Enterprise Drive, Towerwood Road, and Garden Brook Drive, said area being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of south right-of-way line of Belt Line Road and east right-of-way line of Webb Chapel Road; 
Thence in an easterly direction, along the south right-of-way line of Belt Line Road, a distance of approximately 9,500 feet to a point at the intersection of the south right-of-way line of Belt Line Road with the west right-of-way line of Marsh Lane; 
Thence in a southerly direction along the west right-of-way of Marsh Lane to a point at the southeast corner of Mason Addition, an addition to the City of Farmers Branch, Dallas County, Texas as recorded in Volume 2004182, Page 0086 of the Deed Records, Dallas County, Texas; 
Thence along the south line of said Mason Addition, a distance of 377.29 feet to the beginning of a curve to the left, said curve having a radius of 225.00 feet; 
Thence along said curve to the left, a distance of 202.82 feet to a point for corner, said point being the most southerly southwest corner of said Mason Addition; 
Thence in a northerly direction along the west line of said Mason Addition a distance of approximately 343 feet more or less to a point that is approximately 175 feet south of said Belt Line Road right-of-way; 
Thence departing said west line of said Mason Addition, North 89 degrees 41 minutes West, a distance of approximately 375 feet to a point in the centerline of Venture Drive (a 60 foot wide ROW); 
Thence in a southerly direction along said Venture Drive centerline a distance of approximately 240 feet to a point that is approximately 400 feet south of the south right-of-way line of said Belt Line Road; 
Thence departing said Venture Drive centerline, parallel to and approximately 400 feet south of said Belt Line Road, in a westerly direction a distance of approximately 700 feet to a point in the center line of Trend Drive (a 60 foot wide ROW); 
Thence in a southerly direction, along said center line of Trend Drive, a distance of approximately 108 feet to a point that is approximately 509 feet south of the south right-of-way line of said Belt Line Road; 
Thence departing said Trend Drive centerline in a westerly direction, parallel to said Belt Line Road and at 30 feet passing the southeast corner of a 6.75 acre tract of land, and continuing along the south line of said tract a distance of approximately 578 feet to the southwest corner of said 6.75 acre tract, and continuing in a westerly direction a distance of 30 feet to a point in the center line of Enterprise Drive (a 60 foot wide ROW). 
Beer and Wine Sales (BW) Overlay District 6: 
BW Subdistrict 6-A: Being all of East Valley View at LBJ Addition, an area that is bounded on the north by Valley View Lane; on the south by LBJ Freeway; and on the west by Morans Valley View Addition. 
BW Subdistrict 6-B: Being all of Greenbriar Midway Addition and Pace Addition Replat, an area that is bounded on the east by Midway Road; on the south by LBJ Freeway and Valley View Lane; on the north by Blue Lake Circle. 
BW Subdistrict 6-C: Being all of Exxon No. 6-3903 Addition and all of Midway Park Addition, an area that is bounded on the west by Midway Road; on the south by LBJ Freeway; and on the east by Lot 1, Block 5, Metropolitan Industrial Park Section 2 addition, aka the Freed Furniture property. 
Beer and Wine Sales (BW) Overlay District 7: 
BW Subdistrict 7-A: Being all of Lots 1 and 2, Block A, Great Indoors Addition, an area that is bounded on the north by Alpha Road; on the east by Inwood Road; on the west by Cambridge Concourse; and on the south by the south by Simonton Road. 
BW Subdistrict 7-B : Being a part of Lot 1, Block 1, Broadstone Galleria Addition that is bounded on the north by Simonton Road; on the south by Galleria Drive; on the east by Inwood Road; and on the west by a north/south line extending within a dedicated fire lane between the north right-of-way line of Galleria Drive and the south right-of-way line of Simonton Road from points on said rights of way that are respectively located approximately 345 feet and approximately 120 feet west of the west right-of-way line of Inwood Road. 
BW Subdistrict 7-C : Being all of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 of Inwood Parkway Office Park Addition, an area that is bounded on the north by Alpha Road; on the west by Inwood Road; on the east by the common city limit line of the City of Farmers Branch and the City of Dallas; and on the south by Galleria Drive eastward extension to said city limit line. 
Beer and Wine Sales (BW) Overlay District 8: Being an area bounded on the east by Inwood Road; on the west by a 54 foot wide rail right-of-way owned by the St. Louis Southwestern Railway; and bounded on the south and west by Lot A, Block 3, Metropolitan Industrial Park Sect 1 addition, and on the extreme south by Alpha Road. 
Beer and Wine Sales (BW) Overlay District 9: Being an area that is bounded on the north by IH635 and on the west by Luna Road and being that same 7.105 acre tract of land described as Tract IV - Pac Trust in a Trustee's Deed to Graham Mortgage Corporation, recorded as Document No. 201100087228, in the Deed Records, Dallas County, Texas, said property also known as Lot 1, Block 1, Park West Phase 5 , in Volume 87007, Volume 3105, of the Deed Records of Dallas, Texas. (See Appendix C for map of various BW overlay districts and subdistricts). 
C.  Residential Uses Within a Beer and Wine Sales Overlay District 
Section 46-2 of the Code of Ordinances shall be controlling with respect to the sale of beer and wine in residential areas and on property used for residential purposes located within a Beer and Wine Sales Overlay District. Nothing in this Section 5.5 shall be construed as authorizing the development and use of property as a Beer and Wine Package Sales Establishment in a residential area or on property used for a residential purpose that is located in a Beer and Wine Sales Overlay District except where the sale of beer and wine does not constitute a violation of Section 46-2(a) of the Code of Ordinances as described in Section 46-2(c) of the Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
5.6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE (ON-PREMISE) OVERLAY DISTRICT 
A.  Purpose 
An Alcoholic Beverage (On-Premise) Overlay District ("AB-OP") is an area designated within the City where property located within the AB-OP district may serve and sell beer, wine, and mixed beverages for on-premises consumption in accordance with applicable provisions of state law including, but not limited to, the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, without being a Qualifying Restaurant as provided in Section 2.6 but subject to additional regulations as may be set forth in this Section 5.6. 
B.  Development Regulations 
Property located within an AB-OP Overlay District shall be developed and used in accordance with the underlying development and use regulations for the zoning district in which the property is located; provided, however, the sale of beer, wine, and mixed beverages for on-premises consumption is permitted within any non-residential use permitted within an AB-OP Overlay District subject to any additional use and development regulations, if any, set forth in Section 5.6.E. 
C.  Conflicts with Underlying Zoning 
If the use and development regulations applicable to a property located within an AB-OP Overlay District expressly (i) prohibit or (ii) require the approval of a specific use permit for the development and use of property for bars, saloons, or similar non-residential uses that involve the sale of beer, wine, and mixed beverages for on-premises consumption, the provisions relating to the permitted service and sale of beer, wine, and mixed beverages for on-premises consumption in the AB-OP Overlay District shall control. 
D.  Restrictive Covenants 
Nothing in this Section 5.6 shall be construed as prohibiting an owner of property located within an AB-OP Overlay District from imposing a restrictive covenant on such property that prohibits, restricts, or regulates the sale or service of beer, wine, and mixed beverages for on-premises consumption on the property. 
E.  Designated Alcoholic Beverage (On-Premise) Overlay Districts 
The following described areas of the City shall each constitute an Alcoholic Beverage (On-Premise) Overlay District ("AB-OP"): 
Boardwalk Alcoholic Beverage (On-Premise) Overlay District 
Being a 19.51± tract of land out of the H. C. Marsh Survey, Abstract No. 916, City of Farmers Branch, Dallas County, Texas, and being more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows (based on records and not an on-the-ground survey): 
Beginning in the southerly right-of-way line of LBJ Freeway and the easterly boundary line of the same tract of land described in the deed to 2M Holdings, LP recorded as Document No. 201100225464 in the Official Public Records of Dallas County, Texas; 
Thence South 08 degrees 37 minutes 58 seconds West with said easterly boundary line a distance of 163.72 feet; 
Thence North 81 degrees 22 minutes 02 seconds West a distance of 23.44 feet; 
Thence South 43 degrees 21 minutes 29 seconds West a distance of 28.27 feet; 
Thence South 57 degrees 30 minutes 351 seconds West a distance of 335.55 feet; 
Thence South 59 degrees 56 minutes 34 seconds West a distance of 53.53 feet; 
Thence South 44 degrees 06 minutes 28 seconds West a distance of 28.07 feet; 
Thence South 40 degrees 07 minutes 44 seconds West a distance of 188.06 feet; 
Thence South 60 degrees 18 minutes 47 seconds West a distance of 112.39 feet; 
Thence South 81 degrees 31 minutes 25 seconds West a distance of 165.26 feet; 
Thence North 84 degrees 15 minutes 23 seconds West a distance of 117.80 feet; 
Thence North 76 degrees 30 minutes 38 seconds West a distance of 31.33 feet; 
Thence North 60 degrees 43 minutes 54 seconds West a distance of 124.96 feet; 
Thence North 51 degrees 23 minutes 21 seconds West a distance of 30.47 feet; 
Thence North 39 degrees 56 minutes 07 seconds West a distance of 180.19 feet; 
Thence North 64 degrees 13 minutes 09 seconds West a distance of 29.69 feet; 
Thence South 87 degrees 28 minutes 20 seconds West a distance of 520.79 feet; 
Thence North 84 degrees 43 minutes 59 seconds West a distance of 200.96 feet; 
Thence North 82 degrees 26 minutes 33 seconds West a distance of 138.67 feet to the westerly boundary line of said 2M tract; 
Thence North 00 degrees 33 minutes 53 seconds West with said westerly boundary line a distance of 315.07 feet to said southerly right-of-way line; 
Thence North 89 degrees 44 minutes 04 seconds East with said southerly right-of-way line a distance of 514.53 feet; 
Thence North 85 degrees 23 minutes 28 seconds East continuing with said southerly right-of-way line a distance of 357.12 feet; 
Thence North 87 degrees 59 minutes 30 seconds East continuing with said southerly right-of-way line a distance of 707.23 feet; 
Thence South 89 degrees 25 minutes 45 seconds East continuing with said southerly right-of-way line a distance of 503.97 feet to the point of beginning. 
Station Area Alcoholic Beverage (On-Premise) Overlay District 
An area bounded as follows: 
Beginning at a point at the intersection of the east right-of-way line of Denton Drive with the south right-of-way line of Pike Street; 
Then, in a northwesterly direction, along the east right-of-way line of Denton Drive, crossing the Pike Street right-of-way, to a point at the southeast corner of Valley View Lane and Denton Drive; 
Then, departing the east right-of-way line of Denton Drive, along the south right-of-way line of Valley View Lane, crossing the Rossford Street right-of-way and crossing the DART rail right-of-way, continuing east along said south right-of-way line of Valley View Lane, crossing the Bee Street right-of-way to a point for corner located at the northeast corner of a 0.788 acre tract of land conveyed to FB Land LTD by deed recorded as Instrument No. 201300240537, Official Public Records, Dallas County, Texas; 
Then, departing said south right-of-way line of Valley View Lane and the northeast corner of said tract of land conveyed to FB Land LTD, in a southeasterly direction along the east line of said 0.788 acre tract, to a point at the northeast corner of Jenny Lynn Addition; 
Then, in a southeasterly direction, along the east line of said Jenny Lynn Addition to the southeast corner of said addition, being a point in the north right-of-way line of Pepperwood Street; 
Then, departing said southeast corner, in a westerly direction along the south side of said Jenny Lynn Addition and the north right-of-way line of said Pepperwood Drive to a point in the east right-of-way line of Bee Street; 
Then, departing the north right-of-way line of Pepperwood Drive in a northwesterly direction along said east right-of-way line of Bee Street to a point that is at the eastward prolongation of the south right-of-way line of Pike Street with said east right-of-way line of Bee Street; 
Then, departing said east right-of-way line of Bee Street, in a westerly direction along said prolongation line, to a point in the west right-of-way line of said Bee Street, and being the southwest corner of the intersection of said Bee Street and Pike Street rights-of-way; 
Then, in a westerly direction, along said south right-of-way line of Pike Street, crossing the DART rail right-of-way and crossing the Rossford Street right-of-way to a point in the east right-of-way of Denton Drive, being the Point of Beginning. 
( Ord. No. 3446 , § 1, 6-6-2017)  
ARTICLE 6. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
6.1 - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
A.  Organization 
1.  The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members, each to be appointed by the Mayor and subject to confirmation by the City Council for a term of two years and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing. 
2.  Board members shall be appointed on a staggered annual basis. Three full members shall be appointed one year and two full members shall be appointed the following year. 
3.  Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose place becomes vacant for any cause, in the same manner as the original appointment was made. 
4.  Appointed members shall serve until the end of their appointments, resignations, or removals and afterwards each member reappointed or each new appointee shall serve for a full term of two years unless removed as provided above. Provided, however, that the Mayor and the City Council may appoint two alternate members of the Board of Adjustment who shall serve in the absence of one or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the Chairman of the Board, or their appointed representative, as the case may be, so that all cases to be heard by the Board of Adjustment will always be heard by a minimum number of four members. The alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for the same two-year time period as the regular members, and any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner and they shall be subject to the same removal provisions as regular members. 
B.  Procedure 
1.  The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings consistent with this zoning ordinance or statutes of the State of Texas. 
2.  Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. 
3.  The Chairman, or in the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair, or other person elected by the remainder of the Board to serve as Acting Chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
4.  Except for closed (executive) meetings held in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Act, all meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public and subject to the Texas Open Meetings Act, as amended. 
5.  The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board of Adjustment and shall be a public record. 
C.  Appeals 
1.  Appeals to the Board of Adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved, or by an officer, department or board of the municipality affected by the decision of the Building Official. 
2.  Appeals shall be taken within 15 days after the decision has been rendered by the Building Official, by filing with the Director and with the Board of Adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds on which the appeal is based. The Director shall then transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
3.  An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from unless the Building Official certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the Director, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the Building Official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise, than by restraining order that may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the Building Official and due cause shown. 
4.  The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give the public notice by posting such notice in the mail addressed to all owners of real property located within 200 feet of property on which the appeal is made and by publishing notice of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Both the posted and published notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by attorney or by agent. 
D.  Jurisdiction 
When in its judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the Board of Adjustment may, in specific cases, after public notice and public hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize the following special exceptions to the regulations: 
1.  Permit the reconstruction, extension or enlargement of a building occupied by a nonconforming use on the lot or tract occupied by such building provided such reconstruction does not prevent the return of such property to a conforming use and permit the expansion of off-street parking and off-street loading for a nonconforming use. 
2.  Permit modifications of the height, yard, lot area coverage, floor area, minimum access, parking regulations as may be necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of land that differs from other parcels in the district by being of such restricted area, shape or slope, that it cannot be appropriately developed without modification. 
3.  Require the discontinuance of nonconforming uses of land or structure under any plan where the full value of the structure and facilities can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity of all property to conform to the regulations of this zoning ordinance. All actions to discontinue a nonconforming use of land and structure shall be taken with due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of property. The Board of Adjustment shall from time to time, on its own motion or upon cause presented by interested property owners or upon request of the City Council, inquire into the existence, continuation or maintenance of any nonconforming use with the City. 
E.  Actions of the Board 
1.  In exercising its powers, the Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of Texas Local Government Code §§211.009 and 211.010, as amended, revise or reform, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions, or determinations of the Director appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken including the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the applicant. 
2.  The concurring vote of four members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to revise any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Director, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this zoning ordinance or to affect any variance to this zoning ordinance. 
3.  An appeal of a decision of the Board of Adjustment may be made in accordance with Texas Local Government Code §211.011, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
6.2 - MAP AMENDMENT 
A.  Authority 
Any person or corporation having a legal or equitable ownership interest in any real property may petition the City Council for a change or amendment of the Zoning District Map or the regulations relating to a specific tract of land located within the City, or the Commission may on its own motion or on request from the City Council institute study and proposal for such changes and amendments in the public interest. 
B.  Procedure 
1.  The City Council may, from time to time, amend or change by ordinance the boundaries of the various zoning districts or the use and development regulations relating to a specific property in accordance with the manner provided by state law. 
2.  Before taking action on any proposed amendment or change, the City Council shall submit the proposed amendment to the Commission for its recommendation and report. 
3.  The Commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for any map amendment or change prior to making its recommendations and report to the City Council. 
4.  Written notice of all public hearings before the Commission on a proposed amendment or change to the Zoning District Map, including an amendment or change to the use and development regulations governing a specific tract of land, shall be sent to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property regarding which the change is requested. Notice shall be given not less than ten days before the date set for the hearing by posting such notice properly addressed and postage-paid to each taxpayer as the ownership appears on the last approved City tax roll. 
5.  A public hearing shall be held by the City Council before adopting any proposed map amendment or development regulation change relating to a specific tract of land. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in the City's official publication stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the date of publication. 
6.  If a written protest against such change is submitted in accordance with Section 6.2E by the owners of 20% or more of either (i) the area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change or (ii) the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending 200 feet from that area, such map amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the City Council. 
7.  In computing the percentage of land area under Subsection 6, above, the area of streets and alleys shall be included. 
C.  Public Notification Signage 
1.  Any person, firm or corporation requesting a change in zoning from one zoning classification to another zoning classification on a specific site or other amendments to the use and development regulations governing such property shall erect and maintain a sign, provided by the City upon said property. Such sign shall be: 
a.  Located within 15 feet of the closest, adjacent, most heavily traveled thoroughfare; 
b.  Located perpendicular to the street so as to be clearly visible and both sides of the sign are clearly readable from the thoroughfare and not obstructed in any manner; 
c.  Located so as not to create a hazard to traffic on, entering or leaving public rights-of-way abutting the property; and 
d.  Erected on the subject property at least 10 days prior to the hearing of such request by the Commission, and to remain continuously on said property until final action by the City Council or withdrawal of the request by the applicant. Removal of the required public notification sign, by the applicant, prior to final action of the City Council shall constitute a withdrawal of the request. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove, destroy, deface or obstruct the view of a required sign which gives notice that a zoning hearing has been requested, however, it shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of the underlying zoning request has been finally approved or denied by the City Council or if such request has been withdrawn by the applicant. 
3.  In the event the applicant should fail to erect or maintain any required sign in accordance with any appropriate standard in this section, then the public hearing before the Commission and/or City Council shall be postponed to a date in the future that should allow time for compliance. 
4.  The sign shall be two-sided and state that a zoning change is requested and shall list a phone number of an appropriate City department that may be contacted for information regarding this request. 
5.  There shall be a cost attributed to the receiving of each sign by the applicant and such cost shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. 
6.  Failure to comply with the posting of the signs required by this Section 6.2C. or to otherwise strictly comply with the manner in which such signs are posted, shall not invalidate any public hearing or action taken by either the Commission or the City Council relating to a request to amend the zoning regulations relating to the property. 
D.  Site Plan Public Hearing Process for Local Government Public Facilities 
New development or substantial expansion of Local Government Public Facilities shall require site plan review by the Commission and approval by City Council. Such site plans shall require public hearings following the procedure outlined below: 
1.  The Commission shall hold a public hearing to review the proposed site plan prior to making a recommendation to City Council. Written notice of this public hearing shall be sent to all owners of real property located within 200 feet of the development site. Such notice shall be given not less than ten days before the date set for the hearing by posting such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each taxpayer as the ownership appears on the last approved City tax roll. 
2.  A public hearing shall be held by the City Council before approving the proposed site plan. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in the official publication of the City of Farmers Branch stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the date of publication. 
3.  City-owned park improvements, public safety facilities and public utility facilities shall be exempt from this public hearing process. 
E.  Written Protests Procedures 
1.  Purpose. 
a.  State law expressly enables the governing body of a municipality to establish procedures for adopting and enforcing zoning regulations and district boundaries. Pursuant to that authority, the City Council enacts this Section 6.2E governing the receipt of written protests submitted for the purpose of requiring the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the City Council to effect a change in a zoning district classification or boundary. 
b.  This Section 6.2E. is not intended to conflict with state law; it is being enacted at a time when the state law does not explicitly provide how, when, or where a written protest must be filed. The City Council expressly recognizes that this Section 6.2E. may be partially or completely preempted at any such time that state law is amended to explicitly provide how, when, or where a written protest must be filed. 
c.  This Section 6.2E. is intended to accomplish the following listed objectives that, in the opinion of the city council, are fully in keeping with the purposes, spirit, and intent of the state law: 
i.  To allow city staff sufficient time to accurately calculate the land area percentages that determines the voting requirement; 
ii.  To protect the rights of all parties by establishing minimum criteria to assure the reliability of written protests received; 
iii.  To protect the rights of those protesting by establishing procedures and deadlines which are not unduly burdensome or restrictive; and 
iv.  To promote order and maintain the integrity of the zoning process. 
2.  Form of protest. 
a.  A protest must be in writing submitted on a form prepared by the city secretary and, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
i.  A description of the zoning case at issue; 
ii.  The printed or typewritten names of all persons signing the protest of the proposed change in zoning district classification or boundary; 
iii.  A description of the area of lots or land owned by the protesting parties that is either covered by the proposed change or located within 200 feet of the area covered by the proposed change; 
iv.  The mailing addresses of all persons signing the protest; 
v.  The date and time the protest is signed; and 
vi.  If signing the protest on behalf of the owner of property pursuant to a power of attorney, so indicate on the protest and submit a copy of the power of attorney with the protest. 
b.  The protest must bear the original signatures of all persons required to sign under Section 6.2E.3, below. 
c.  The return of the notice provided to an owner pursuant to Section 6.2B.3 shall not constitute a written protest pursuant to this Section 6.2E. 
3.  Who must sign. 
a.  A protest must be signed by the owner of the property in question, or by a person authorized by power of attorney to sign the protest on behalf of the owner. If the property is owned by two or more people, the protest must be signed by a majority of the owners, or by a person authorized by power of attorney to sign the protest on behalf of a majority of the owners, except that in the case of community property, the city shall presume the written protest of one spouse to be the protest of both. 
b.  In the case of property owned by a corporation, the protest must be signed by the president, a vice-president, or by an attorney in fact authorized to sign the protest on behalf of the corporation. In the case of property owned by a general or limited partnership, the protest must be signed by a general partner or by an attorney in fact authorized to sign the protest on behalf of the partnership. In the case of property owned by a trust, the protest must be signed by the trustee(s) authorized under the trust agreement to perform actions with respect to the property. 
c.  Lots or land subject to a condominium regime are presumed to be commonly owned in undivided interests by the owners of all condominium units and under the control of the governing body of the condominium. For such lots or land to be included in calculating the lots or land area protesting a proposed rezoning, the written protest must state that the governing body of the condominium has authorized a protest in accordance with procedures required by its bylaws, and that the person signing the protest is authorized to act on behalf of the governing body of the condominium. A written protest signed by the owner of an individual condominium unit shall not be accepted unless the filing party produces legal documents governing the condominium which clearly establish the right of an individual owner to act with respect to his or her respective undivided interest in the common elements of the condominium. 
d.  For purposes of this subsection, the "owner" of the property for which a protest is being submitted shall be determined to be the owner of the property shown in the records of the Dallas Central Appraisal District as of the date of delivery of the protest to the city secretary. A person with only a leasehold or easement interest in property is not an "owner" for purposes of filing a protest pursuant to this subsection. 
e.  A person who is not named on the records of the Dallas Central Appraisal District as the owner of the property may submit additional information to the city attorney indicating that the person is the current record owner of the property identified in the protest. The determination of the city attorney as to the sufficiency of such information and whether or not the person should be considered the record owner of the property for purpose of filing the protest is final. Any additional information submitted pursuant to this paragraph (e) must be submitted by the deadline required for submission of the protest. 
4.  Filing deadline. 
a.  A written protest must be filed with the city secretary before noon of the business day immediately preceding the date advertised for the Commission or City Council public hearing in the statutory notice published in the official newspaper of the City. A protest sent through the mail must be received by the city secretary before the deadline. 
b.  Before the public hearing on the case, the filing deadline is automatically extended whenever the public hearing is re-advertised in the official newspaper of the city pursuant to statutory notice requirements. 
c.  After the public hearing has begun, and 
i.  the public hearing is concluded with no action being taken on the zoning amendment at the same meeting and a subsequent public hearing and advertising that public hearing in the official newspaper of the city pursuant to statutory notice requirements; or 
ii.  the public hearing is continued to a date certain as otherwise allowed under the Texas Open Meetings Act; 
iii,  the filing deadline may be extended to noon of the working day immediately preceding the newly advertised public hearing date or the date to which the public hearing is continued, as the case may be. 
d.  Written protests may be filed electronically be emailing the written protest as an attachment in .pdf format to the city secretary or by sending via facsimile transmission to the published facsimile telephone number for the office of the city secretary. 
e.  For purposes of determining compliance with the filing deadline, the date and time the city secretary's office actually receives the written protest is solely determinative. 
5.  Withdrawals of protests filed. Withdrawals of protests filed must be in writing and filed with the city secretary before the filing deadline for protests. The provisions of this subsection governing the form and filing of protests apply equally to withdrawals. 
6.  Presumptions of validity. 
a.  In all cases where a protest has been properly signed pursuant to this subsection, the city shall presume that the signatures appearing on the protest are authentic and that the persons or officers whose signatures appear on the protest are either owners of the property or authorized to sign on behalf of one or more owners as represented. 
b.  In cases of multiple ownership, the city shall presume that a properly signed protest which on its face purports to represent a majority of the property owners does in fact represent a majority of the property owners. 
c.  The presumptions in subparagraphs (1) and (2) above are rebuttable, and the city attorney may advise the city council that a presumption should not be followed in a specific case based on extrinsic evidence presented. 
7.  Conflicting instruments. In the event that multiple protests and withdrawals are filed on behalf of the same owner, the instrument with the latest date and time execution controls. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
6.3 - TEXT AMENDMENT 
A.  Authority 
Any person or corporation having a legal or equitable ownership interest in any real property located in the City may petition the City Council for a text amendment to the provisions of this zoning ordinance, or the Commission may on its own motion or on request from the City Council institute a study and proposal for changes and amendments in the public interest. 
B.  Procedure 
1.  The City Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, or change by Ordinance this zoning ordinance as provided by state law. 
2.  Before taking action on any proposed text amendment, the City Council shall submit the proposed amendment to the Commission for its recommendation and report. 
3.  The Commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for any text amendment or change prior to making its recommendations and report to the City Council. 
4.  A public hearing shall be held by the City Council before adopting any proposed text amendment. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in the City's official publication stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the date of publication. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
6.4 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND COMPLIANCE 
No building erected, converted or structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use, no land may be used, nor shall any basic change of use in land or structure be made until a certificate of occupancy and compliance has been issued stating that the building or proposed use of land or building complies with the provisions of this zoning ordinance and other applicable City ordinances. 
A.  A certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for a Building Permit and will be issued not later than ten days after the completion of the erection, alteration or conversion of such building or land provided such construction or change fully complies with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. A certificate of occupancy permit shall be considered evidence of the legal existence of a nonconforming use as contrasted to an illegal use and violation of this zoning ordinance. 
B.  A certificate of occupancy and compliance shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all building or health laws or ordinances and with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the land or building affected except where providing such copies is prohibited by law. 
C.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, neither the Director nor any other officer or employee of the City shall be authorized to grant a certificate of occupancy and compliance for a building which fails to comply fully with this zoning ordinance unless the Director or other officer or employee of the City has been granted express authority by this zoning ordinance to grant a variance or special exception with respect to the regulation for which compliance has not otherwise been obtained. The City reserves the right to withdraw and/or terminate a certificate of occupancy and compliance which was issued to commence use of a property which is not fully compliant with this zoning ordinance at the time the certificate was originally issued. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
6.5 - SPECIFIC USE PERMIT 
A.  Procedure 
1.  The City Council after public hearing and proper notice as required by state law and after receipt and consideration of the recommendations of the Commission may authorize the issuance of Specific Use Permits for the uses indicated by "S" in the use table in Section 2.4C. 
2.  The Commission, in considering and determining its recommendations to the City Council on any request for a specific use permit, may require from the applicant plans, information, operating data and expert evaluation concerning the location and function and characteristics of any building or use proposed. The City Council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance of this zoning ordinance, establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement, and construction of any use for which a specific use permit is authorized. In authorizing the location of any of the uses listed as specific use permits, the City Council may impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and locations indicate important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property from excessive noise, vibration, glare, offensive view or other undesirable or hazardous conditions. 
3.  All specific use permits approved in accordance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance in its original form or as hereafter amended shall be referenced on the Zoning District Map and a list of such permits shall be maintained in Appendix B of this zoning ordinance. 
B.  Interim Use 
Upon application by any person or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in real property located within the City, the City Council, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties as required by state law and after recommendations by the Commission may authorize the issuance of specific use permit -interim use for the uses of such property indicated by "S" in the use table, Section 2.4C. 
1.  The application for a Specific Use Permit - Interim Use shall include the following: 
a.  The nature and extent of the proposed use; 
b.  The nature and extent of all expenditures and capital improvements to the property contemplated by the applicant for the implementation of such use, and the applicant's best estimate of the cost; 
c.  The applicant's best estimate of the period of time required to recover such investment; 
d.  The expiration date of the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use for which the applicant is applying, which shall not be earlier than the date specified by the applicant pursuant to Section 6.5B.1c; and 
e.  The acknowledgment, consent and agreement of the applicant, any other person or corporation holding a legal interest in the property, and the holder or holders of all liens and encumbrances against the property of the following: 
i.  That the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use, if granted, will expire by its own terms on or before the expiration date specified by the applicant pursuant to Section 6.5B.1d; 
ii.  That the use for which the applicant seeks the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use to be granted shall be terminated on or before such date and the property may afterwards be used only in accordance with the zoning applicable to the property in effect on such date, excluding the uses permitted by the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use; 
iii.  That such parties have, and shall have, no right to continued use of the property for the use specified in the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use after such date, and that any and all such rights are and shall be expressly released, waived and abandoned; 
iv.  That any and all investment in the property made subsequent to or in reliance upon the issuance of the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use which has not been recovered prior to expiration of the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use may not thereafter be recovered through continued use of the property in the manner authorized by the Specific Use Permit -Interim Use; and 
v.  That as a condition to the effectiveness of the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use the contents of the application responsive to this section, signed by all of said parties, in recordable form, shall be filed in the Official Public Records of Dallas County, Texas. 
2.  The application for a Specific Use Permit - Interim Use shall not be granted unless the City Council finds and determines, on the basis of facts presented in the application at the public hearing, as follows: 
a.  That the proposed use is consistent with existing uses of adjacent and nearby property. 
b.  That the proposed use is not consistent with: 
i.  The reasonably foreseeable uses of adjacent and nearby property anticipated to be in place upon expiration of the term of the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use; and 
ii.  The use of the property contemplated by the City's Comprehensive Plan, as in effect on the date of granting of said permit; 
c.  That the proposed use will not impair development of adjacent and nearby property in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan during the period for which the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use is in effect; 
d.  That the proposed use will not adversely affect the City's Thoroughfare Plan and traffic patterns, as in effect at the time of granting of said permit, and as contemplated by the City's Comprehensive Plan; and 
e.  That any investment contemplated to be made by the applicant in the property subsequent to or in reliance upon the issuance of the permit may reasonably be expected to be recovered prior to the expiration date of the permit. 
3.  The expiration date of the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use shall be fixed by the City Council to be a date subsequent to the expiration of the time for recovery of applicant's investment in the property, as specified by the applicant pursuant to Section 6.5B.1c. 
4.  The Commission on considering and determining its recommendations to the City Council on any request for a Specific Use Permit - Interim Use (or any extension granted pursuant to Section 6.5B.5 may require from the applicant plans, information, operating data and expert evaluation concerning the location and function and characteristics of any building or use proposed. The City Council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance of this zoning ordinance, establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement and construction of any use for which a permit is authorized. In authorizing the location of any of the uses listed as Specific Use Permit - Interim Use (or any such extension), the City Council may impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and locations indicate important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property from excessive noise, vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, fumes, gas, odor, explosion, glare, offensive view or other undesirable or hazardous conditions. 
5.  Within 90 days prior to expiration of the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use, or any extension granted pursuant to this section or at any time afterwards, the City shall give written notice to all persons or corporations known to the City to have an interest in the property stating that all uses permitted by the terms of the permit shall, unless extended pursuant to 6.5B.6, cease 90 days after the date of the notice, such that the only uses permitted upon the property afterwards shall be those permitted by the zoning applicable to the property in effect on such date, excluding the uses permitted by the specific use permit. 
6.  Within 30 days after the expiration date of the notice, any party having a legal interest in the property may initiate a zoning case or an extension of the SUP-Interim Use pursuant to this paragraph. The City Council, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected, and after recommendation of the Commission, shall consider the matters set out in Section 6.5B.2 and shall either: 
a.  Grant an extension of the specific use permit for so long as to reasonably anticipate it will remain in effect and continue to apply to the property, or 
b.  If it does not so find, order the use terminated. 
7.  The applicant and each person or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property shall cease and terminate the use authorized by the specific use permit on or before the later of: 
a.  The 90th day after the date of the expiration notice given pursuant to Section 6.5B.5; or 
b.  If applicable, the 30th day after the order of termination pursuant to Section 6.5B.6. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to use the property for any use or purpose not permitted by the zoning applicable to the property on such date, excluding the uses permitted by the Specific Use Permit - Interim Use. 
8.  Each Specific Use Permit - Interim Use approved in accordance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance, in its original form or as amended shall be referenced as such on the Zoning District Map. 
9.  An applicant for a Specific Use Permit pursuant to Section 6.5, whose application is denied, may, notwithstanding any policies or procedures of the Commission to the contrary, amend said application to apply for a Specific Use Permit - Interim Use pursuant to Section 6.5B, at any time after said denial. 
10.  Upon granting of a Specific Use Permit - Interim Use, and as a condition to the effectiveness, a notice containing the information set forth in Section 6.5B.1c, signed and acknowledged by the applicant, any other person or corporation having a legal or equitable ownership interest in the property and the holder or holders of all liens and encumbrances against the property, shall be recorded in the Official Public Records of Dallas County, Texas. 
C.  Termination of Specific Use Permits 
1.  If new construction is required to comply with a Specific Use Permit or to be able to use property for the use for which a Specific Use Permit is granted, a building permit for the property described in the Specific Use Permit shall be obtained from the City not later than six months after the effective date of the ordinance granting the Specific Use Permit provided, however, the Director may authorize one or more extensions of such deadline for a period totaling not more than an additional one year after the original deadline. A specific use permit and the ordinance granting same shall terminate and be of no further effect if (i) a required building permit has not been issued within the time required by this section, or. (ii) if a building permit has been issued but has subsequently expired. 
2.  If no new construction is required to comply with a Specific Use Permit or to make the property usable for the use for which a Specific Use Permit is granted, the specific use permit and the ordinance granting same shall expire and be of no further effect if a certificate of occupancy is not obtained and use of the property for which the Specific Use Permit granted has not commenced within six months after the effective date of the ordinance granting the specific use permit unless such ordinance grants a longer period of time to commence such use. 
3.  If for a period in excess of 180 days (i) a building or property subject to a Specific Use Permit is vacated, or (ii) a building or property, though still occupied, is not being used for the purpose for which the Specific Use Permit was granted, the Specific Use Permit shall terminate and the use of the building or property described in the Specific Use Permit shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the original zoning district of such property unless a new and separate Specific Use Permit is granted for continuation of the use for which the original Specific Use Permit was granted. 
4.  The provisions of this Section 6.5C. shall also apply to a Specific Use Permit -Interim Use. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
6.6 - Nonconforming Uses and Structures 
A.  Any use or structure which does not conform with the regulations of the zoning district in which the use or structure is located shall be deemed a nonconforming use or structure when: 
1.  The use or structure was in existence and lawfully operating prior to September 23, 1957, and since that date has been continuously operating (in the case of the use) or in existence (in the case of the structure). 
2.  The use or structure was in existence and lawfully operating prior to February 24, 1969 and since that date has been continuously operating (in the case of the use) or in existence (in the case of the structure). 
3.  The use or structure was in existence and lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this zoning ordinance and since that date has been continuously operating (in the case of the use) or in existence (in the case of the structure). 
4.  The use or structure was in existence at the time of annexation into the City and has been in regular and continuous use (in the case of the use) or existence (in the case of the structure) since the date of annexation. 
B.  Any nonconforming use of land may be continued for definite periods subject to regulations the Board of Adjustment may adopt for immediate preservation of the adjoining property prior to the ultimate removal of the nonconforming use. 
C.  The Director may grant a change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to another, provided the use is within the same, or higher or more restricted classification as the original nonconforming use. 
D.  In the event a nonconforming use is changed to another nonconforming use which is more restrictive, it shall not later be changed to a less restrictive classification of nonconforming use and the prior less restrictive classification shall be considered to have been abandoned. 
E.  Any nonconforming use of property may be changed to a permitted use. When a nonconforming use of property is changed to a permitted use, the property may no longer be used for the prior non-conforming use. 
F.  If a non-conforming structure is damaged or destroyed by fire, the elements or other cause such that the cost of reconstruction of the structure to substantially its condition prior to the event causing the damage or destruction exceeds 50% of the appraised value of the non-conforming structure prior to the event resulting in such damage or destruction, the structure may not be rebuilt except in compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
G.  If a nonconforming structure is damaged such that the cost of reconstruction of the structure to substantially its condition prior to the event causing the damage or destruction does not exceed 50% of the appraised value of the non-conforming structure prior to the event resulting in such damage or destruction, the non-conforming structure may be reconstructed subject to the following: 
1.  If the nature of the non-conformity relates to the location of the destruction to one or more of the required setbacks on the property, and the structure can be rebuilt in a manner that (a) maintains the floor area of the structure prior to the damage and (b) eliminates the non-conformity, the structure shall be rebuilt in such a manner as to reduce the non-conforming nature of the structure as much as reasonably possible; and 
2.  The reconstruction of the building shall not increase the prior non-conformity or create a new basis for the structure being non-conforming. 
H.  No nonconforming use may be expanded or increased beyond the lot or tract upon which such nonconforming use was located as of the date such use became non-conforming except, however, to provide off-street parking or off-street loading space upon approval of the Board of Adjustment. 
I.  When the use of property for a nonconforming use is abandoned or discontinued, all rights to continue the use of the property for such nonconforming use shall cease and the use of the property thereafter shall conform to this zoning ordinance. Abandonment shall involve the intent of the user or owner to discontinue a nonconforming operation and the actual act of discontinuance. Any nonconforming use which is discontinued for a period of six months shall be deemed to have been abandoned. 
J.  In the I-RU zoning district, no nonconforming use may be expanded, except as otherwise provided. Prior to the issuance of any permit for an addition or modification to the site or building, the Director shall determine if the proposed modification will expand the nonconforming use and/or if the modification will adversely impact surrounding properties. If it is determined that the proposed modification will expand the nonconforming use or have an adverse impact on adjacent properties, the nonconforming use shall be brought into a legal conforming status as a condition of granting any building permit. 
K.  Notwithstanding anything in this Section 6.6 to the contrary, a one-family or two-family dwelling constructed prior to August 24, 1970, which does not provide the number of off-street parking spaces required by Section 4.3, the one-family or two-family dwelling structures shall be considered a conforming structure for all purposes under this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
6.7 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
ARTICLE 7. - DEFINITIONS 
 
7.1 - WORD USAGE 
Certain words in this zoning ordinance are defined as follows: 
A.  Words used in the present tense include the future words; 
B.  Words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number; 
C.  The word "building" includes the word "structure;" 
D.  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "tract;" 
E.  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
7.2 - DEFINITIONS OF WORDS, TERMS, AND PHRASES 
All words and their definitions as defined in this Article are applicable throughout the entire zoning ordinance, except as provided for in any amending ordinance, and any reference to words and definitions in any part of this zoning ordinance shall be defined by this Article if needed to be defined otherwise than by their plain and ordinary meaning. Definitions for specific uses are listed in Section 7.3. 
Accessory Building - A separate building or structure from the main building, used for purposes subordinate to and incidental to the main use of the premises, and includes both Attached Accessory Buildings and Detached Accessory Buildings. 
Accessory Building (Attached) - An accessory building that is either physically attached to the main building or that, by its location on the lot, is located ten feet (10.0') or closer to the main building. 
Accessory Building (Detached) - An accessory building that is located entirely in the rear half of the lot and is located more than 10 feet from the main building. 
Accessory Use - A use subordinate to and incidental to the primary use of the main building or to the primary use of the premises. 
Alley - A public space or thoroughfare which affords only secondary means of access to abutting property by motorized vehicle, typically located on the side or rear of a lot. 
Atmosphere - The air that envelops or surrounds the earth. Where air contaminants are emitted into a building not designed specifically as air pollution control equipment, such emission into the building shall be considered emission into the atmosphere. 
Atmospheric Pollution - The discharging from stacks, open storage, chimneys, exhausts, vents, ducts, openings, or open fires of such air contaminants as visible emissions, sulfur dioxide, particulate matter, hydrocarbons, fumes or similar material or gases. 
Background Noise - Noise from all sources other than that under specific consideration including traffic operating on public thoroughfares. 
Block - An area surrounded by streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public walks, parks, green strips, rural lands, rivers, lakes, streams, or other bodies of water, drainage channels, or a combination of any of the foregoing. If used as a term of measurement, "block" shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two streets which intersect said street on said side. 
Building - Any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind. When subdivided in a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire, each portion so subdivided may be deemed a separate building. 
Building Line - A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specified distance away making the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected. 
Building Official - The City Employee appointed by the City Manager to serve as the City's Chief Building Official or other person charged with the enforcement of the City's zoning and construction ordinances and regulations. 
Cellar - A building story with more than one- half its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story in computing building height. 
Certificate of Occupancy and Compliance - An official certificate issued by the City through the enforcing official which indicates conformance with or approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued. 
City Council - The City Council of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
City Manager - The City Manager of the City of Farmers Branch, Texas. 
Code of Ordinances - The Code of Ordinances of the City of Farmers Branch, as amended or recodified. 
Combustion - The rapid exothermic reaction of any material with oxygen. 
Commission - The City of Farmers Branch Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Comprehensive Plan - Long term plan and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Court - An open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is a court entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one side open to a street, alley, yard or other permanent space. 
Coverage - The area of a lot or tract covered by the roof or first floor of a building, but not including the first two feet of the area of any roof eaves extending from the walls of a building. 
District - An area of the City with boundaries established by the City Council to which -regulations governing the area, height, and use of the land and buildings within said area have been established in accordance with this zoning ordinance and applicable state law. 
Director - The person appointed by the City Manager to be employed as City's Community Services Director or such person designated by the Community Services Director. 
Emission - The act of passing into the atmosphere an air contaminant or a gas stream which contains or may contain an air contaminant or the material so passed into the atmosphere. 
Emission Points - The location (place in horizontal plane and vertical elevation) at which an emission enters the atmosphere. 
Exhaust Gas Volume - The total volume of gas emitted from an emission point. 
Family - Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit in which not more than two individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption when residing in multi-family zoning districts, or high density residential areas, or in a one-family dwelling containing one or two bedrooms; or not more than three individuals unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption when residing in a one-family dwelling containing three or more bedrooms. Foster children shall be considered as a related member of the family. 
Frequency - The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave. 
Full-time domestic service worker - An adult that performs domestic duties on a full-time basis for the owner/occupant of the main building at the premises. Domestic duties may include, but are not limited to cooking, household cleaning, laundry, lawn maintenance and child care for the owner/occupant's children. 
Gas - Any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas. 
Gas Compressor - Means any machinery or equipment needed to adjust the pressure of gas being extracted from the earth or transported through a pipeline. All Gas Compressor stations shall be completely enclosed and substantially soundproofed. 
Gas Well - Any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of natural gas. 
Guest/Servants Quarters - An accessory building designed and used for the housing of immediate family members, personal guests or the housing of a full-time domestic service worker and may be furnished with a bathroom, kitchen, or cooking and food preparation facilities. 
Immediate Family Member - A member of the occupant's family in the first degree of consanguinity (i.e. spouse, child (including adopted), and parent). 
Landscaping- Landscaping shall consist of any of the following or combination thereof: material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees; and non-living structural material commonly used in landscaping, such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls, or fences but excluding paving. 
Living Unit - The room or rooms occupied by a person and must include cooking facilities. 
Lot - An undivided parcel or tract of land having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved placed and designated as a distinct tract. 
Lot Lines - The lines bounding a lot. 
Lot of Record - A lot which is part of a subdivision the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Dallas County, or a parcel of land, the deed for which was recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Dallas County prior to February 24, 1969. 
Main Building - The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use. 
Occupancy - The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors, or tenants. 
Octave Band - A term denoting all the frequencies between any given frequency and double that frequency. 
Octave Band Filter - An electrical frequency analyzer designed according to the standards formulated by the formulated by the American Standards Association and used in conjunction with a sound level meter to take measurements in specific octave intervals. 
Off-Street Parking - A location not within any public street, highway, or alley designed and intended for the parking of motor vehicles. 
Open Space - Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections of cornices, eaves, porches and plant material. 
Operation - Any physical action resulting in a change in the location, form or physical properties of a material, or any chemical action resulting in a change in the chemical composition or chemical or physical properties of a material. The following are given as examples, without limitation of the generality of the foregoing: heat transfer, calcination, double decomposition fermentation, pyrolysis, electrolysis, combustion material handling, evaporation mixing, absorption, filtration, fluidization, screening, crushing, grinding, demolishing, shoveling, bagging, etc. 
Particulate Matter - Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid at standard conditions when released into the atmosphere. 
Person - Any person, firm, associations, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user, or owner or any state or local governmental agency or public district or any officer or employee thereof. It includes the owner, lessor, lessee, tenant, licensee, manager and operator, or any of such, of any emission point or any source operation which may constitute a source of atmospheric pollution related thereto, or any interest in such emission point or operation source. 
PPM (vol) - Parts per million by volume. 
Private Garage - An accessory building housing vehicles owned and used by occupants of the main buildings; if occupied by vehicles of others, it is a storage space. 
Radio, Television or Microwave Towers - Structures supporting antennas for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio spectrum, but excluding noncommercial antenna installations for home use of radio or television. In any event the use as a Microwave, radio, or television tower in a given zone is still subject to the height, setback and other requirements, etc., as per the zoning district requirement in which the tower is located. 
Railroad Team Track - A siding for spotting and unloading or loading box cars or other railroad cars and which area is connected to a public street by a drive for access. 
Railroad Track and Right-Of-Way - The area located within the boundaries of an easement or fee simple tract of land owned by a private or public entity that operates or has the right to operate trains on tracks located or that may be located within said area, but not including railroad stations, sidings, railroad team tracks, loading facilities docks, yards or maintenance areas. 
Rear Half of the Lot - The portion of a lot located behind a line connecting the midpoints on the two opposite side lot lines of any lot, tract, or plot. 
Re-Drill - The re-completion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than 150 feet from the existing well bore. 
Shrubs- Self-supporting, woody, evergreen species as normally will grow in Dallas County. 
Sign shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 6-30 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Story - The height between the successive floors of a building or from the top floor to the roof. A half story (0.5) shall not exceed 50% of habitable floor area of the story directly beneath it. 
Street - Any thoroughfare or public driveway, other than an alley, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use. 
Street Line - A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street, the right-of-way line. 
Structural Alterations - Any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column, beams or girders. 
Structure - (same as Building). 
Thoroughfare - (same as Street). 
Top Plate - The top of the top structural support on which the rafters and/or joists rest. 
Tower - means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers, for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio spectrum, but excluding noncommercial antenna installations for home use of radio or television. The term includes telephonic, radio, data, and television transmission towers, microwave towers, telephone towers and the like. 
Well - Any single hole or bore to any horizon, formation, or strata, for the purpose of producing gas, liquid hydrocarbon, brine water or sulfur water, of for use as an injection well for secondary recover, disposal or production of gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth. 
Yard - An open space other than a court, on the lot in which a building is situated and which is not obstructed from a point 40 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot to the sky, except as provided for roof overhang and similar architectural features and plant material. 
Zoning District Map - The official certified map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts within the City are drawn and which is an integral part of the zoning ordinance as provided in Section 2.2. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3582 , § 2, 7-23-2019)  
7.3 - DEFINITIONS OF USES 
The following definitions define the meaning and intent of uses as set forth in the Use Table. Definitions for words, terms, and phrases are listed in Section 7.2. 
Accessory Building or Structure - A building or structure, attached or detached and on the same lot as the main structure. 
Adult Arcade - Any place to which the public is permitted or invited where coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store - A commercial establishment that as one of its principal business purposes openly advertises or displays or offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities". 
Adult Cabaret - A commercial establishment that regularly features the offering to customers of live entertainment that is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and; is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, simulating, describing, or relating to "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
Adult Day Care Center - An establishment that provides counseling, recreation or food or any combination of these services on a daily or regular basis but not overnight to four or more elderly or handicapped persons who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner of the establishment. Clients of an adult day care center shall not require institutionalization in a hospital, nursing or convalescent home, or similar specialized facility. Such establishment shall not accommodate individuals who pose a direct threat to the health, safety, or welfare of themselves or others. An adult day care center shall be licensed by either the Texas Department of Health or the Texas Department of Human Services and operated in a manner consistent with such standards as may be promulgated by the Texas Department of Health, the Texas Department of Human Services and the City of Farmers Branch under its zoning and police power. 
Adult Motel - A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this type of photographic reproductions; or allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time hat is less than ten hours. 
Adult Motion Picture Theater - A commercial establishment where for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities." 
Adult Theater - A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons in a state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
Airport, Landing Field or Heliport - A landing facility for fixed and rotary wing aircraft including terminal, fueling, repair, and storage facilities and subject to approval by the City of Farmers Branch. 
Amusement, Commercial (Indoors) - An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed in a building offering entertainment or games of skill, including, but not limited to, bowling, billiards, batting cages, bingo, cricket facilities, combative fighting, arcades as a primary use, ice rinks, soccer fields, and similar uses that generate higher noise levels or parking requirements than general retail establishments. 
Amusement, Commercial (Outdoors) - Any amusement enterprise offering entertainment or games of skill where any portion of the activity takes place in the open including, but not limited to, golf driving range, archery range, baseball or softball batting cages, soccer fields, and miniature golf course, and similar uses that generate higher noise levels, parking requirements, and/or outdoor lighting. 
Antique Shop - An establishment offering for sale, within a building, articles such as glass, china, furniture or similar furnishings and decorations which have value and significance as a result of age, design and sentiment. 
Art Gallery - An establishment engaged in the sale, loan and/or display of works of art including, but not limited to, books, paintings, sculptures, and other similar media. 
Bakery (Retail) - An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of baked or sugar based products. 
Bakery (Wholesale) - A bakery in which there is permitted the production and/or wholesaling of baked goods, but where over the counter or other retail dispensing of baked goods shall be prohibited. 
Bank or Financial Institution - An establishment, open to the public, for the deposit, custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds excluding pawnshops, check cashing businesses, payday advance/loan businesses and car title loan businesses. 
Bar, Tavern, Lounge - An establishment primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. 
Bar/holding area - An area for serving and/or consumption of beer, wine, or mixed beverages, indicated on the approved floor plan of a qualifying restaurant holding a Specific Use Permit for serving beer, wine, or mixed beverages, not to exceed 20% of the floor area of the qualifying restaurant. 
Beauty Salon (see Retail, Personal Services) - A commercial establishment wherein cosmetology is offered or practiced on a regular basis for compensation. 
Beer and Wine Package Sales Establishment - An establishment engaged in the selling of beer and/or wine to the general public for off-site personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
Benevolence Storage and Distribution - Center operated by a eleemosynary corporation, where no food preparation is allowed, where there is no charge for the food or other goods, where no housing or shelter is allowed. 
Boarding House or Rooming House - A building, other than a hotel, where lodging and/or meals for three or more persons are provided for compensation. 
Bottling Plant - Manufacturing establishments producing or processing beverages for human consumption and certain related products in glass, plastic or metal containers. 
Brewery - An industrial use that brews wines, ales, beers, meads and/or similar beverages on site. On-premise consumption of beverages is allowed on a case-by-case basis in accordance with applicable provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
Brew Pub - A business owned and/or operated by the holder of a Brewpub License issued to the holder pursuant to Chapter 74 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
Car Title Loan Business - A credit access business as defined in Texas Finance Code sec. 393.601(2), as amended, that makes motor vehicle title loans to consumers pursuant to Chapter 393, Subchapter G of the Texas Finance Code, as amended. 
Car Wash - A business engaged in the washing and/or cleaning of vehicles, primarily automobile and passenger trucks (less than 8,000 pounds gross vehicle weight). 
Catering Services - A business that prepares, supplies, and/or serves food consumed at a location other than the location where the substantial portion of the food preparation occurs. 
Catering Vehicle (Cold Truck) - A mobile food establishment which conveys food from an approved commissary or servicing area; and from which only approved, prepackaged foods in individual servings are sold or conveyed in such a manner that no direct food contact results. 
Cemetery or Mausoleum - Land used or dedicated to the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes but excluding crematories. 
Check Cashing Business - An establishment that (1) provides to the customer an amount of money that is equal to the face of the check or the amount specified in the written authorization for an electronic transfer of money, less any fee charged for the transaction, or where there is an agreement not to cash the check or execute an electronic transfer of money for a specified period of time; or (2) where the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose for compensation by any person or entity other than a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, including consumables to retail buyers, cashes checks or money orders or issues money orders or money transfers for a minimum flat fee as service that is incidental to its main purpose or business, provided such retailer does not cash more than 100 checks in any calendar month. This definition excludes a state or federally chartered bank, savings and loan association or credit union, pawnshop or supermarket. 
Commercial Parking Lot - An outdoor area devoted exclusively to the parking or storage of vehicles for a fee, but does not include storage of vehicles for sale or lease. 
Commissary - a catering establishment, restaurant, or any other place in which food containers, or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored. 
Community Center (Public) - A building and grounds owned and operated by a governmental body for the social, recreational, health or welfare of the City's residents and others. 
Community Center (Private) - A building and grounds owned and operated by an individual or non-governmental entity used by members of a group or organization for social, cultural, or recreational purposes. 
Community Garden - A lot or portion of a lot that is temporarily used for the production of vegetables, fruits, herbs and plant materials that may have public or charitable funding. 
Country Club - An area of 25 acres or more containing a golf course and clubhouse which is available to a specific recorded membership. Such a club may include as adjunct facilities, a dining room, private club, swimming pool, cabanas, tennis courts and similar service and recreational facilities for the members. 
Crematorium - A location containing properly installed, certified apparatus intended for use in the act of cremation. 
Day Camp - A facility arranged and conducted for the instruction and organized outdoor recreation of children on a daytime basis. 
Driving School - A school where people are taught to drive vehicles. 
Dry Cleaning or Laundry Pick-Up Station - An establishment or business maintained for the pickup and delivery of dry cleaning and/or laundry without the maintenance or operation of any laundry or dry cleaning equipment or machinery on the premises. 
Dry Cleaners (Full Service) - An establishment or business that provides full laundry services to the general public. 
Eleemosynary Corporation - A private corporation formed and operating pursuant to the Texas Non-Profit Corporation Laws (Texas Business Organizations Code ch. 22, as amended), and which is qualified as a tax exempt organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
Enclosed Vehicle Storage Facility - A building or structure devoted exclusively to the parking or storage of vehicles for a fee, but does not include storage of vehicles for sale or lease. 
Escort Agency - A person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Farms, Ranch Garden or Orchard - An area of five acres or more which is used for growing of usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain and for the raising of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle and sheep and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal and garbage to swine and other animals and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law. 
Farmers Market - A temporary establishment used by farmers and other individual vendors primarily for retail sale of food and homemade products that meet all applicable federal, state, and local laws regulating the preparation and sale of such products. 
Feed Store - An establishment engaged in retail sale of supplies directly related to the day to day activities of agricultural production. 
Food Processing - Manufacturing establishments producing or processing foods for human consumption and certain related products. 
Fraternal Organization, Lodge or Civic Club - A society or association organized for the pursuit of some common objective by working together in a brotherly union. These organizations are not automatically a private club, but may also be a private club. 
Furniture Store - A retail establishment where no less than 75% of the gross floor area is given to the sale display and storage of indoor household furnishings, including, but not limited to: chairs, sofas, tables, beds, mattresses, major household appliances, floor coverings, curtains and draperies, indoor window treatments, fireplace implements, and similar household merchandise. Specifically excluded are those retail establishments that primarily engage in the sale of consumer electronics, media products (i.e., music, video, software, etc.) and associated equipment. 
Golf Course (Commercial) - A golf course constructed by a private individual or group and operated as a commercial enterprise other than a driving range, miniature golf or similar golf oriented commercial amusement. 
Gun (Firearm) Sales - A person or entity engaged in the business of selling, transferring, or leasing; or advertising for sale, transfer, or lease, any firearm and/or ammunition, either directly or indirectly; and/or engaged in the retail sale of ammunition. 
Holder of a Mixed Beverage Permit - Holder of a permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission pursuant to Chapter 28 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
Home Occupation - An activity conducted solely by a residing member of the occupant's family, in the main structure only and which does not: offer goods or services to a client(s) at the premises or; involve the employment or assemblage of assistants or other persons at the premises or; require structural alterations to the building or, involve the installation of machinery or equipment not customarily found at a residence or; involve any advertising or signage at the premises or; involve the dedication of greater than 20% of the building area to the storage or warehousing of any goods, equipment, materials, or other matter associated with the occupation at the premises or; cause the generation of additional traffic in the street or; cause additional parking at or around the premises or; cause the parking or storage of commercial vehicles at the premises or; create or emit any noise, odor, glare, or smoke outside of the main residence or; require additional utilities (other than telephone) to the premises. Exception: This definition is not intended to preclude the occasional visit of a person to a premises due to a home occupation such as tutoring, piano lessons, or other similar non-disruptive home occupation. 
Home for Care of Alcoholic, Psychiatric or Narcotic Patients - An institution offering resident treatment to alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients. 
Hookah/Vapor Lounge - A business establishment for which the configuration of the floor area is to facilitate on-site consumption of tobacco, cigarette, and nicotine-enriched solutions. 
Hospital (Acute Care) - An institution where sick or injured patients are given medical or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and active life and which is licensed by the State of Texas. 
Hospital (Chronic Care) - An institution where those persons suffering from illness, injury, deformity, deficiency or age, are given care and treatment on a prolonged or permanent basis and which is licensed by the State of Texas. 
Hotel - A building or group of buildings whose primary function is to provide rooms for temporary lodging and where each room is gained from a completely enclosed area and which structure may contain a restaurant, conference room, fitness center, business center, gift shop, and other various personal services shops and provides customary hotel services such as linen, maid service, telephone, use and upkeep of furniture. Residence hotel, as defined, is included in this definition. 
Household Appliance Sales - To include the sale and service of the following, but not necessarily limited to, radio, TV, refrigerators, etc. 
Knife Sharpening Shop - A knife sharpening shop consists of picking up knives from restaurants, cafeterias, etc., bringing them back to the shop where they are sharpened and then delivered back to the restaurants, cafeterias, etc. A knife sharpening shop specifically excludes manufacturing, assembly, or retail sharpening. 
Light Fabrication and Assembly Processes - Including the manufacture of jewelry, trimming decorations, and any similar item not involving the generation of noise, odor, vibration, dust or hazard. 
Live/Work Units - Located in non-residential zoning districts, the live/work unit allows one or more living spaces within a building zoned and/or used for non-residential uses. 
Local Government Public Facilities - Any use, facility or structure owned, operated or controlled by the City that provides a governmental function, activity, or service for public benefit and which is exempt from zoning district regulations. 
Local Utility Line - The facilities provided by a municipality or a franchised utility company for the distribution or collection of gas, water, surface drainage water, electric power or telephone service. 
Massage Business - Any place of business where manipulative massage or manipulated exercises are practiced upon the human body for consideration whether with or without the use of mechanical therapeutic or bathing devices, in a State of Texas licensed hospital by a duly licensed physician or chiropractor; by a duly licensed beautician or barber in a licensed beauty shop or barber shop; in an establishment where State of Texas registered physical therapists treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician and operate under such physician's direction or any registered massage establishment under Chapter 455 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended. 
Mobile food preparation vehicle (hot/food truck) - A food establishment upon which food is cooked and packaged for service, sale or distribution from a truck, bus or trailer. 
Mortuary or Funeral Home - An establishment providing services such as preparing the human dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals and may include limited caretaker facilities. 
Motel - A building or group of buildings whose main function is to provide rooms for temporary lodging in which the rooms are directly accessible from an outdoor parking area and provides customary services such as linen, maid service, telephone, and upkeep of furniture. 
Multiple-Family Dwelling (Apartments) - Any building or portion of a building, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more families living in independent dwelling units. 
Museum - A commercial or non-commercial establishment for preserving and exhibiting to the public artistic, historical, scientific, natural or man-made objects of interest. Such activity may include the sale of the objects collected and memorabilia, the sale of crafts work and artwork, boutiques, and the holding of meetings and social events. 
Nude Model Studio - Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Nursing Home or Residence Home for Aged - A facility established for profit or non-profit which provides nursing care and related medical services on a 24-hour per day basis to two or more individuals because of illness, disease, or physical or mental infirmity. 
One-Family Dwelling (attached) - A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall and which is designed for occupancy by one family and is located on a separate lot, delineated by front, side and rear lot lines. 
One-Family Dwelling (detached) - A dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one family and located on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract and occupied by one family. 
Open Storage/Outside Storage - The placement, keeping or storage of personal or business property, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles in an area outside an enclosed building. 
Park or Playground (Public) - An open recreation facility or park owned and/or operated by a governmental entity and accessible for use by the general public. 
Parking Lot Structure, Commercial (Auto) - An area or structure devoted to the parking or storage of automobiles for a fee. May include, in the case of a parking structure only, a facility for servicing of automobiles provided such facility is primarily an internal function for use only by automobiles occupying the structure and creates no special problems of ingress and egress. 
Payday Advance/Loan Business - An establishment that makes small consumer loans, usually backed by a postdated check or authorization to make an electronic debit against an existing financial account, where the check or debit is held for an agreed-upon term, or until an applicant's next payday, and then cashed unless the customer repays the loan to reclaim such person's check. 
Permanent Make-Up or Cosmetics (See Retail, Personal Services) - Tattooing which is limited to the insertion of a pigment under the skin on a person's face (1) in the area of a person's eyes for the purpose of creating permanent eye shadow on the person's eyelids, eyebrows, or eyeliner; or (2) on or adjacent to a person's lips for the purpose of creating permanent lip color or lip liner. 
Pharmacy - A retail establishment in which the primary purpose is the sale of drugs, medical supplies and other aids to wellness and may also include the sale of foodstuffs, miscellaneous retail items and provide services, such as photography reproduction and/or in-house clinics. 
Playfield or Stadium (Public) - An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a governmental entity for the general public including a baseball field, golf course, football field or stadium. 
Pre-Packaged Food and Beverages - Food items and beverages sold to a consumer in the original container and include, but are not limited to, soft drinks, bottled water, beer, wine, milk and juices. 
Pre-Packaged Retail Sales (Drive Through) - A business whose primary activity is the retail sale of pre-packaged food and beverages, to the occupants of a motor vehicle for off-premise consumption, with a drive through facility, including a drive through building that allows the interior passage of motor vehicles or where vehicles may pull into the building, or any other means of conducting sales without requiring customers to exit their vehicle. 
Private Club - An association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated under the laws of the State of Texas, that is the holder of a valid and subsisting private club permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission and whose stated purpose is for the promotion of some common object and whose members must be passed upon by a committee made up of members of the club. 
Public Building, Shop or Yard of Local, State, Federal Government - Facilities such as office buildings, maintenance yards or shops required by branches of Local, State or Federal Government for service to an area such as Highway Department Yard or City Service Center. 
Rectory, Convent or Monastery - Dwelling units for the housing of religious organization personnel affiliated with the worship facility on the same platted lot. 
Recycling Plant - A facility that is semi enclosed or enclosed to limit dust and particulates from escaping the property where clean products (non-putrescent) and materials are processed to reclaim useful components for future use. Must be TCEQ approved. 
Reflexology (Hand and Foot Massage) - Massage limited to work on the hands and feet that does not involve manipulating soft tissue, stroking, rubbing, tapping, stretching, bathing, scrubbing, or the use of oils or lotions or the touching of any other part of the body (e.g. cannot start rubbing the ankles as part of foot reflexology). The person performing reflexology must also not represent that he or she is a massage therapist or use any of the other protected terms without being licensed as a massage therapist. 
Residence Hotel (also called "extended stay hotel") - A multi-dwelling unit extended stay lodging facility consisting of efficiency units or suites with a complete kitchen suitable for long-term occupancy. Customary hotel services such as linen, maid service, telephone, and upkeep of furniture shall be provided. Meeting rooms, club house, and recreational facilities intended for the use of residents and their guests are permitted. This definition shall not include other dwelling units as defined by this zoning ordinance. 
Restaurant, with Drive-in Service - Any eating establishment that either serves food to occupants of parked automobiles or offers facilities that would encourage patrons to eat in parked vehicles. 
Restaurant, Non Drive-in w/o Outside Sales Window - A structure in which the principal use is the preparation, sale, and consumption of food and beverages and having no outside sales window and or drive-in service. 
Restaurant (Only in Section 2.6) - Unless specifically delineated otherwise, the term "restaurant" shall mean a qualifying restaurant where the operator is the holder of a mixed beverage permit or a private club permit. 
Restaurant, Qualifying - An existing or proposed eating establishment whose gross sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages shall constitute at least 50% of the establishment's combined gross sales of food, non-alcoholic and alcoholic beverages quarterly. 
Retail, General - The selling of goods, wares, or merchandise, directly to the ultimate consumer or persons without a resale license. 
Retail, Personal Services - An establishment whose primary activity is the provision of assistance of a personal nature, as opposed to the sale of products, and is mainly the act or any results of useful labor, which does not in itself produce a tangible commodity. 
Retail, Warehouse (Big-Box) - A singular retail or wholesale user who occupies no less than 50,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
Retail Store Sales Consisting Primarily of Specialty and Novelty Items - The term "Specialty and Novelty Items" is defined as: 
1.  Paraphernalia such as water pipes, bongs, carburetors, stones, cigarette rollers, syringes, small rubber hoses, roach clips, incense burners, specialty spoons, cocaine holders, and other types of paraphernalia that are readily usable instruments to assist in the use and consumption of illegal drugs. 
2.  Wearing apparel containing obscene pictures or words, such apparel being T-shirts, belt buckles, jewelry or any other wearing apparel. 
3.  Salves, ointments, jells, creams, jellies lotions and oils advertised as or designed as a sexual stimulus. 
4.  Magazines, books, records, cassettes, pictures, drawings and other similar material depicting and describing sexual conduct in a manner that is designed for adult use and consumption. 
5.  Incense. 
6.  The term "primarily" is defined as gross monthly sales of specialty and novelty items representing more than 50% of total sales. 
Residential Activity - An activity, not-for-profit, conducted by a residing member of the occupant's family in the main or accessory structures which does not: offer goods of services to a client(s), friend(s), or acquaintance(s) at the premises or; involve the employment or assemblage of assistants or other persons at the premises or; require structural alterations to a building or; involve the installation of machinery or equipment not customarily found at a residence or; involve the manufacturing, re-manufacturing or repair of vehicles, machinery or equipment (beyond incidental and occasional vehicle or other equipment maintenance provided all vehicles and/or equipment that is the property of a residing member of the occupant's family and is associated with the residential use) or; involve any advertising or signage or; involve the storage or warehousing (greater than five percent of the building area) of any heavy equipment, cause the generation of additional traffic in the street or: cause additional parking at or around the premises or; cause the parking or storage of commercial vehicles or utility trailers at the premises for non-residential purposes or; create or emit any noise, odor, glare, or smoke outside of the main or accessory buildings or; require additional utilities (other than telephone) to the premises. 
Rooming House - (See Boarding House). 
School, Business or Trade - A business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction and training in a service or art such as a secretarial school, barber college, beauty school, or commercial art school. 
School, College or University - An academic institution of higher learning, accredited or recognized by the State and offering a program or series of programs of academic study. 
School, Denominational (or Day Care) - An educational facility sponsored or operated by an organization established for religious purposes that has a curriculum for preschool; elementary or secondary education. 
School, Nursery, Kindergarten or Day Care - An establishment where 7 or more children are housed for care or training during the day or portion of the day. 
School, Public - A school under the sponsorship of a public agency or otherwise determined to be a public school under the Texas Education Code and having a curriculum generally equivalent to public elementary or secondary schools, but not including trade or commercial schools. 
Self Storage Facility - Individualized storage units which are leased to the general public and are located within an encompassing, totally enclosed building structure; having common use of utilities, loading/unloading doors; personnel doors; and to which there is no access available to an individual storage unit except by common corridors within the encompassing building structure. 
Sexually Oriented Businesses - An Adult Arcade, Adult Bookstore, Adult Video Store, Adult Cabaret, Adult Motel, Adult Motion Picture Theater, Adult Theater, Escort Agency, Nude Model Studio, Sexual Encounter Center. 
Sexual Encounter Center - A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or activities between, male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity. 
Shooting Range (Indoor) - A structure used for archery and/or the discharging of firearms for the purposes of target practice or temporary competition. 
Snack and Sandwich Shop - A non-drive-in restaurant without an outside sales window in which only sandwich and snack type foods are sold and within which there is no cooking or food preparation. That such snack and sandwich shops shall be operated only during normal business hours and on normal business days. 
Stable, Boarding - A stable and related open pasture where horses are quartered for owners on a fee basis. No horses or other livestock shall be stabled or corralled within 100 feet of any bounding property line. 
Stable, Commercial - An establishment where horses are kept and rented to the general public for riding. No horses or other livestock shall be stabled or corralled within 100 feet of any bounding property line. 
Stable, Private Club - A paddock, stable and related riding and quartering facilities for horses owned by a specific number of recorded members and maintained for the exclusive use of such members and guests. No horses or other livestock shall be stabled or corralled within 100 feet of any bounding property line. 
Supermarket - Means a retail food market or combination retail food market and department store with more than 40,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
Swim or Tennis Club - A private recreational club with restricted membership, usually of less area than a Country Club but including a clubhouse and a swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational facilities none of which are available to the general public. 
Tattoo Studio - Any establishment, place of business, or location, other than a licensed medical facility, or an office or clinic of a person licensed by the Texas State Board of Medical Examiners, where adornment of any part of the human body or head, whether artistic, cosmetic or otherwise, is practiced through the use of needles, scalpels, or any other instrument, designed to touch, penetrate or puncture the skin for purposes of: inserting, attaching or suspending jewelry, decorations or other foreign objects; producing an indelible mark or figure on the human body or head by scarring skin or flesh; producing an indelible mark or figure on the human body or head by inserting a pigment under or upon the skin; or permanently changing the color or other appearance of the skin. This term shall not, however, include piercing an ear with a disposable, single-use stud or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear. 
Telephone Exchange, Switching Relay and Transmitting Equipment - but not including public business facilities, storage or repair facilities. 
Temporary Carnival or Circus - An activity where one or more of the following take place: mechanized rides, games of chance, an exhibition of feats of physical skill and daring by either humans or animals, or the exhibition of animals for petting by patrons. 
Temporary Field or Construction Building - A trailer, structure or shelter for temporary office use, subject to removal by order of the Director, used in connection with a development or building project for housing on the site of temporary administrative and supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and equipment. Temporary buildings and temporary building materials storage areas to be used for construction purposes may be permitted for a specific period of time in accordance with a permit issued by the Director for cause shown. Upon completion or abandonment of construction or expiration of permit, such field offices and buildings shall be removed at the direction of the Director. 
Temporary Outside Sales - The placement of articles for sale by a business on a private sidewalk or in a private parking lot serving that business, which are representative of merchandise offered normally for sale inside the business, for temporary periods of time. 
Temporary Real Estate Office - A model home or homes, which may include enclosed garages, for temporary real estate sales, used in conjunction with the development of a housing subdivision on which the model home is located. Temporary interior storage of materials representing options for potential homeowner is allowed during the sales period. Upon completion of a specific number or percentage of homes, such temporary office shall be converted for individual sale and retail sales will no longer be allowed. Such threshold to be determined by the Director. 
Truck Parking Lot - Any area, used for the parking or storage of trucks or trailers larger than 3/4 ton in size. 
Tires and Wheel Accessories - A retail establishment engaged in the sale and/or installation of tires and wheels for vehicles. 
Tobacco Store - A business establishment which is dedicated to the display and retail sale of tobacco products such as cigars, pipe tobacco, cigarettes and electronic cigarettes. May also contain an accessory, lounge area. 
Two-Family Dwelling - A single structure designed and constructed with two living units under a single roof for occupancy by two families. 
Vehicle - Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn or moved upon a street, highway, waterway or airway, and shall include any automobile, bus, truck, tractor, motor house, farm machinery, motorcycles, scooters, mopeds, all-terrain vehicles, boats, aircraft, recreational vehicles, golf carts, go-carts, trailers, fifth-wheel trailer, camper, camper shells, wheeled towing frames, semi-tractor trailers, truck beds mounted on chassis and mobile homes. This definition does not include non-motorized bicycles, small engine lawn mowers and devices of similar scale. 
Vehicle Parts and Accessory Sales (Indoor) - A retail establishment devoted to sale of vehicle parts or accessories. No installation or service activities allowed within this business. 
Vehicle Maintenance - Routine preventative maintenance services to vehicles, limited to such activities as the following; replacement of batteries; diagnostic services; lube services; filter changing; replacement of brakes; performing state inspections and making minor repairs to pass said inspection; glass repair; upholstery; paintless dent repairs; and minor installation of accessories such as car alarms, radios, window tinting, pin striping and similar accessories. All services shall be performed inside and outdoor storage is not allowed. 
Vehicle Repair - A general repair or reconditioning of a vehicle and its parts including; drivetrain, HVAC systems and electrical systems; alignment of brakes; paint and body shop; part repair or engine rebuild; undercoating; muffler and exhaust; custom shop. All services shall be performed inside with limited outdoor storage 
Worship Facility - A place of worship and religious training that may also include one dwelling unit for the housing of religious organization personnel and other functions designated by the mission of the worship group. 
Wrecking or Auto Salvage Yard - A yard or building where automobiles or machinery are stored, dismantled and/or offered for sale as whole units, as salvaged parts or as processed metal. 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3629 , § 1(B), 2-18-2020)  
APPENDIX A: - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES 
PD# 	Ord# 	Date 	Description 	Address/Location 
PD-01 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District-1 (PD-1, O, LI) 
Research park uses including Office (O) and Light Industrial (LI) uses subject to approval of site plan and meeting the City of Farmers Branch Development requirements and observance of applicable area, parking, density, street, utility, access, and related zoning standards for the PD, O, and LI Districts. 
Partially incorporated into PD-51-b (11/05/84, Ord. #1513; and 11/04/85, Ord. #1610). 	The Centre. Between Alpha Road, Midway Road, and Valley View Lane. 
PD-01 	2044 	04/19/93 	Planned Development District-1 
Amend Ord. No. 769, increasing FAR in PD-1 from 1:1 to 2:1 on tracts A, B, C, D, and E on attached exhibit "A". 	The Centre. Between Alpha Road, Midway Road, and Valley View Lane. 
PD-01 	2264 	07/15/96 	Planned Development District-1 
Amend Ord. No. 769, establishing sign standards for an office development. 	The Centre. Between Alpha Road, Midway Road, and Valley View Lane. 
PD-02 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District-2 (PD-2, O, LI) 
Planned area permitting uses allowed in the Office (O) and Light Industrial (LI) Districts subject to approval of site plan and provision of access and improvements in accordance with the City of Farmers Branch development requirements for streets, utilities, drainage, and meeting parking, density, and related zoning standards for the PD, O, and LI Districts. 
Incorporated into PD-74 (05/20/96, Ord. #2248). 	Northeast corner of Ford Road and LBJ north to Farmers Branch Creek and east to Villa Creek apartments, excluding Dallas Christian College. 
PD-03 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District-3 (PD-3, LR-1, MF-2) 
Planned retail center permitting LR-1 uses subject to approval of site plan and provision of access and improvements in accordance with the City of Farmers Branch development requirements and meeting standards for streets, utilities, drainage, parking, off-street loading and related zoning standards for the PD and LR-1 Districts. 	Northeast corner of Josey @ Dennis including Post Office, retail strip, and Farmers Branch Park. 
PD-03 	845 	04/06/70 	Planned Development District-3 
Amends Ord. No. 769 to change a portion of PD-3 to allow Multifamily Housing (MF-2) uses and to require a masonry wall for all retail properties and to require a site plan. 	Portion of original PD-3, east of retail strip. (Now Farmers Branch Park.) 
PD-03 	1016 	07/29/74 	Planned Development District-3 
Amends Ord. No. 769 to change the zoning of a portion of PD-3 to allow LR-2 uses, subject to approval of a site plan. 	Portion of original PD-3. (Retail strip along Josey excluding service station at SW corner.) 
PD-03 	1304 	04/21/80 	Planned Development District-3 
Amend Standards for masonry screening walls. Deletes Section 4 of Ord. No. 845. Amends Section 5 concerning roof architecture. 	"MF-2" portion of PD-3. (Now Farmers Branch Park.) 
PD-04 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District-4 (PD-4, MF-2, LR-1) 
Planned shopping and apartment development permitting LR-1 and MF-2 uses and standards subject to the conditions of Ordinance Number 543. 	Southeast corner of Josey @ Fyke. Includes apartments and retail strip. 
PD-04 	1862 	01/22/90 	Planned Development District-4 
Amends Ord. No. 769 to indicate "Indoor Commercial Amusement" as an allowable use requiring a specific use permit within PD-4. 	All of PD-4. 
PD-05 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District-5 (PD-5, C) 
Planned Central area development permitting Commercial uses subject to the development of a site plan providing a framework for vehicular access, circulation, setback, parking and coverage standards and restricting the conversion of dwellings to business or commercial uses and requiring all new or remodeled structures to meet the building code standards. A public hearing shall be held on the framework site plan prior to its approval or adoption. 
Incorporated into PD-31 (08/02/82, Ord. #1388) and PD-36 (08/02/82, Ord. #1393) and later PD-70 (04/04/94, Ord. #2111). 	South of Valley View and east of Stemmons to Rawhide Creek. 
PD-05 	844 	04/06/70 	Planned Development District-5 (PD-5, C) 
Provides dev. standards for circulation and access for PD-5. 	All of PD-5 
PD-06 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District-6 (PD-6, LR-1) 
Planned Shopping center development permitting LR-1 uses and subject to the provisions of Ordinance Number 564. 	Shopping center, NE corner Valley View @ Josey. 
PD-06 	848 	5/18/70 	Planned Development District-6 
Amends Ord. No. 769 to indicate "Restaurant without Drive-in Service" as an allowable use requiring a specific use permit within PD-6. 	All of PD-6 
PD-07 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District-7 (PD-7, LR-1) 
Planned shopping center development permitting LR-1 uses and standards and subject to the approval of a site plan and provision of access and improvements in accordance with the development standards of the City of Farmers Branch. 	Shopping center, SE corner Valley View @ Josey, except for strip including service station, Seven-Eleven, and Little Caesar's Pizza adjacent to Valley View. 
PD-07 	2030 	05/17/93 	Planned Development District-7 
Indicate "non-profit thrift store" as allowed use requiring SUP. 	All of PD-7 
PD-07 	2876 	09/18/06 	Planned Development District-7 
Amend PD-7 stds/SUP for large tenant spaces. 	13100 Josey 
PD-07 	3535 	10/16/18 	Planned Development District-7 
Rezone described property from PD-7 and PD-29 to PD-101. 	Shops at Branch Crossing 
PD-08 	146 	03/17/58 	Farmers Branch Shopping Center (Pre-PD) 
Changed the zoning of the described property from R-7.5 Residential to C-Commercial by special permit under Article XIV of the 09/23/57 Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. 	Farmers Branch Shopping Center 
PD-08 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District-8 (PD-8, LR-1) 
Planned shopping center development permitting LR-1 uses and subject to the provisions of Ordinance Number 146 but eliminating therefrom the requirement for architectural design as "semi-colonial". 	SW Cnr. Josey @ Valley View, south to Firestone and Tara Condominiums and including Sizzler 
PD-09 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District-9 (PD-9, MF-2) 
Planned apartment project permitting MF-2 uses and standards requiring an eight (8) foot masonry screening wall on all sides exposed to single-family residence areas, eliminating the previous requirement of a special permit for "semi-colonial" design and qualifying masonry construction to mean exterior masonry veneer including stucco and further subject to the approval of a site plan which provides adequate access. 	Tara Condominiums, west of Josey, South of Valley View, behind Sizzler and Goodyear. 
PD-10 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District -10 (PD-10, MF-2, D-1, R-3) 
Planned residential development with mixed housing types covering the area fronting on Valley View Lane between Tom Field Road and Josey Lane and extending from Rawhide Creek to Valley View, subject to approval of a site plan which provides for the extension of Golfing Green Drive from Josey Lane to Tom Field Road; the provision of the D-1, two-family dwellings, or R-3 single-family dwellings along Golfing Green Drive: the restricting of MF-2 uses in the area between the lots fronting Golfing Green Drive and V. V. Lane and having frontage on Valley View Lane which matches the LR-1 zoned areas on the opposite side of each street, D-1 uses are permitted to one lot depth to the west of the MF-2 use on the remainder of the tract to be subdivided for R-3, single-family dwellings. Two-family or single-family dwellings req. for screening of apartment uses are to be built prior to completion of 	Area fronting on Valley View Lane between Tom Field Road and Josey Lane and extending from Rawhide Creek to Valley View. Includes duplexes, south side of Rawhide between Josey and Tom Field. 
			apartment section. All zoning standards for the various types of use districts permitted shall be observed and the development shall comply with the City of F. B. reqs. for streets, utilities, drainage and access, subject to the provisions of Ord. No. 833. 	
PD-10 	833 	11/17/69 	Planned Development District-10 
Amends Ord No. 769 to change Tracts 1 and 2 from PD-10 to LR-2, Tract 5 from PD-10 to O, and Tracts 6, 7, 8, and 9 to LR-1. 	Area south of Rawhide duplexes to Valley View. 
PD-11 	436 	10/21/63 	Planned Development District-11 
Changed a described tract from "R-4" Single Family Residential to "L-M" Light Manufacturing under a special permit and prohibited certain uses in that district. Also changed another described tract from "R-3" and "R-4" Residential to "A" Apartment District under a special permit. 	Southeast intersection of Beltline and Webb Chapel to Marsh and south to alley behind properties on south side of Gardenbrook. 
PD-11 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District -11 (PD-11, MF-2) 
Planned apartment development permitting MF-2 uses and standards subject to approval of a site plan and the requirements of Ordinance Number 436. 	SW corner Marsh @ Gardenbrook. 
PD-12 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District -12 (PD-12, MF-2) 
Planned apartment development permitting MF-2 uses and standards subject to approval of a site plan. 
Incorporated into PD-21 (01/17/77, Ord #1123). 	South of Beltline, north of PD-13, East of Josey. 
PD-13 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District -13 (PD-13, MF-2) 
Planned apartment development permitting MF-2 uses and standards subject to approval of a site plan 
Incorporated into PD-21 (01/17/77, Ord#1123). 	North of Country Club, south of PD-12, East of Josey. 
PD-14 	769 	02/24/69 	Planned Development District -14 (PD-14, O, MF-2) 
Planned apartment and office district permitting MF-2 and O uses and standards subject to approval of a site plan and the provision of access and improvements in accordance with the City of Farmers Branch requirements for streets, drainage and utilities. 	Between LBJ and Maybrook from Josey to Webb Chapel except for a parcel Midway along LBJ designated as PD-47 and a lot at the southeast corner of LBJ and Webb Chapel zoned as LR-2. 
PD-15 	958 	11/15/71 
(On revised map) 	Planned Development District -15 (PD-15, LI) 
Planned Industrial District permitting LI uses and standards subject to approval of site plan. 
Incorporated into PD-30 (08/02/82, Ord. #1387), PD-70 (04/04/94, Ord. #2111). 	East of Denton between Sable, the City Hall, and Rawhide Creek. 
PD-16 	950 	02/05/73 	Planned Development District-16 (PD-16, LR-2) 
Planned Development District changing allowed uses from "Office" and permitting Local Retail-2 uses and standards requiring a Specific Use Permit to allow a restaurant. 	Between Villa Creek and LBJ approximately halfway between Metro Blvd. and Josey. 
PD-17 	974 	10/01/73 	Planned Development District -17 (PD-17, R-3) 
Planned Development District changing zoning for the described tract from R-2 to Planned Development 17 allowing R-3 uses and requiring site plan approval. 	SE Corner Marsh @ Brookhaven Club to FB Creek. (Wooded Creek Area). 
PD-18 	996 	02/04/74 	Planned Development District -18 (PD-18, O) 
Amends Zoning Ordinance from Office "O" uses to Planned Development District 18 permitting "O" uses and requiring a public hearing for site plan approval, and prohibiting vehicle access directly from PD-18 to the Residential areas to the north. 	RHD Hospital. 
PD-18 	1326 	11/17/80 	Planned Development District -18 
Amends Ord. # 996 to allow a radio tower to be permitted within PD-18. 	
PD-18 	1378 	05/17/82 	Planned Development District -18 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the building height regulation limit for a 1.911 acre described tract within PD-18 so as to allow one six-story building with elevator penthouse, establishing screening requirements, prohibiting access to certain streets and residential areas and requiring site plan approval. 	
PD-18 	1924 	01/28/91 	Planned Development District -18 
Amends the zoning Ordinance by establishing revised development standards for PD-18 (primarily office and medical uses). 	
PD-19 	1076 	09/15/75 	Planned Development District -19 (PD-19, R) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance to change the zoning on a 13.561 acre tract from R-2 to Planned Development District No. 19 allowing single-family residences and establishing development standards as described in Ordinance No. 1076. 	Between Brookhaven Club Drive and Golfing Green Drive. (Tennis club and townhouses.) 
PD-20 	1062 	06/02/75 	Planned Development District -20 (PD-20, R-3) 
Planned Development District changing zoning for the described tract from R-2 to Planned Development District 20 (R-3) allowing college uses and conforming to the requirements of Ordinance Number 1062. 	NE corner of Marsh @ Valley View, excluding F.B. Police and court building and land. 
PD-21 	1123 	01/17/77 	Planned Development District -21 (PD-21, R-3, MF-2) 
Planned Development District changing zoning for the described tracts from PD-12 and PD-13 to PD-21 allowing R-3 and MF-2 uses as described for Oakbrook on Brookhaven in Ordinance #1123 and requiring site plan approval. 	Between Webb Chapel, Gardenbrook Drive alley, rear of properties on east side of Park Lake, and the north boundary of Brookhaven Country Club. 
PD-21 	1145 	08/01/77 	Planned Development District -21 
Amended Ord. #1123 by amending boundaries of Phase III of Oakbrook on Brookhaven as platted and recorded with the County of Dallas. 	
PD-21 	1220 	11/20/78 	Planned Development District -21 
Amended the uses on the two indicated tracts within PD-21 as shown on Ord. #1220 Exhibit A. 	
PD-21 	2348 	09/08/97 	Planned Development District-21 (PD-21) 
Amends PD-21 by declaring the legality and validity of the existing development located at 14802 Enterprise Drive. 	
PD-21 	2909 	03/19/07 	Planned Development District-21 (PD-21) 
Amend dev stds- Allow fence in front yard 	14802 Enterprise 
PD-22 	1162 	11/07/77 	Planned Development District -22 (PD-22, LI) 
Amend Ord. # 769 to create a Planned Development District allowing Light Industrial uses and establishing development standards as described in Exhibit "B" of Ordinance No. 1162. 
Partially incorporated into PD-45 (Ord. #1445, 06/06/83), PD-50 (Ord. #1508, 08/06/84), PD-59 (Ord. #1608, 11/04/85), PD-60 (Ord. #1609, 11/04/85), PD-62 (Ord. #1650, 08/25/86), PD63 (Ord. #1659, 10/06/86), PD-67(Ord. #1899, 08/06/90), PD-72 (Ord. # 2235, 10/23/96) 	Between Chicago, Rock Island, and Pacific Railroad on the east, the Trinity River and the western City Limits on the west, Royal Lane and the southern City Limits on the south, and the northern City Limits on the north. 
PD-22 	2434 	12/07/98 	Planned Development District -22 (PD-22, LI) 
Amends development standards and permitted uses in PD-22, north of Cooks Branch Creek and west of BNR R.O.W. except for 4.857 acre tract. 	
PD-22 	2512 	12/13/99 	Planned Development District -22 (PD-22, LI) 
Defines PD-22 including 4.5 acre adjudicated portion. 	Diplomat/Valwood/ Senlac/Hutton (PD-22) 
PD-22 	3529 	09/25/18 	Amends development standards of PD-22. 	
PD-23 	1177 	01/16/78 	Planned Development District -23 (PD-23, LI) 
Planned Development District allowing Light Industrial uses as described in Ordinance No. 1177. 	SW corner Beltline & Marsh 
PD-23 	2790 	09/20/04 	Planned Development District -23 (PD-23, LI) 
Amend PD-23 zoning for restaurant/retail—eliminate quarterly reports; omit min. floor area req.; allow sidewalk cafes. 	3640 Beltline 
PD-24 	1179 	02/06/78 	Planned Development District -24 (PD-24, LI) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance to change the described tract of land from Light Industrial to Planned Development District 24 (PD-24) allowing Light Industrial uses as described in Ordinance No. 1179. 	In western area of the City between the Chicago, Rock Island, and Pacific Railroad and I-35-W, between Valley View and the southern City Limits. 
PD-24 	1638 	07/21/86 	Planned Development District -24 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning district classification of three tracts of land, totaling 78.132 acres from PD-24 to PD-61 (City Pointe NW/JV) allowing office and related uses and establishing development standards and approval of a concept plan. 	East of Valley Branch Circle and south of Spring Lake Road and Valley Branch Lane along southern City Limit. 
PD-24 	2190 	07/10/93 	Planned Development District -24 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning district classification of three tracts of land totaling 25.4 acres changed from PD-24 to PD-61 in Ordinance No. 1638 from PD-61 back to PD-24. 	East of Valley Branch Circle and south of Valley Branch Lane along southern City Limit. 
PD-24 	2234 	10/23/95 	Planned Development District -24 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning district classification of three tracts of land totaling 46.7 acres changed from PD-24 to PD-61 in Ordinance No. 1638 from PD-61 back to PD-24 and repealing Ordinance 1638. 	East of Valley Branch Circle and south of Valley Branch Lane along southern City Limit. (Remainder of PD-61). 
PD-24 	2417 	08/03/98 	Planned Development District -24 
Amends use and development standards in PD-24. 	
PD-24 	3007 	01/20/09 	Planned Development District -24 
Prohibit sexually oriented businesses. 	All of PD-24. 
PD-24 	3558 	03/05/19 	Planned Development District -24 
Amends use and development regulations in PD-24. 	
PD-25 	1263 	07/16/79 	Planned Development District -25 (PD-25, LI) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning district classification of the described tract of land from Light Industrial to Planned Development District 25 allowing Light Industrial uses as described in Ordinance No. 1263, subject to performance standards established by the Zoning Ordinance and requiring a site plan. 	In western area of the City between the Chicago, Rock Island, and Pacific Railroad and I-35-W, between Valley View and the northern City Limits. 
PD-25 	1454 	09/19/83 	Planned Development District -25 
Amends Ord. No. 1263 to indicate "Quick oil change and lube facility" as an allowable use requiring a specific use permit within PD-4 and establishing a definition for "Quick oil change and lube facility". 	
PD-25 	1648 	08/25/86 	Planned Development District -25 
Amend standards to increase the allowed site coverage for warehouse and light industrial uses on a tract of land in PD-25. 	13365 Branch View. 
PD-25 	3008 	01/20/09 	Planned Development District -25 
Prohibit sexually oriented businesses. 	All of PD-25 
PD-25 	3559 	03/05/19 	Planned Development District -25 
Amends use and development regulations in PD-25. 	
PD-26 	1286 	12/17/79 	Planned Development District -26 (PD-26, O) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance to change the zoning of the described tract from Office to Planned Development District 26 allowing Office uses as described in Ordinance No. 1286. 	Between Tom Field Road and Rawhide Creek and between Valley View Lane and an 11 foot easement at the rear of properties adjoining it. 
PD-26 	2955 	06/17/08 	Planned Development District -26 
Change Commercial Zoning to Residential. 	2620 Valley View 
PD-27 	1320 	09/08/80 	Planned Development District -27 (PD-27, LI) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance to change the zoning of the described tract from light industrial to Planned Development District 27 allowing light industrial uses as described in Ordinance No. 1320. 	NW cnr. Of Spring Valley and Inwood Road. 
PD-28 	1349 	07/15/81 	Planned Development District -28 (PD-28, Condos) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance to change the zoning of the described 7.6315 acre tract from LI to Planned Development District 28 allowing condominium uses with standards established by site plan approval and provisions of Ordinance No. 1349. 	NW cnr. of Gardenbrook Drive and Marsh Lane. 
PD-29 	1358 	09/08/82 	Planned Development District -29 (PD-29, LR-2) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance to change the zoning of the described tract from Local Retail 2 (LR-2) to Planned Development District allowing Local Retail-2 uses on lots 1, 3, 4, and 5 of Valley View Estates #1 and Tract 18B of the Robert Jay West Survey Abstract #1576. 	Southeast corner of Valley View @ Josey 
PD-30 	1387 	08/02/82 	Planned Development District -30 (PD-30, O, LI) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance to change the zoning of the described tract from Light Industrial to Planned Development District No. 30 allowing Office and Light Industrial uses. 
Repealed by and incorporated into PD-70 (04/04/94, Ord. #2111). 	Between Denton, Valley View, Stemmons & North City Limit. 
PD-30 	1580 	6/24/85 	Planned Development District -30 
Amends use chart to allow "Printing Company" with specific use permit. 	
PD-30 	1604 	10/21/85 	Planned Development District -30 
Amends use chart to allow "Child Care Facility" with specific use permit as a permitted use in PD-30. 	
PD-30 	1832 	08/21/89 	Planned Development District -30 
Amends use chart to allow "Gasoline Service Station" with specific use permit as a permitted use in PD-30. 	
PD-30 	1870 	02/19/90 	Planned Development District -30 
Amends use chart to indicate "Fraternal Organization, Lodge, or Civic Club" as a permitted use in PD-30. 	
PD-30 	1948 	07/01/91 	Planned Development District -30 
Amends use chart to indicate "Automobile Paint and Body Repair Shop With On-site Storage as a permitted use in PD-30. 	
PD-30 	1955 	09/09/91 	Planned Development District -30 
Amends use chart to indicate "Light Manufacturing and Industrial" uses as permitted uses in PD-30. 	
PD-30 	2090 	12/20/93 	Planned Development District -30 
Amends use chart to indicate "New and Used Automobile Sales" as a permitted use in PD-30 with a specific use permit. 	
PD-31 	1388 	08/02/82 	Planned Development District -31 (PD-31, O, LR-1) 
mended Zoning Ordinance to change the indicated areas from Light Industrial (LI) and Planned Development/ Commercial (PD-5 (C)) to Planned Development District No. 31 allowing office and Planned Development uses as indicated in attachment "B" with standards listed in attachment "C" 
Repealed by and incorporated into PD-70 (04/04/94, Ord. #2111). 	Between Denton, Valley View, Stemmons & F.B. Lane. 
PD-31 	1477 	12/05/83 	Planned Development District -31 
Amend use chart to indicate "Knife Sharpening Shop" as an allowable use. 	
PD-31 	1478 	12/05/83 	Planned Development District -31 
Amend use chart to indicate "Religious Television School Facility" as an allowable use with an SUP. 	
PD-31 	1490 	03/26/84 	Planned Development District -31 
Amend use chart to indicate "Office/Showroom, Office Supply/Office Furniture, Architectural Supply and Equipment, Printing and Copying Store, Telephone Store, Home Interior/Home Decorating Store, and Card and Gift Shop" as allowable uses. 	
PD-31 	1637 	06/02/86 	Planned Development District -31 
Amend use chart—add specific retail uses listed in attachment. 	
PD-31 	1825 	05/22/89 	Planned Development District -31 
Amend use chart to indicate "Automobile Leasing Facility with Storage" as an allowable use with an SUP. 	
PD-32 	1389 	08/02/82 	Planned Development District -32 (PD-32, O, LI) 
Amends Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from Light Industrial (LI) to Planned Development District No. 32 allowing office and Light Industrial uses as listed in ordinance # 1389 attachment "B" and establishing development standards as listed in ordinance # 1389 attachment "C". 	Between Denton, F.B. Lane, Stemmons & South City Limit. 
PD-33 	1390 	08/02/82 	Planned Development District -33 (PD-33, LI, SF, C) 
Amends Zoning Ordinance to change zoning in the indicated tracts from Light Industrial (LI) and Local Retail 2 (LR-2) to Planned Development District No. 33 allowing Light Industrial, Single Family, and Commercial uses and establishing development standards as listed in Ordinance #1390. 
Repealed by and incorporated into PD-70 (04/04/94, Ord. #2111). 	Between Havenhurst, Denton & North City Limit. 
PD-33 	1498 	05/21/84 	Planned Development District -33 
Amend use chart to allow private school grades K through 2 nd as an allowable use with an SUP. 	
PD-33 	1538 	12/3/84 	Planned Development District -33 
Amend use chart to allow "All Breed Grooming". 	
PD-33 	1562 	3/18/84 	Planned Development District -33 
Amend use chart to allow additional commercial and retail uses as shown on attachment. 	
PD-33 	1707 	07/20/87 	Planned Development District -33 
Amend use chart to allow Non-Drive-in Restaurant w/outside sales window by SUP. 	
PD-33 	1780 	07/05/88 	Planned Development District -33 
Amend use chart to allow Automotive Repair Facilities by SUP. 	
PD-33 	1883 	04/16/90 	Planned Development District -33 
Amend use chart to allow Used Car Sales Lot with an SUP. 	
PD-34 	1391 	08/02/82 	Planned Development District -34 (PD-34, C, MF, LR) 
Amends Zoning Ordinance to change zoning in the indicated tracts from PD-5, MF-3, R-6, and LR-2 to Planned Development District No. 34 allowing Commercial, Multi-Family, and Local Retail uses. 
Repealed by and incorporated into PD-70 (04/04/94, Ord. #2111). 	Between Havenhurst, Nestle, Valley View & Denton 
PD-34 	1437 	04/04/83 	Planned Development District -34 
Amend use chart to add "Benevolence Storage and Distribution Center" as an allowable use. 	
PD-34 	1642 	07/21/86 	Planned Development District -34 
Amend use chart to add "day care center" as an allowable use. 	
PD-34 	1688 	03/23/87 	Planned Development District -34 
Amend use chart to add "private school center" as an allowable use. 	
PD-34 	1848 	11/06/89 	Planned Development District -34 
Amend Ord 1391 by attaching use chart with additional uses. 	
PD-34 	1916 	11/26/90 	Planned Development District -34 
Allow "landscape and nursery operation" with an SUP. 	
PD-35 	1392 	08/02/82 	Planned Development District -35 (PD-35, O, LR-1, LR-2, R-6) 
Amends Zoning Ordinance to change zoning in the indicated tracts from PD-5, MF-3, Office, and R-6 to Planned Development District No. 35 allowing Office, Local Retail (LR-1 and LR-2), and Townhouse uses. 
Repealed by and incorporated into PD-70 (04/04/94, Ord. #2111). 	Between Valley View, Denton, Rawhide Creek, and Gussie Field Park 
PD-35 	1495 	04/09/84 	Planned Development District -35 
Amend use chart to allow duplexes, triplexes, and fourplexes by SUP. 	
PD-35 	1499 	05/21/84 	Planned Development District -35 
Amend use chart to allow "Day Care Center" by SUP. 	
PD-35 	1716 	08/17/87 	Planned Development District -35 
Amend use chart to allow a mortuary by SUP. 	
PD-35 	1771 	06/06/88 	Planned Development District -35 
Amend required parking ratio from 1 space/300 sq. ft. to 1 space/333 sq. ft. 	
PD-36 	1393 	08/02/82 	Planned Development District -36 (PD-36, R) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from R-2 (H), R-4, R-6, and PD-5 to Planned Development District No. 36 allowing single family residential uses as listed in ordinance #1393 attachment "B" and establishing development standards as listed in ordinance #1393. 	Between Denton, F.B. Creek, Ford & South City Limit. 
PD-37 			Planned Development District -37 No information found. 	
PD-38 			Planned Development District -38 No information found. 	
PD-39 	1414 	12/20/82 	Planned Development District -39 (PD-39, O) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from Light Industrial (LI) to Planned Development District No. 39 allowing high density office uses and establishing development standards as listed in ordinance #1414 attachment "B". 
Repealed by Ord. #2071 (08/16/93). 	Northwest corner of LBJ & Inwood 
PD-39 	1834 	08/21/89 	Planned Development District -39 
Amend Ord. #1414 to indicate "day care facility" as permitted secondary use requiring SUP approval. 	
PD-39 	2071 	08/16/93 	Planned Development District -39 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by establishing revised development standards for PD-39 allowing high density office uses as listed in ordinance #2071 attachment "B". 
Repealed Ord. #1414 (08/16/93). 	
PD-40 	1415 	12/06/82 	Planned Development District -40 (PD-40) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from Light Industrial (LI) to Planned Development District #40 allowing office uses and "automobile dealership" and establishing that the allowable lot coverage shall be 50% as listed in Ordinance #1415 attachment "A". 	Northwest corner of LBJ & Midway 
PD-40 	1533 	11/19/84 	Planned Development District -40 
Amends Section 3 of Ord. #1415 to establish height regulations. 
Partially incorporated into PD-66 (12/07/87). 	
PD-40 	2639 	11/19/01 	Planned Development District -40 
Amend PD-40 - Add surface parking lot as a Primary Use 	4455 LBJ 
PD-41 	1431 	02/07/83 	Planned Development District -41 (PD-41, O, LI) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from Light Industrial (LI) to Planned Development District #41 (PD-LI) allowing high density office uses and establishing development standards as listed in Ord. #1431 Exhibit "B" and requiring a comprehensive site plan. 	Between Spring Valley, Inwood, Alpha & the D.P.& L transmission line easement. 
PD-41 	1903 	09/04/90 	Planned Development District -41 
Amend use chart to indicate "Automobile Leasing Facility with on-site Storage" as an allowable use with an SUP. 	
PD-42 	1422 	12/20/82 	Planned Development District -42 (PD-42, LI) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from Light Industrial (LI) to Planned Development District #42 (PD-LI) allowing high density mixed uses and establishing dev. standards as listed in Ord. #1422 Exhibit "B". 	Stanford Corp. Center and International Athletic Club. Between Alpha, Dallas Parkway, Spring Valley, and Dallas Power and Light utility Easement. 
PD-42 	1603 	10/21/85 	Planned Development District -42 
Amends Ord. #1422 by amending Exhibit "B" to establish parking ratios for office uses of 1 space/333 sq. ft. of gross floor area and allowance for small car parking. 	
PD-43 	1428 	02/07/83 	Planned Development District -43 (PD-43, O) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from Light Industrial (LI) to Planned Development District #43 allowing office uses. 	13355 and 13395 Inwood. SW corner of Alpha at Inwood. 
PD-43 	2122 	06/20/94 	Planned Development District -43 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by allowing LR-2 uses listed in the schedule of uses under Article 8, Section 104, Section 107, and Section 114 as principal uses in PD-43. 	
PD-44 	1432 	03/14/83 	Planned Development District -44 (PD-44, O) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from Light Industrial (LI) to Planned Development District #44 allowing office uses and establishing development standards. 	5001 Spring Valley (Providence Towers). 
PD-44 	2541 	05/15/00 	Planned Development District -44 (PD-44, O) 
Amend development standards 	5001 Spring Valley 
PD-44 	2779 	08/16/04 	Planned Development District -44 (PD-44, O) 
Amend PD-44 signage 	5001 Spring Valley 
PD-45 	1445 	06/06/83 	Planned Development District -45 (PD-45) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from PD-22 (LI) to Planned Development District #45 allowing office, hotel, retail, and residential uses and establishing development standards. 	Southwest corner of LBJ @ CRI&P Railroad. 
PD-45 	1447 	06/06/83 	Planned Development District -45 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from PD-22 (LI) to Planned Development District #45 allowing office, hotel, retail, and residential uses and establishing development standards. 	Northeast corner of Luna @ Crown to 
PD-45 	2184 	06/05/95 	Planned Development District -45 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the "allowable uses" established under Ord. # 1445 for PD-45. 	
PD-46 			Planned Development District -46 
No information found. 	
PD-47 	1479 	01/09/84 	Planned Development District -47 (PD-47, O) 
Rezone the described tract from PD-14 (MF-2, O) to create Planned Development District No. 47 PD-47 (O) allowing Office uses conforming to development standards in Exhibit "A" and conditions and requirements of the Development Conceptual Plan attached as Exhibit "C". 	Northwest corner of Treeview & LBJ 
PD-48 	1491 	03/26/84 	Planned Development District -48 (PD-48, LI) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from LI to Planned Industrial District No. 48 (PD-48, LI) allowing high density office uses and establishing development standards. 	4951 & 4971 Simonton 
PD-48 	2123 	06/20/94 	Planned Development District -48 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by expanding the permitted uses in PD-48 to include those permitted in the Local Retail-2 (LR-2) Zoning District listed in the Zoning Ordinance under Article 8, Section 104 (Recreational and Entertainment uses); Section 107 (Retail and Service uses); and Section 114 (Miscellaneous uses); Also to permit uses in the Light Industrial (LI) District under article 8, Section 113 (General Manufacturing and Industrial uses) with a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 	
PD-49 	1492 	03/26/84 	Planned Development District -49 (PD-49, LI) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from LI to Planned Industrial District No. 49 (PD-49, LI) allowing high density office development uses and establishing development standards. 
Repealed by Ord. #2038 (04/19/93). 	Between Inwood, Alpha and Dallas City Limits 
PD-49 	2038 	04/19/93 	Planned Development District -49 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by establishing new use and development standards for PD-49 to include Retail uses as permitted within the Local Retail-1 (LR-1) Zoning District and to include "massage establishment" as a permitted use requiring a Specific Use Permit (SUP) and repealing Ord. No. 1492 which permitted High Density Office uses. 
Repealed Ord. #1492 (04/19/93). 	
PD-49 	3520 	09/11/18 	Amends use and development regulations. 	
PD-50 	1508 	08/06/84 	Planned Development District -50 (PD-50, LI) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from PD-22 (LI) to Planned Industrial District No. 50 (PD-50) allowing office, high technology warehousing and assembly, hotel, retail, and related uses with revised performance and development standards. 
Repealed by Ord. #2244 (05/20/96). 	Between Valley View, Luna, LBJ, GNB Battery and CRI and P Railroad except for portions of PD-22 at the NE corner of Luna & LBJ and the NW corner of LBJ and the Railroad. 
PD-50 	2244 	05/20/96 	Planned Development District -50 (PD-50, LI) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described tract (PD-50) by repealing Ord. # 1508 and establishing new use and development standards for PD-50. 
Repealed Ord. #1508 (05/20/96). 	
PD-50 	2421 	10/19/98 	Planned Development District -50 (PD-50, LI) 
Amends uses and zoning standards in PD-50. 
Repealed Ord. #2244 (10/19/98) 	
PD-50 	2570 	11/06/00 	Planned Development District -50 (PD-50, LI) 
Amend PD-50 - allow temporary parking lot 	NEC LBJ/Commerce 
PD-51 	1506 	08/06/84 	Planned Development District -51 (PD-51-a, LR-1) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from Office (O) to PD-51 allowing Local Retail-One (LR-1) uses 	2763 Valwood (East of Valwood @ Josey). 
PD-51 	1513 	11/05/84 	Planned Development District -51 (PD-51-b) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from PD-1 (O, LI) to PD-51 allowing office, hotel, retail, and related uses with revised performance and dev. stds. 
Deleted by Ord. #1761 (04/18/88). 	Northwest corner of LBJ & Midway (Treasury Addition, excluding Vincent's site). 
PD-51 	1610 	11/04/85 	Planned Development District -51 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from PD-1 (O, LI) to PD-51 allowing office, hotel, retail, and related uses with existing PD-51 per. and dev. stds. 
Amended by Ord. #1761 (04/18/88). 	Vincent's site 
PD-51 	1761 	04/18/88 	Planned Development District -51 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by deleting Ord. # 1513 and by establishing revised development standards for PD-51. 
Deleted Ord. #1513 (04/18/88). 
Amended Ord. #1610 (04/18/88). 
Amended by Ord. #1965 (11/04/91). 	Northwest corner of LBJ & Midway (Treasury Addition, excluding Vincent's site). 
PD-51 	2777 	07/12/04 	Planned Development District -51 
PD-51 and O to IRU district 	2765 & 2771 Valwood 
PD-52 	1531 	10/22/84 	Planned Development District -52 (PD-52) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by changing the zoning for the described tract from LI to PD-52 allowing office, hotel, retail, and related uses with revised performance and development standards. 	Southeast corner of Inwood and Spring Valley 
PD-52 	2015 	12/21/92 	Planned Development District -52 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by allowing LR-2 uses listed in Article 8, Section 107 (retail and service uses), Section 110 (commercial uses), Section 114 (misc. uses), and Section 114(b) (Auto repairs, service, and installation) as principal uses in PD-52 except that "tool, equipment, and trailer rental - outside storage (screen)" be excluded and "retail furniture store" be included. 	
PD-53 	1532 	12/03/84 	Planned Development District -53 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described tract from Light Industrial (LI) to Planned Development District #53 allowing office, hotel, financial institutions, and related uses and establishing development standards. 
Amended by Ord. #1649 (08/25/86). 
Deleted by Ord. #2029 (03/01/93). 	14221 Dallas Pkwy (Butts Olds Subdivision). North of Providence Towers. 
PD-53 	1649 	08/25/86 	Planned Development District -53 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending Ord. #1532, Section I, Paragraph F1 to establish parking ratios for office uses of one space for each 333 square feet of gross floor area and an allowance for small car parking and by amending the concept plan for PD-53. 
Amended Ord. #1532 (08/25/86). 
Deleted by Ord. #2029 (03/01/93). 	14221 Dallas Pkwy. 
PD-53 	2029 	03/01/93 	Planned Development District -53 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by establishing revised development standards for PD-53, deleting the concept plan and repealing ordinances 1532 and 1649. 
Repealed Ord. #1532 and Ord. #1649 (03/01/93). 
Deleted by Ord. #2466 (06/07/99). 	
PD-53 	2466 	06/07/99 	Planned Development District -53 
Amend PD uses; parking requirements; signs, exterior finish, landscaping, etc. 
Repealed Ord. #2029. (06/07/99). 
Deleted by Ord. #2538 (05//00). 	
PD-53 	2538 	05/15/00 	Planned Development District -53 
Amend PD uses; building volume, site coverage, parking, etc. 
Repealed Ord. #2466. (05/15/00). 	14221 &14241 Dallas 
PD-54 	1536 	12/17/84 	Planned Development District -54 (PD-54) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described tract from Light Industrial (LI) to Planned Development District #54 allowing office, support retail, and service uses and establishing dev. stds as listed in Ord. #1536 Exhibit "B". 
Repealed by Ord. #2289 (12/02/96). 	Southwest corner of Spring Valley & Inwood. 
PD-54 	2289 	12/02/96 	Planned Development District -54 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by repealing Ord. No. 1536 and establishing revised development standards for PD-54 with additional allowed uses. 
Repealed Ord. #1536 (12/02/96) 	
PD-55 	1543 	12/17/84 	Planned Development District -55 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described tract from Light Industrial (LI) to Planned Development District #55 allowing office, support retail, and service uses and establishing dev. standards as listed in Ord. #1543 Exhibit "B". Repealed by Ord. #2040 (04/19/93). 	Northwest corner of Alpha & Inwood 
PD-55 	2040 	04/19/93 	Planned Development District -55 (PD-55) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by repealing Ord. No. 1543 and establishing revised development standards for PD-55 as listed in Exhibit "B" that have no reference or obligations to related to a four-lane divided thoroughfare to be constructed along the district's west boundary. 
Repealed Ord. #1543 (04/19/93). 	
PD-55 	2361 	11/03/97 	Planned Development District -55 (PD-55) 
Amends PD-55 by amending the development standards to allow as principal uses those uses permitted by right in the LR-2 zoning district as listed under Article 8, Sections 107 and 114 in the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance schedule of uses, specifically including retail furniture store and retail carpet store and specifically excluding several uses. 	
PD-56 	1550 	02/04/85 	Planned Development District -56 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described tract from Light Industrial (LI) to Planned Development District #56 allowing office, support retail, and service uses and establishing dev. standards as listed in Ord. #1550 Exhibit "B". Repealed by Ord. #2041 (04/19/93). 	Northwest corner of Inwood Road & the extension of Nall Road 
PD-56 	2041 	04/19/93 	Planned Development District -56 (PD-56) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by repealing Ord. No. 1550 and establishing revised performance and development standards for PD-56 as listed in Exhibit "B" and amending development phasing requirements. 
Repealed Ord. #1550 (04/19/93). 	
PD-57 			Planned Development District -57 
No information found. 	
PD-58 	1560 	05/06/85 	Planned Development District -58 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described tract from Light Industrial (LI) to Planned Development District #58 allowing office, hotel, and support retail uses, and establishing development and performance standards as listed in Ord. #1550 Exhibit "B". 
Repealed by Ord. #2042 (04/19/93). 	Southeast corner of Langland & Welch Rd. 
PD-58 	2042 	04/19/93 	Planned Development District -58 (PD-58) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by repealing Ord. No. 1560 and establishing revised performance and development standards for PD-56 as listed in Exhibit "B" that delete all references or obligations to "off-site infrastructure improvements". 
Repealed Ord. #1550 (04/19/93). 	
PD-58 	2640 	12/03/01 	Planned Development District -58 
Amend zoning of PD-58 pertaining to uses, allowing variances with Site Plans, and eliminating existing Concept Plan and infrastructure phasing requirements. 	14303 Inwood 
PD-59 	1608 	11/04/85 	Planned Development District -59 (PD-59) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described tract from PD-22 (LI) to Planned Development District #59 allowing office, hotel, support service, and retail uses and establishing development and performance standards as listed in Ord. #1608 Exhibit "B". 	East side of Luna, between LBJ and Lake Drive. 
PD-60 	1609 	11/04/85 	Planned Development District -60 (PD-60) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described tract from PD-22 (LI) to Planned Development District #60 allowing high density mixed uses and establishing development standards as listed in Ord. #1609 Exhibit "B". 	SW corner of Luna & LBJ. 
PD-60 	2316 	05/05/97 	Planned Development District -60 (PD-60) 
Amend zoning and performance standards for PD-60. Amends Ord. No. 1609. 	
PD-61 	1638 	07/21/86 	Planned Development District -61 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning district classification of three tracts of land, totaling 78.132 acres from PD-24 to PD-61 (City Pointe NW/JV) allowing office and related uses and establishing development standards and approval of a concept plan. 
Repealed by Ord. #2234 (10/23/95). 	East of Valley Branch Circle and south of Spring Lake Road and Valley Branch Lane along southern City Limit. 
PD-61 	2190 	07/10/93 	Planned Development District -61 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning district classification of three tracts of land totaling 25.4 acres from PD-24 to PD-61 in Ord. No. 1638 from PD-61 back to PD-24. 
Partially reincorporated into PD-24 (7/10/93). 	East of Valley Branch Circle and south of Valley Branch Lane along southern City Limit. 
PD-61 	2234 	10/23/95 	Planned Development District -61 (PD-61,O) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the use and development standards of PD-61 comprised of three tracts of land totaling 46.7 acres and repealing Ordinance 1638. 
Repealed Ord. #1638 (10/23/95). 	East of Valley Branch Circle and south of Valley Branch Lane along southern City Limit. (Remainder of PD-61). 
PD-61 	2418 	08/03/98 	Planned Development District -61 (PD-61,O) 
Amends uses and zoning standards in PD-61. 	
PD-62 	1650 	08/25/86 	Planned Development District -62 (PD-62) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described 6.099 acre tract from PD-22 (LI) to Planned Development District #62 allowing mixed office use, hotel, and financial institutions and establishing development standards as listed in Ord. #1650 Exhibit "B". 	Slightly south of SE corner of Luna @ LBJ. 
PD-63 	1659 	10/06/86 	Planned Development District -63 (PD-63) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described 5.77 acre tract from PD-22 (LI) to Planned Development District #63 allowing office, hotel, and retail uses and establishing dev. stds. as listed in Ord. #1659 Exhibit "B". 
Repealed by Ord # 2043 (04/19/93) 	SW corner Inwood @ Spring Valley 
PD-63 	2043 	04/19/93 	Planned Development District -63 
Repealing Ordinance 1659, but retaining the Zoning District classification of PD-63 for the same three tracts totaling 5.77 acres, allowing Office, Hotel, and Retail uses and establishing dev. stds. 
Repealed Ord # 1659 (04/19/93)
Incorporated into PD-73 (12/18/95) 	
PD-64 	1672 	01/19/87 	Planned Development District -64 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described 153.161 acre tract from LI to PD-64 allowing office, hotel, restaurant, retail, residential, and mixed uses and establishing development standards as listed in Ord. #1672 Exhibit "B". 
Repealed by Ord. #2037 (04/19/93). 	Southwest corner Spring Valley & Midway 
PD-64 	2037 	04/19/93 	Planned Development District -64 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described 153.161 acre tract by establishing new use and development standards for PD-64 which also include Local Retail-2 (LR-2) uses as principal uses and repealing Ord. # 1672. 
Repealed Ord. #1672 (04/19/93). 	
PD-64 	2577 	12/18/00 	Planned Development District -64 
Amend PD-64 - amend development stds. 	SW CNR Midway @ Spring Valley (PD-64) 
PD-64 	2594 	03/19/01 	Planned Development District -64 
Amend concept plan to allow school. 	13777 Midway 
PD-64 	2805 	01/10/05 	Planned Development District -64 
Rezone to PD-64 to allow residential use in Parcel C. 	13600 Sigma 
PD-64 	2848 	12/05/05 	Planned Development District -64 
Amend PD-64 in its entirety. 	4100 Sigma 
PD-65 	1741 	11/16/87 	Planned Development District -65 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described 5.076 acre tract from LI to PD-65 allowing office, hotel, financial institutions, and limited retail uses and establishing development standards as listed in Ord. #1741 Exhibit "B". 	Between Inwood and the Dallas North Tollway south of Spring Valley. 
PD-66 	1743 	12/07/87 	Planned Development District -66 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described 10.15 acre tract from PD-40 to PD-66 allowing office, hotel, and retail uses and establishing development standards as listed in Ord. #1743 Exhibit "B". 
Repealed by Ord. #2039 (04/19/93). 	NE corner of LBJ & Midway 
PD-66 	2039 	04/19/93 	Planned Development District -66 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the scope of required thoroughfare improvements, increasing the allowable F.A.R., for the described 10.15 acre tract (PD-66) and repealing Ord. #1743. 
Repealed Ord. #1743 (04/19/93). 
Repealed by Ord. #2100 (01/24/94). 	
PD-66 	2100 	01/24/94 	Planned Development District -66 (PD-66) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described 10.15 acre tract (PD-66) by amending the use and development standards and repealing Ord. #2039. 
Repealed Ord. #2039 (01/24/94). 	
PD-67 	1899 	08/06/90 	Planned Development District -67 (PD-67) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described 6.92 acre tract from PD-45 to PD-67 allowing mixed commercial uses and establishing development standards as listed in Ord. #1899 Exhibit "B". 
NE corner of Luna at Crown Drive. 	
PD-67 	2070 	08/16/93 	Planned Development District -67 
Amends the zoning ordinance to allow "church or rectory" with an SUP in PD-67. 	
PD-67 	2752 	12/15/03 	Planned Development District -67 
Rezone from PD-67 to IRU district 	11550 Luna 
PD-68 	1965 	11/04/91 	Planned Development District -68 (PD-68) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending Ord. #1761, which established specific use and development standards for PD-51 (the described 18.3 acre tract), and changing the designation of the tract from PD-51 to PD-68, revising use and development standards as listed in Ord. #1899 Exhibit "B" to allow specified commercial, retail, office, hotel, financial, and medical concerns. 	NW corner LBJ /Valley View @ Marsh. 
PD-68 	1981 	04/23/92 	Planned Development District -68 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending Section J of the performance and development standards for PD-68 as set out in Exhibit "B" of Ord. # 1965; providing for permanent access to properties within the PD-68 zoning district via Midway Road. 	
PD-68 	2085 	09/09/93 	Planned Development District -68 
Amend Performance and Development Standards for PD-68 by amending Section A, Subsection M of the Performance and Development Standards set out in Exhibit "B" of Ord. #1965 so as to indicate "outdoor Garden Center" as an accessory use. 	
PD-68 	2746 	11/17/03 	Planned Development District -68 
Amend Zoning from PD-51b to PD-68 allowing Retail Furniture Store (Lazy Boy) 	13227 Midway 
PD-68 	2746 	11/17/03 	Planned Development District -68 
Retail furniture store-Lazy Boy 	13327 Midway 
PD-69 	2055 	06/07/93 	Planned Development District -69 (PD-69) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described 10.866 acre tract from One-Family Residence-4 (R-4) to PD-69 allowing single-family, detached residences and establishing development standards as listed in Ord. #2055 Exhibit "B". 	NW corner Webb Chapel @ Maybrook, north of drainage channel. 
PD-70 	2111 	04/04/94 	Planned Development District -70 (PD-70) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described properties from PD-30, PD-31, PD-33, PD-34, PD-35, and R-6 to PD-70, to be known as "The Old Farmers Branch Special District", providing for the establishment of three (3) sub-districts, establishing a street plan, repealing all conflicting ordinances, and establishing new use (Sections 5, 6, and 7) and development regulations as listed in Ord. #2111. 
Repeals Ord. #'s 1387, 1388, 1390, 1391, 1392, and all supplemental ordinances for each. 	Between I-35 and Bee Street from Valwood to Havenhurst. Between I-35 and Nestle from Havenhurst to Valley View. Between I-35 and Rawhide Creek from Valley View to Farmers Branch Lane. 
PD-70 	2416 	08/03/98 	Planned Development District-71 (PD-71) 
Amend uses in PD-70 Freeway Subdistrict south of Valley View Lane. 	PD-70 south of Valley View 
PD-70 	2771 	05/25/04 	Planned Development District-71 (PD-71) 
Amend PD-70 street plan 	12700 Stemmons 
PD-70 	3569 	05/07/19 	Planned Development District-70 (PD-71) 
Amends use and development regulations in PD-70 	
PD-71 	2170 	02/20/95 	Planned Development District-71 (PD-71) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described 4.5 acre tract from MF-2 to PD-71 allowing retail and service type uses and miscellaneous uses as permitted in LR-2 zoning districts and as listed in Article 8, sections 107 and 114 of the zoning ordinance, prohibiting Mortuary or Funeral Parlor as an allowable use in PD-71, approving a concept plan for PD-71, and establishing dev. standards as listed in Ord. #2170 Exhibit "B". 	Triangular parcel west of Valley View @ LBJ intersection. 
PD-71 	2478 	05/17/99 	Planned Development District-71 (PD-71) 
Amend Pd-71 to allow alcoholic beverage sales. 	
PD-71 	2478 	05/17/99 	Planned Development District-71 (PD-71) 
Amend Section 8-400 of Ord. 1986 to allow Alcohol sales in PD-71. 	4100 Valley View 
PD-72 	2235 	10/23/95 	Planned Development District -72 (PD-72) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the two described tracts totaling 148 acres from PD-50 to PD-72 allowing light industrial, commercial, and office uses with revised performance and dev. stds. as listed in Ord. #2235 Exhibit "B". 	Located generally between Luna and CRI.&P RR and between Valley View and LBJ. More specifically, between Valley View and G&B Battery on the north and PD-50 on the east, south, and west. 
PD-72 	2306 	03/17/97 	Planned Development District -72 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the two described tracts totaling 148 acres which comprise PD-72 by repealing Ord. #2235 and retaining the same development and performance requirements with the exception of amended development phasing requirements. 	
PD-72 	2422 	09/08/98 	Planned Development District -72 
Amends performance and development standards in PD-72. 
Repealed Ord. # 2235 	
PD-72 	2563 	09/11/00 	Planned Development District -72 
Amend signage; parking, Phase II Mercer Crossing 	Valley View/Luna/LBJ 
PD-73 	2242 	12/18/95 	Planned Development District -73 (PD-73) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the two described tracts totaling 148 acres from LI and PD-63 to PD-73 allowing office, retail, and other specified uses with specific dev. and performance standards as listed in Ord. #2242 Exhibit "B". 	SE corner of Inwood and Welch to Olin Road and S.P.RR siding. 
PD-74 	2248 	05/20/96 	Planned Development District -74 (PD-74, O, LR-1, LR-2) 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning district classification from PD-2 (south of College and Christian Parkway) and R-4 (north of Christian Parkway) to PD-74 for the described tracts, establishing definitions, establishing new use and development regulations requiring site plan approval, and repealing all conflicting ordinances. 	Generally between Ford Road and the western City Limits, Farmers Branch Creek, Dallas Christian College, Villa Creek Apts., and LBJ. 
PD-74 	2360 	11/03/97 	Planned Development District -74 (PD-74, O, LR-1, LR-2) 
Amends PD-74 by eliminating the nonconforming status of existing structures within PD-74 existing as of May 20, 1996. 	
PD-75 	2300 	02/17/96 	Planned Development District -75 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described tract from LI to PD-75 allowing high density office and ancillary uses, establishing development standards as listed in Ord. #2242 Exhibit "B", and approving an associated site plan. 	SW corner North Dallas Tollway @ Spring Valley. 
PD-75 	2466 	04/05/99 	Planned Development District -75 
Increase FAR; Height 	1 International Place 
PD-76 	2371 	02/02/98 	Planned Development District -76 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning for the described tract from PD-41 and PD-65 to PD-76 allowing high density office and ancillary uses, establishing development standards as listed in Ord. #2371 exhibit "B" and approving an associated concept plan. 	SE corner Spring Valley @ Inwood. 
PD-77 	2424 	09/08/98 	Planned Development District-77 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning district classification from PD-22 to PD-77 for the described tracts, establishing use and development regulations requiring site plan approval. 	Between Cooks Creek and Valley View and the southerly lot line of the GNB property, and between the old BN Railroad and Luna. 
PD-77 	3511 	07/17/18 	Planned Development District-77 
Amends use and development standards. 	
PD-77 	3618 	12/10/19 	Planned Development District-77 
Amends the zoning ordinance bychanging the zoning of a 7.357± acre tract out ofthe Francis Miller Survey, Abst. No. 936 described asTract C in Exhibit "A" hereto from PlannedDevelopment District No. 88 (PD-88) to PlannedDevelopment District No. 77 (PD-77) and restatingthe use and development standards for PlannedDevelopment District No. 77 (PD-77). 	
PD-78 	2423 	09/08/98 	Planned Development District-78 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning district classification from PD-22 to PD-78 for the described tracts, establishing use and development regulations requiring site plan approval. 	Between Valley View, LBJ, Luna, and the Trinity River and between Luna, Commerce Drive, Park West, and LBJ. 
PD-79 	2430 	10/05/98 	Planned Development District-79 
Amends the Zoning Ordinance by amending the zoning district classification from R-6 to PD-79 for the described tracts, establishing use and development regulations, Exempting existing homes from certain standards. 	(Branch Crossing). Between Tom Field Road, Rawhide Creek and Ford Road, rear lot line along south side of Danny Lane, and rear lot line along north side of Epps Field Road. 
PD-80 	2481 	07/06/99 	Planned Development District-80 
Consolidate districts PD-43 and PD-48 Southwest corner Alpha/Inwood. 	5000 Alpha 
PD-80 	3442 	05/16/17 	Planned Development District-80 
Amends development standards. 	
PD-81 	2578 	01/08/01 	Planned Development District-81 
Rezone peninsula portion of PD-60 to PD-81. 	Luna/LBJ 
PD-81 	2944 	11/20/07 	Planned Development District-81 
Amend PD-81 to eliminate retail and roadway requirements for C.O. 	11601 Lago Vista 
PD-81 	2950 	02/05/08 	Planned Development District-81 
Senior Living Facility. 	11701 Mira Lago 
PD-82 	2497 	09/20/99 	Planned Development District-82 
Create PD-82. 	Marsh/Valley View Lane 
PD-82 	2760 	06/14/04 	Planned Development District-82 
Amend architectural standards. 	SWC Marsh/Valley View Lane 
PD-82 	2766 	05/03/04 	Planned Development District-82 
Rezone from PD-82 to R-3. 	3553 Chellen 
PD-82 	2877 	09/25/06 	Planned Development District-82 
Amend dev standards. 	3600 Valley View 
PD-82 	2878 	09/18/06 	Planned Development District-82 
Rezone - wall construction in wrong location. 	3600 Vineyard Way 
PD-83 	2548 	06/05/00 	Planned Development District-83 
Create PD-83 from 40- acre tract in LI and establish development stds., including LI uses, and setbacks, signs, etc. (originally Dallas Semiconductor complex). 	4401 Belt wood 
PD-84 	2589 	04/16/01 	Planned Development District-84 
Create PD-84 from 19.6 acre tract in PD-39, allowing primarily offices, retail, restaurants, financial institutions, hotels and motels (SUP) with dwellings 30 units or above/acre and other secondary uses 	LBJ/Tollway 
PD-85 	2687 	08/19/02 	Planned Development District-85 
Create PD-85 from 125.7 acres encompassing Pd's 45, 59, and 62 and establishing allowed uses (primarily offices, financial institutions, medical laboratories and retail and restaurants as secondary and other uses with a SUP) and development standards. 	11600 Luna/South of LBJ 
PD-86 	2800 	01/24/05 	Planned Development District-86 
Station Area Form-Based Code created from 143.7 acres in PD-70 for new PD-86, including a regulating plan, building envelope standards, streetscape standards, architectural standards, administration procedures, and definitions. 	Station Area, north to Havenhurst, south to Farmers Branch Lane, west to I-35, east to Rawhide Creek and Nestle 
PD-86 	3570 	05/07/19 	Planned Development District-86 
Amends use and development regulations. 	
PD-86 	3631 	03/17/20 	Planned Development District-86 
Amends development regulations. 	
PD-87 	2820 	08/15/05 	Planned Development District-87 
Create PD-87 from 7.765 acres of PD-39, allowing mixed uses, including primarily offices, retail, restaurants, hotels (SUP) and dwellings 30 units or above/acre and secondary uses. 	13465 Inwood (Broadstone/Galleria dev.) 
PD-87 	2975 	07/15/08 	Planned Development District-87 
Amend Zoning to allow additional parking. 	13465 Inwood 
PD-88 	2868 	08/21/06 	Planned Development District-88 
Mercer Crossing Code -Create PD-88 from PD's 24(portion), 50, 60, 61, 72, 77, 78 and 85; including a regulating plan, building envelope standards, streetscape standards, architectural standards, administration procedures, and definitions. 	Mercer Crossing west of I-35, generally south of Valley View Lane and north of Royal Lane 
PD-88 	3553 	02/05/19 	Planned Development District-88 
Rezone with respect to property described in Tracts 1 and 2 in Exhibit A of ordinance. 	Mercer Crossing 
PD-88 	3591 	09/03/19 	Planned Development District-88 
Amends zoning ordinance and zoning map of the city by changing the designation of 8.02± acres of land out of the H.C.Marsh Survey Asst. No. 916 and the Francis MillerSurvey Abst. No. 926 described in Exhibit "A," hereto,from "commerce district" to "urban centerdistrict". 	
PD-89 	2891 	11/20/06 	Planned Development District-89 
Rezone portion of PD-84 to PD-89 allowing primarily offices, retail, restaurants, financial institutions, automobile dealership, hotels and motels (SUP) with dwellings 35 units or above/acre and secondary uses 	4825 LBJ 
PD-89 	3581 	07/23/19 	Planned Development District-89 
Amending the comprehensive zoning ordinance and zoning map of the city by amending the development and use regulations of Planned Development Zoning District Number 99 (PD-99) as set forth in Exhibit "C" of Ordinance No. 3429. 	
PD-90 	2922 	08/06/07 	Planned Development District-90 
Rezone portion of PD-1 (The Centre, comprised of Tract 1/2.7870 acres, Tract 2/9.0345 acres, Tract 3/16.1394 acres, and Tract 4/12.5285 acres) to mixed-use development; establishing new development standards allowing primarily Multi-family residential uses, retail services and trade, personal services, professional offices retail specialty shops and day care, as well as secondary uses other uses (i.e., hotels) with a SUP. Also establishes development standards (i.e., building volume, site coverage and landscaping, parking, etc.) 	4100 McEwen & 4141 Blue Lake 
PD-90 	2995 	10/06/08 	Planned Development District-90 
Zoning Amendment for mixed use development. Adds "Legacy Bank" (formerly "Bank of the West" property to PD-90. 	13333 Midway 
PD-91 	2926 	11/06/07 	Planned Development District-91 
Change from Office zoning to allow Retail. 	13545 Webb Chapel 
PD-92 	2940 	10/02/07 	Planned Development District-92 
Zoning Amendment from PD-14, 47 to PD-92/mixed use development-retail, office, hotel, restaurant and secondary uses. 	2915-3005 LBJ 
PD-93 	2955 	06/17/08 	Planned Development District-93 
Rezone a 0.749 acre tract of PD 26(O) to PD-93 allowing attached single family or townhomes. 	2620 Valley View 
PD-94 	3060 	11/17/09 	Planned Development District-94 
Rezone a 1.44 acre tract of R-1 to PD-94 allowing detached single family. 	3135 Brookholllow Drive 
PD-95 	3172 	02/07/12 	Planned Development District-95 
Rezone a 10.1 acre tract of PD-76, PD-41 and PD-42 to PD-95 allowing multi-family residential, office, retail and restaurant uses. 	Inwood Road/Dallas North Tollway 
PD-95 	3515 	09/11/18 	Amends use and development regulations. 	
PD-96 	3180 	04/03/12 	Planned Development District-96 
Rezone a 43.31 acre tract of PD-60 to PD-96 allowing mixed use development- residential, retail, office, hotel, restaurant and secondary uses. 	Luna Road/Royal Lane 
PD-97 	3230 	07/16/13 	Planned Development District-97 
Rezone a 48.1 acre tract of PD-88 to PD-97 allowing mixed use development- light industrial, retail, office, restaurant and secondary uses. 	Interstate Highway 35/Interstate Highway 635 
PD-97 	3560 	03/05/19 	Planned Development District-97 
Amends use and development regulations in PD-97. 	
PD-98 	3348 	11/17/15 	Planned Development District-98 
Rezone a 3.2 acre tract from Light Industrial to PD-98 	Luna Road/Landmark Boulevard 
PD-99 	3359 	03/15/16 	Planned Development District-99 
Rezone a 247 acre tract of PD-88 to PD-99 allowing mixed use development and single family residential. 	Valley View Lane/Luna Road/I-635 
PD-99 	3581 	07/23/19 	Planned Development District-99 
Amends use and development regulations in PD-99. 	
PD-100 	3512 	09/11/18 	Amends use and development regulations. 	
 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3581, § 1, 7-23-2019; Ord. No. 3591, § 1, 9-3-2019; Ord. No. 3618, § 1, 12-10-2019; Ord. No. 3631, § 1, 3-17-2020 )  
APPENDIX B: - SPECIFIC USE PERMITS 
Listed are the SUP number enacting ordinance number, address, effective date, zoning district, specific use(s), deleting or amending ordinance number(s) (if any), and selected brief descriptions of each Specific Use Permit granted by the City of Farmers Branch as well as whether the permit is no longer effective (if applicable). 
SPECIFIC USE PERMITS APPROVED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE NO. 769 (COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE) 
SUP & ORD 	SUP Description 
S-A 
148 	Specific Use Permit-A 
13545 Webb Chapel; 4/21/58; O; medical office; SUP no longer req/by-right use. 
S-B 
224 	Specific Use Permit-B 
2745 Valwood; 3/7/60; O; med. off./clinic; Dr. Winslow's; SUP no longer req. 
S-C 
243 	Specific Use Permit-C 
13545 Webb Chapel; 6/20/60; O; dental/med. off./clinics; (Ord. 243 amended by Ord. 632 to include other professional offices); SUP no longer req. 
S-D 
256 	Specific Use Permit-D 
2745 Valwood; 11/07/60; O; retail nursery/greenhouse; not per. use in O zoning district. 
S-E 
283 	Specific Use Permit-E 
2736 Valley View; 5/1/61; O; dental/med. off./clinics; SUP no longer req/by-right use. 
S-F 
284 	Specific Use Permit-F 
2620 Valley View; 5/1/61; O; private school; SUP no longer req/by-right use. 
S-G 
492 	Specific Use Permit-G 
14067 Dennis; LI; 7/20/64; vet clinic. 
S-H 
496 	Specific Use Permit-H 
12934 Harrisburg; R-5; 8/3/64; day nursery; expired 8/10/67. 
S-I 
497 	Specific Use Permit-I 
2700 Valley View; R-5; 8/17/64; priv. sch.- dancing/baton twirling; SUP no longer req/ by-right use. 
S-J 
499 	Specific Use Permit-J 
12103 Webb Chapel; 9/8/64; LR-2; gasoline service station. 
S-K 
599 	Specific Use Permit-K 
14133 Dennis; 2/23/66; R-4; private kindergarten and day nursery. 
S-L 
600 	Specific Use Permit-L 
12717 Marsh; 2/7/66; R-3; priv. kindergarten and school for mentally retarded children. 
S-M 
639 	Specific Use Permit-M 
Northeast cnr. LBJ@Rosser; 11/7/66; R-4; priv. club and comm. bldg; Ord. 638 added use to R-5 under prior CZO ; not permitted within R-4 under current CZO. 
SPECIFIC USE PERMITS APPROVED WITH ORDINANCE NO. 769 ADOPTION 
S-1 
769 	Specific Use Permit-1 
3723 Valley View; 02/24/69; R-3; Police station and related municipal facilities of the City. 
S-2 
769 	Specific Use Permit-2 
3333 Golfing Green; 2/24/69; R-2, R-4; Private country club with golf course, tennis, private club, and dining room and related accessory country club uses covering all lands devoted to use by Brookhaven Country Club. 
S-3 
769 	Specific Use Permit-3 
3301 Valley View; 2/24/69; R-6; Town North Y.M.C.A.; Amended by Ord. 843 on 3/6/70. 
S-4 
769 	Specific Use Permit-4 
3507 Valley View; 2/24/69; R-2; City water reservoir and pump station; Ord. 226 approved property purchase (4/4/60) prior to adoption of SUP by Ord. 769 (CZO). 
S-5 
769 	Specific Use Permit-5 
SW cnr. of Webb Chapel and FB Creek Bridge; 2/24/69; R-4; Webb Chapel Cemetery. 
S-6 
769 	Specific Use Permit-6 
3315 Rockmartin, 2/24/69; R-1; Marsh Cemetery. 
S-7 
769 	Specific Use Permit-7 
14032 Heartside; 2/24/69; R-6; Municipal recreation center and library; Funds appropriation approved prior to adoption of Ord. 769 by Ord. 366. 
S-8 
769 	Specific Use Permit-8 
2570 Valley View; 2/24/69; R-6; (Designation approved prior to adoption of Ord. 769.) Keenan Cemetery. 
SPECIFIC USE PERMITS ISSUED BY AUTHORIZATION SUBSEQUENT TO ORDINANCE NO. 769 APPROVAL 
S-9 
817 	Specific Use Permit-9 
3030 Fyke, 9/15/69; R-6; private school for the education of retarded children. 
S-9A 
820 	Specific Use Permit-9A 
13109 Holbrook; 9/15/69; R-6; private school of dance. 
S-10 	Specific Use Permit-10 
2700 Christian Parkway; 2/15/71; R-4; SUP required for college in R-4 zoning district before additional building could be built, SUP originally not obtained; Dallas Christian College. 
S-10A 
835 	Specific Use Permit-10A 
13333 Stemmons Freeway; 1/19/70; LI; private club; Ramada Inn. 
S-10B 
848 	Specific Use Permit-10B 
2901 Valley View; 5/4/70; PD-6 (LR-1); restaurant without drive-in service; Jim Dandy (Never built). 
S-11 	Specific Use Permit-11 
12704 Bee, 4/19/71; R-6; institution of philanthropic nature; deleted; Truth House. 
S-12 	Specific Use Permit-12 
13100 Josey, 7/19/71; LR-1; restaurant w/o drive-in service; Bonanza Steak House. 
S-13 	Specific Use Permit-13 
13000 Josey, 1/17/72; PD-7 (LR-1); restaurant w/o drive-in service; Deleted by Ord. 1329 (11/3/80); Straw Hat Pizza Palace. 
S-14 	Specific Use Permit-14 
13297 Josey, 2/21/72; LR-2; auto laundry; Shell. 
S-15 
950 	Specific Use Permit-15 
2833 LBJ Freeway; 2/5/73, PD-16; Restaurant; Red Lobster Inn 
S-16 	Specific Use Permit-16 
12004 Webb Chapel; 5/21/73; car wash; LR-2; Exxon Auto Laundry. 
S-17 
986 	Specific Use Permit-17 
2915 LBJ Freeway; 12/17/73; four general business signs; PD-14 (O, MF-2) 
S-18 
998 	Specific Use Permit-18 
2665 Villa Creek; Suite 125; 2/18/74; PD-2 (O-LI); private club; in Metro Square Office Park #2; deleted 2/6/78 by Ord. 1174. 
S-19 
1010 	Specific Use Permit-19 
4855 LBJ Freeway; 6/3/74; LI; private club; located in Farmers Branch Office Park; deleted 9/10/84 by Ord. 1520. 
S-20 
1011 	Specific Use Permit-20 
2700 Christian Parkway; 6/17/74; R-4; operation of a private primary and secondary school; Dallas Christian College. 
S-21 
1013 	Specific Use Permit-21 
13980 Josey; 7/1/74; PD-3 (LR-2); operation of a car wash. 
S-22 
1020 	Specific Use Permit-22 
2700 Valley View; 8/19/74; O; general business sign; (Southeast corner of Tom Field and Valley View Lane). 
S-23 
1045 	Specific Use Permit-23 
2727 Valwood; 12/16/74; O; general business sign; (Northeast corner of Valwood and Josey Lane). 
S-24 
1058 	Specific Use Permit-24 
Southwest quadrant of Valley View and Luna intersection, on the west side of Luna Road, 574' south of Valley View; 3/17/75; removal of natural resource, storage, and excavation; LI; deleted 1/21/80 by Ord. 1294. 
S-25 
1062 	Specific Use Permit-25 
3939 Valley View; 6/2/75; change zoning from R-2 to R-3 and allow college uses; Brookhaven Community College. 
S-26 
1066 	Specific Use Permit-26 
2877 LBJ Freeway; 7/28/75; O; general business sign. 
S-27 
1071 	Specific Use Permit-27 
13327 Midway; 9/15/75; PD-51-B; private club; Vincent's Seafood. 
S-28 
1086 	Specific Use Permit-28 
2915 LBJ Freeway; 11/17/75; PD-14 (O, MF-2); restaurant; Brookhaven Office Park; not a permitted use in zoning district. 
S-29 
1090 	Specific Use Permit-29 
2270 Valley View; 1/19/76; LI; installation of a third driveway; SUP not required. 
S-30 
1098 	Specific Use Permit-30 
13904 Josey; 3/15/76; PD-3 (LR-2); United States Post Office 
S-31 
1099 	Specific Use Permit-31 
2925 LBJ Freeway; 4/5/76; O; dental assistants' school; deleted 1/21/80 by Ord 1291. 
S-32 
1107 	Specific Use Permit-32 
13305 Josey; 7/19/76; O; savings and loan association. 
S-33 
1108 	Specific Use Permit-33 
3001 LBJ Freeway; 7/19/76; PD-14 (O, MF-2); sandwich shop; not a permitted use in zoning district. 
S-34 
1118 	Specific Use Permit-34 
3001 LBJ Freeway; 10/18/76; PD-14 (O, MF-2); general business sign. 
S-35 
1519 	Specific Use Permit-35 
4145 Valley View; 8/6/73; PD-1 (O, LI); private club; deleted 9/10/84 by Ord. 1519; Steak & Ale. 
S-36 
1125 	Specific Use Permit-36 
13305 Josey; 2/7/77; O; general business sign. 
S-37 
1126 	Specific Use Permit-37 
14041 Distribution Way; LI; 2/21/77; paper recycling plant. 
S-38 
1127 	Specific Use Permit-38 
14320 Josey; 2/21/77; LR-2; restaurant with drive-in service; Sonic. 
S-39 
1128 	Specific Use Permit-39 
14000 Josey; 2/21/77; PD-3 (LR-2); lawn mower/bicycle sale, service and repair shop. 
S-40 
1132 	Specific Use Permit-40 
1480 Valley View; 4/4/77; LI; parking for employees/equipment; Freeway Ready-Mix. 
S-41 
1136 	Specific Use Permit-41 
2361 Valwood; 5/2/77; LI; private club; The Drover. 
S-42 
1142 	Specific Use Permit-42 
2915 LBJ Freeway; 6/20/77; O; general business sign; Brookhaven Office Park. 
S-43 
1163 	Specific Use Permit-43 
12855 Valley Branch; 10/3/77; LI; install add'l driveways; Hines Ind. Prop.; SUP not req. 
S-44 
1164 	Specific Use Permit-44 
2645 LBJ Freeway; 11/7/77; PD-2; private club; LBJ/Metro. 
S-45 
1165 	Specific Use Permit-45 
4801 LBJ Freeway; 12/19/77; LI; private club. 
S-46 
1174 	Specific Use Permit-46 
This SUP number assigned to Ord. 1174 was issued in error, thus S-46 is not a valid SUP number. Ord. 1174 deletes Ord. 998 (SUP-18). 
S-47 
1183 	Specific Use Permit-47 
7 Medical Plaza; 4/17/78; PD-18 (O); two general business signs. 
S-48 
1184 	Specific Use Permit-48 
2915 and 2925 LBJ Fwy; 5/15/78; PD-14 (O, MF-2); gen. bus. signs (one per building). 
S-49 
1190 	Specific Use Permit-49 
2877 LBJ Freeway; 6/19/78; O; general business sign. 
S-50 
1192 	Specific Use Permit-50 
3001 LBJ Freeway; 6/19/78; PD-14 (O, MF-2); general business signs. 
S-51 
1193 	Specific Use Permit-51 
4745 Langland; 6/19/78; LI; installation of driveways; NW cnr Inwood Road and Langland Road; SUP no longer required. 
S-52 
1198 	Specific Use Permit-52 
11431 Ferrell; 7/17/78; PD-22; construction yard; deleted 1/21/80 by Ord. 1295. 
S-53 
1199 	Specific Use Permit-53 
2362 Valwood; 7/17/78; LI; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; Waffle House. 
S-54 
1202 	Specific Use Permit-54 
2825 Valley View; 8/21/78; LR-2; physical fitness center; deleted 08/20/79 by Ord. 1269; (associated with S-67); Never built. 
S-55 
1203 	Specific Use Permit-55 
14850 Webb Chapel; 8/21/78; LI; car wash; Webb Chapel Car Wash. 
S-56 
1204 	Specific Use Permit-56 
4099 Valley View; 9/5/78; PD-1; private club; Holiday Inn Hotel. 
S-57 
1205 	Specific Use Permit-57 
3690 Beltline; 9/5/78; PD-23; non-drive-in restaurant w/outside sales window; repealed by Ord. 2504 (S-279), which was repealed by Ord. 2525 (S-282); Never built. 
S-58 
1214 	Specific Use Permit-58 
14440 Josey; 11/20/78; LR-2; non-drive-in restaurant w/o outside sales window. 
S-59 
1216 	Specific Use Permit-59 
12855 Valley Branch; 11/20/78; LI; install fifth driveway; Hines Ind. Prop; SUP not req. 
S-60 
1217 	Specific Use Permit-60 
2807 Valwood; 11/20/78; R-6; private/nursery school; Christ United Methodist Church. 
S-61 
1223 	Specific Use Permit-61 
13212 Bee; 12/4/78; PD-5; automobile repair garage; Bob Hackler Auto. 
S-62 
1224 	Specific Use Permit-62 
14000 Josey; 12/4/78; PD-3 (LR-2); tune-up shop; amended by Ord. 2739 (S-318); Tune Up Masters. 
S-63 
1229 	Specific Use Permit-63 
NW quadrant of Valley View /Stemmons Fwy interchange; 1/15/79; C; PD-25 (LI) when deleted by Ord. 1292, 1/21/80; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; unbuilt. 
S-64 
1230 	Specific Use Permit-64 
2373 Valley View; 1/15/79; PD-25; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; unbuilt. 
S-65 
1234 	Specific Use Permit-65 
13675 Stemmons Fwy; 2/19/79; LI; outside sales for Chrysler auto dealership; deleted 7/7/80 by Ord. 1308; unbuilt. 
S-66 
1237 	Specific Use Permit-66 
12000/12300 Ford; 2/19/79; PD-2; non drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; unbuilt. 
S-67 
1247 	Specific Use Permit-67 
2825 Valley View; 5/21/79; LR-2; non-drive-in restaurant w/o outside sales window; deleted 8/20/79 by Ord. 1269. 
S-68 
1253 	Specific Use Permit-68 
2410 Valwood; 6/18/79; LI; outside sales (nursery and seasonal items). 
S-69 
1254 	Specific Use Permit-69 
4101 McEwen; 6/18/79; PD-1; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales wind.; Sandwich Chef. 
S-70 
1255 	Specific Use Permit-70 
3001 LBJ Freeway; 6/18/79; PD-14 (MF-2, O); beauty shop. 
S-71 
2997 	1279 Specific Use Permit-71 
LBJ Fwy; 11/19/79; PD-14; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales wind.; LBJ Sand. Shop. 
S-72 
1283 	Specific Use Permit-72 
Josey Square Shopping Center, Suite 206; 12/17/79; PD-4 (LR-1); non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; Neptune's Sub Sandwich Shop. 
S-73 
1284 	Specific Use Permit-73 
4801 LBJ Freeway; 12/17/79; LI; indoor commercial amusement use; Hilton Hotel. 
S-74 
1285 	Specific Use Permit-74 
14530 Josey; 12/17/79; PD-4 (LR-1); non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window. 
S-75 
1297 	Specific Use Permit-75 
4455 LBJ Fwy; 2/18/80; LI; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; La Cuisine Cafe. 
S-76 
1298 	Specific Use Permit-76 
Farmers Branch Shopping Center, Suite 203; 2/18/80; PD-8 (LR-1); non drive-in rest.; Bo's Subs & Spuds. 
S-77 
1300 	Specific Use Permit-77 
4455 LBJ Fwy; Suite 612; 3/3/80; LI; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; Suavi's Sandwich Shop. 
S-78 
1311 	Specific Use Permit-78 
3055 Valley View; 7/21/80; R-4; church; Farmers Branch Church of Christ; repealed by Ord. 2307 (S-243). 
S-79 
1313 	Specific Use Permit-79 
5001 LBJ Fwy; 8/4/80; LI; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; Best Cuisine Cafe. 
S-80 
1327 	Specific Use Permit-80 
Farmers Branch Shopping Center, Suite 225; 10/20/80; PD-8 (LR-1); non-drive-in restaurant w/o outside sales window; Pick A Pocket Sandwich. 
S-81 
1335 	Specific Use Permit-81 
2551 Valley View; 12/22/80; LR-2; non-drive-in restaurant w/o outside sales window; Shopette Bakery and Sandwich. 
S-81A 
1344 	Specific Use Permit-81A 
13995 Midway; 4/20/81; LI; gasoline service station; Mobil; repealed by Ord. 2468 (S-268); repealed by Ord. 2528 (S-284). 
S-81B 
1351 	Specific Use Permit-81B 
2720 Hollandale; 7/20/81; LR-2; physical fitness center; amended by Ord. 1354 (S-81C). 
S-81C 
1354 	See S-81B 
2720 Hollandale; 8/3/81; LR-2; amends Ord. 1351, S-81B; physical fitness center. 
S-81D 
1357 	Specific Use Permit-81D 
Josey Square Shopping Center, #101; 8/3/81; LR-2; retail automobile stereo sales and outside installation; deleted 5/17/82 by Ord. 1379. 
S-81E 
1359 	Specific Use Permit-81E 
2755 Valwood; 9/8/81; O; general business sign. 
S-81F 
1365 	Specific Use Permit-81F 
13619 Inwood; 10/19/81; LI; physical fitness center. 
S-81G 
1367 	Specific Use Permit-81G 
2727 LBJ Freeway; 1/18/82; PD-2 (LI); non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; IBM Employees & Guests; 
S-81H 
1376 	Specific Use Permit-81H 
14520 Josey, #101; 4/19/82; LR-2; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; Alvin Ord's. 
S-81I 
1380 	Specific Use Permit-81I 
14520 Josey Lane; 6/15/82; PD-4 (MF-2, LR-1); non-drive in rest. w/ outside sales window; Taco Bell. 
S-82 
1403 	Specific Use Permit-82 
3330 Beltline; 10/4/82; LI; non-drive-in rest. w/ outside sales window; Kips. 
S-83 
1404 	Specific Use Permit-83 
12885 Josey; 10/4/82; PD-8 (LR-1); non-drive-in rest. w/ outside sales window; Wendy's. 
S-84 
1413 	Specific Use Permit-84 
1901 Royal, #105; 12/6/82; PD-22 (LI); non-drive in rest. w/o outside sales window; Le Cafe-Royal Lakes. 
S-85 
1419 	Specific Use Permit-85 
13707 North Dallas Pkwy; 4/18/83; PD-42; private club within athletic facility; International Athletic Club. Amended 3/17/86 by Ord. 1625. 
S-86 
1421 	Specific Use Permit-86 
1601 LBJ Freeway; 1/17/83; PD-22 (LI); non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; Dewey's Restaurant. 
S-87 
1423 	Specific Use Permit-87 
7 Medical Plaza; 12100 Webb Chapel; 12/20/1982; PD-18 (O); commercial parking lots. 
S-88 
1433 	Specific Use Permit-88 
13707 N. Dallas Parkway; 2/21/83; PD-42; private health club; N. Dallas Athletic Club. 
S-89 
1444 	Specific Use Permit-89 
2825 Valley View, #216; LR-2; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sale window; Ancient China. 
S-90 
1452 	Specific Use Permit-90 
2770 Valwood; 10/17/83; LR-2; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window. 
S-91 
1453 	Specific Us Permit-91 
12895 Josey, #100; 9/19/83; PD-8; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales wind.; Taco Spec.. 
S-92 
1455 	Specific Use Permit-92 
13337 Bee; 9/19/83; PD-34; golf cart sales and service center. 
S-93 
1473 	Specific Use Permit-93 
2363 Valwood; 11/21/83; PD-30; non-drive-in rest. w/ outside sale window; Taco Bueno. 
S-94* 
1475 	Specific Use Permit-94 
13002 Rossford; 1/23/84; PD-31; religious television school facility. 
S-95 
1476 	Specific Use Permit-95 
2410 Valwood; 12/5/83; PD-33; retail gun shop; Williams Gun Shop. 
S-96 
1485-A 	Specific Use Permit-96 
4641 and 4643 Nall; 2/6/84; LI; automobile repair garage. 
S-97 
1487 	Specific Use Permit-97 
2241 Valwood; 2/20/84; PD-22 (LI); auto/truck leasing w/sales of trade-ins and vehicles obtained thru expiration of term-of-lease; maint./storage of leasing vehicles. 
S-98 
1496 	Specific Use Permit-98 
14051 Stemmons Fwy; 4/23/84; PD-25 (LI); quick oil change and lube facility; Mr. Lube. 
S-99 
1534 	Specific Use Permit-99 
2833 LBJ Freeway; 12/17/84; PD-16 (LR-2); private club; "Red Lobster". 
S-100 
1535 	Specific Use Permit-100 
3340 Beltline; 12/5/84; LI; new car sales; amended 10/3/88, Ord 1797 for used car sales. 
S-100 
1537 	A Specific Use Permit-100 A 
13675 Stemmons Fwy; 12/3/84; PD-25; five-foot satellite roof antenna; Word of Faith. 
S-101 
1542 	Specific Use Permit-101 
4500 Alpha; 12/18/84; LI; satellite antenna; Never built. 
S-102 
1557 	Specific Use Permit-102 
1603 LBJ Freeway; 3/4/85; PD-22 (LI); non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sale window; Woodway's Cafe. 
S-103 
1565 	Specific Use Permit-103 
13920 Josey; 4/15/85; PD-3; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; Pizza Inn. 
S-104 
1566 	Specific Use Permit-104 
3119 Gardenbrook; 4/1/85; LI; auto repair shop. 
S-105 
1567 	Specific Use Permit-105 
3336 Beltline; 5/6/85; LI; car wash and retail gasoline sales; Ord. 1838, 9/5/89 amends SUP to allow auto repair; Ultra Car Care Center. 
S-106 
1570 	Specific Use Permit-106 
1 Medical Plaza, #108; 5/6/85; PD-18 (O); non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window. 
S-107 
1575 	Specific Use Permit-107 
12895 Josey, #219; 6/3/85; PD-8; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sale window; Marshall's. 
S-108 
1579 	Specific Use Permit-108 
4519 Sigma; 6/24/85; LI; auto repair facility. 
S-109 
1582 	Specific Use Permit-109 
4100 Spring Valley; 7/15/84; LI; 18' sat. antenna dish in parking lot. 
S-110 
1586 	Specific Use Permit-110 
13304 Stemmons Fwy; 8/5/85; PD-30; sat. antenna dish @ SE cnr Jett @ E service road of IH35E; never built. 
S-111 
1627 	Specific Use Permit-111 
14540 Beltwood Parkway East; 3/17/86; LI; general engine repair; Paradise Garage. Defunct business. 
S-112 
1633 	Specific Use Permit-112 
4205 LBJ Freeway; 5/5/86; PD-40; retail gasoline sales; Exxon. 
S-113 
1634 	Specific Use Permit-113 
13115 Stemmons Freeway; 5/5/86; PD-24; gas station; retail gasoline sales; Exxon. 
S-114 
1635 	Specific Use Permit-114 
2755 Valley View; 5/5/86; LR-1; satellite antenna dish on roof of building;; A.L. Williams; never built. 
S-115 
1640 	Specific Use Permit-115 
5005 LBJ Freeway, #150; 7/21/86; PD-39; private club; Gallaghers. 
S-116 
1641 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-116 
13321 Midway; 7/21/86; PD-51; temp. park and ride facility; expired 9/30/89. 
S-117 
1658 	Specific Use Permit-117 
14530 Josey; 10/6/86; PD-4; rest. w/drive-thru; SE cnr of Fyke and Josey; Little Caesars. 
S-118 
1663 	Specific Use Permit-118 
11496 Luna; 11/17/86; PD-22; rest. w/in Building C of Crown Plaza; Kolaches. 
S-119* 
1664 	Specific Use Permit-119 
2400 Havenhurst; 12/8/86; church; PD-34; SW cnr Havenhurst@Elder; Jehovah's Wit. 
S-120 
1667 	Specific Use Permit-120 
1503 LBJ Fwy; #150; 1/5/87; PD-22; rest. w/mixed beverage permit; Pacific Street Grill. 
S-120A 
1668 	Specific Use Permit-120-A 
3336 Beltline; 1/5/87; LI; oil change and lube center; Ultra Car Wash. 
S-121 
1684 	Specific Use Permit-121 
13920 Josey; #110; 3/9/87; PD-3; operation of video games; Buy-n-Go; never built. 
S-122 
1687 	Specific Use Permit-122 
13920 Josey; #108; 3/23/87; PD-3; installation of window tinting and cellular phones; Artech Window Tinting Company; never built. 
S-123 
1689 	Specific Use Permit-123 
13114 Holbrook (2704 Valley View); O; 4/20/87; gen. bus. sign; Tender Learning Care. 
S-124 
1692 	Specific Use Permit-124 
13370 Branch View; 7/6/87; PD-25; private club; Knights of Columbus. 
S-125 
1701 	Specific Use Permit-125 
2727 LBJ Fwy; 6/1/87; LR-1; satellite antenna dish on rooftop. 
S-126 
1702 	Specific Use Permit-126 
4100 Spring Valley (13950 Midway); 7/20/87; LI; non drive-in rest. w/outside sales window; SE cnr Midway @ Spring Valley; McDonalds. 
S-127 
1704 	Specific Use Permit-127 
3430 Janlyn; 6/15/87; R-3; satellite antenna dish; SUP no longer required. 
S-128 
1705 	Specific Use Permit-128 
5001 Spring Valley; 7/6/187; PD-44; underground commercial parking garage; NW cnr Spring Valley @ Dallas Parkway; Providence Towers. 
S-129 
1708 	Specific Use Permit-129 
2409 Valwood; 7/20/87; non drive-in rest. w/outside sales windows; Fajita Junction. 
S-130 
1711 	Specific Use Permit-130 
1590 LBJ Fwy; 8/3/87; PD-60; rest. w/mixed bev. permit w/in hotel; Doubletree. 
S-131 
1715 	Specific Use Permit-131 
1605 LBJ Fwy, 8/17/87; PD-22; rooftop satellite antenna dish. 
S-132 
1723 	Specific Use Permit-132 
4851 LBJ Fwy, 9/14/87; PD-39; rooftop satellite antenna dish. 
S-133 
1739 	Specific Use Permit-133 
2553 Valley View; 11/2/87; PD-34; retail gun accessories, jewelry and other accessories; Ajax Shooter Supply; SUP no longer required (never built); (Deleted by Ord. 1844.) 
S-134 
1744 	Specific Use Permit-134 
1503 LBJ Freeway; 12/7/87; PD-22; rooftop sat. antenna dish 
S-135 
1745 	Specific Use Permit-135 
13235 Stemmons Fwy; 12/7/87; PD-25; ground mounted sat. antenna dish; La Quinta. 
S-136 
1746 	Specific Use Permit-136 
3001 LBJ Fwy; 12/7/87; PD-14; rooftop sat. antenna dish; never built. 
S-137 
1747 	Specific Use Permit-137 
2290 Springlake; 12/7/87; PD-24; 4 sat. antenna dishes; International Christian Media. 
S-138 
1748 	Specific Use Permit-138 
2925 LBJ Fwy, #102 & #106; 12/7/87; PD-14; toxicological laboratory; never built. 
S-139 
1758 	Specific Use Permit-139 
3607 Gardenbrook; 2/15/88; LI; general engine repair; w/deed restrictions which reserves the City the right to review the zoning on the property after 5 years or in the event the business of Swedish Auto Inc, is sold or no longer involves general engine repair and terminate the Specific Use Permit; See also Resolution No. 93-029 (March 1993). 
S-140 
1764 	Specific Use Permit-140 
1885 Valley View; 4/18/1988; PD-22; fuel facility in conjunction with a commercial truck leasing operation; UPS Truck Leasing; never built. 
S-141 
1765 	Specific Use Permit-141 
14455 Webb Chapel; 5/4/1988; O; general business sign. 
S-142 
1766 	Specific Use Permit-142 
14807 and 14809 Venture; 4/18/1988; LI; general engine repairs. 
S-143 
1772 	Specific Use Permit-143 
3308 Towerwood, 6/6/1988; general engine repairs; LI. 
S-144 
1776 	Specific Use Permit-144 
4851 LBJ Fwy; 6/20/88; PD-39; rooftop satellite antenna. 
S-145 
1784 	Specific Use Permit-145 
13300 Branchview; 08/01/88; PD-25; gen. eng. repairs; amended 9/19/88 by Ord. 1789. 
S-146 
1802 	Specific Use Permit-146 
2631 Wicker; 11/7/88; R-6; satellite antenna dish; SUP no longer required. 
S-147 
1805 	Specific Use Permit-147 
14465 Webb Chapel; 1/21/88; O; gen. bus. sign; Webb Chapel North Prof. Building. 
S-148 
1808 	Specific Use Permit-148 
2825 Valley View; 12/12/88; LR-2; non drive-in rest. w/outside sale window; Church's Fried Chicken; (never built). 
S-149 
1818 	Specific Use Permit-149 
2877 LBJ; 4/17/89; O; general business sign; Hearing Aid Express. 
S-150 
1819 	Specific Use Permit-150 
12895 Josey; 4/17/89; #236; PD-8; non drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window. 
S-151 
1820 	Specific Use Permit-151 
14455 Webb Chapel; 4/17/89; O; roof-mounted satellite antenna; never built. 
S-152 
1825 	Specific Use Permit-152 
12800 Stemmons Fwy; 5/22/89; PD-31; amend Ord. 1388 (PD-31) indicating automotive leasing facility with storage as permitted use requiring a SUP; also grants a SUP for auto leasing with storage; Automate Auto Rental; building demolished. 
S-153 
1833 	Specific Use Permit-153 
2435 Squire; 8/21/89; PD-33; general engine repairs; Metrocrest Tire and Auto, Inc. 
S-154 
1835 	Specific Use Permit-154 
1590 LBJ; 8/21/89; PD-60; roof mounted satellite antenna; at Doubletree Hotel. 
S-155 
1836 	Specific Use Permit-155 
4851 LBJ; 9/5/89; PD-39; roof mounted satellite antenna. 
S-156 
1843 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-156 
13321 Midway; 9/18/89; PD-51; temporary park and ride facility; expired 9/30/1991. 
S-157 
1845 	Specific Use Permit-157 
3340 Beltline; 10/2/1989; general automotive repair; LI; City reserves right to institute rezoning and terminate SUP in event of noncompliance; European Technology. 
S-158 
1849 	Specific Use Permit-158 
3650 Beltline; 11/6/89; PD-23; non drive-in rest. w/outside sales window; repealed by Ord. 2504 (S-279), later repealed by Ord. 2525 (S-282); unbuilt. 
S-159 
1850 	Specific Use Permit-159 
3690 Beltline; 11/6/89; gasoline service station; PD-23; Mainstreet Concepts. repealed by Ord. 2504 (S-279), later repealed by Ord. 2525 (S-282). 
S-159-A 
1861 	Specific Use Permit-159-A 
14400 Josey; 12/18/89; LR-2; installation of window tinting and car stereos. 
S-160 
1863 	Specific Use Permit-160 
14524 Josey, #216; 1/22/90; PD-4; indoor comm. amusement; Clown Around; not built. 
S-161 
1865 	Specific Use Permit-161 
2877 LBJ Fwy; 1/22/90; O; general bus. sign; Quick Print & Hearing Aid Express. 
S-162 
1876 	Specific Use Permit-162 
2702 Valwood; 4/2/90; LR-2; gasoline service station; Fina. 
S-163 
1877 	Specific Use Permit-163 
2740 Valwood; #122; 4/2/90; LR-2; indoor com. amusement; Pop's Family Fun; unbuilt 
S-164 
1888 	Specific Use Permit-164 
2420 Valwood; 5/21/90; PD-33; used car sales; Metrocrest Oil & Auto Sales. 
S-165 
1889 	Specific Use Permit-165 
3030 Fyke; 5/21/90; R-6; philanthropic institution; Special Care School. 
S-166 
1890 	Specific Use Permit-166 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 5/21/90; PD-22; heavy construction; expired 12/1/95. 
S-167 
1891 	Specific Use Permit-167 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 5/21/90; PD-22; general auto repairs; expired 12/1/95. 
S-168 
1894 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use - 168 
2420 Valwood; 6/18/90; PD-33; display area; Metrocrest Oil & Auto; expired 6/18/95) 
S-169 
1901 	Specific Use Permit-169 
14008 Distribution; 9/4/90; PD-33; church; Dallas Agape Mission Church. 
S-170 
1904-A 	Specific Use Permit-170 
14098 Inwood; 9/4/90; PD-41; auto leasing/on-site storage; Curry Auto Leasing; unbuilt. 
S-171 
1914 	Specific Use Permit-171 
2361 Valwood; 11/26/90; PD-30; gasoline service station; Mobil; unbuilt 
S-172 
1915 	Specific Use Permit-172 
2361 Valwood; 11/26/90; PD-30; drive-in rest. w/outside sales window; Red Line Burger. 
S-172-A 
1917 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use 172-A 
2825 Valley View; 12/10/90; LR-2; sno cone stand; 4/1/91 to 9/30/91; Expired. 
S-173 
1923 	Specific Use Permit-173 
NE cnr Spring Valley @ Inwood; 1/28/91; LI; gasoline service station; Mobil; unbuilt. 
S-174 
1925 	Specific Use Permit-174 
13337 Bee; 1/28/91; PD-34; LS and nursery bus.; Precision LS Mgmt.; moved/Valwood. 
S-175 	1930 Specific Use Permit-175 
12895 Josey; #132, 4/15/91; PD-8; cell antenna; "Southwestern Bell". 
S-176 
1931 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-176 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 4/1/91; PD-22; cell antenna; "Southwestern Bell"; exp. 3/31/11. 
S-177 
1949 	Specific Use Permit-177 
13904 Stemmons; 7/15/91; PD-30; paint and body repair shop w/ on-site storage. 
S-178 
1953 	Specific Use Permit-178 
13835 Welch; 8/19/91; LI; cell antenna; SW Bell; repealed by Ord. 2347 (S-252). 
S-179 
1956 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use - 179 
13321 Midway; 9/9/91; PD-51; park and ride; American Airlines; exp. 9/30/93. 
S-180 
1964-A 	Specific Use Permit-180 
13922 Stemmons; 10/7/91; PD-30; paint and body repair w/on-site storage; Crawford. 
S-181 
1969 	Specific Use Permit-181 
2280 Springlake; 1/6/92; PD-24; private club; Knights of Columbus. 
S-182 
1979-B 	Specific Use Permit-182 
3330 Beltline; 3/23/92; LI; amusement devices; Norma's Cafe. 
S-183 
1987 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-183 
2825 Valley View; 5/18/92; LR-2; sno cone stand; Gummy Bear Sno; exp. 9/30/92 
S-184 
1993 	Specific Use Permit-184 
14185 Dallas Parkway; 6/15/92; LI; new or used boat sales lot; Louis Delhomme Marine. 
S-185 
1996 	Specific Use Permit-185 
14185 Dallas Parkway, 8/3/92; LI; additional signage; Louis Delhomme Marine. 
S-186 
2003 	Specific Use Permit-186 
2425 Valwood; 9/14/92; PD-33; non-drive-in rest. w/outside sales window; unbuilt. 
S-187 
2005 	Specific Use Permit-187 
2740 Valwood, #130; 9/28/92; LR-2; cell antenna; Metrocel Cellular Tel. Co. 
S-188 
2017 	Specific Use Permit-188 
4169 LBJ Fwy; 1/18/93; PD-68; non-drive-in rest. w/outside sales window; Wendy's. 
S-189 
2018 	Specific Use Permit-189 
4151 LBJ Fwy; 1/18/93; PD-68; non-drive in rest. w/outside sales window; Taco Bell; repealed by Ord. 2540 (S-286). 
S-190 
2034 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-190 
2825 Valley View; 4/5/93; LR-2; sno cone stand; Exp. 9/30/93 
S-191 
2051 	Specific Use Permit-191 
13700 Gamma; 5/17/93; LI; auto general repair; Lord of the Rings. 
S-192 
2054 	Specific Use Permit-192 
13000 Josey, #106-A; 5/17/93; PD-7; non-profit thrift store; Goodwill. 
S-193 
2057 	Specific Use Permit-193 
13450 Inwood, #150; 6/7/93; PD-49; massage establishment; Elite Therapy. 
S-194 
2064 	Specific Use Permit-194 
11925 Josey; 7/12/93; LR-2; non-drive-in rest. w/outside window; Rally Burger; unbuilt. 
S-195 
2092 	Specific Use Permit-195 
2409 Valwood; 10/4/93; PD-33; general engine repair; A-1 Foreign & Domestic. 
S-196 
2094 	Specific Use Permit-196 
13850 Diplomat; 11/1/93; PD-22; cell antenna. 
S-197 
2105 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-197 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 1/24/94; PD-22; Outdoor storage/plumbing mat.; Exp. 2/1/99. 
S-198* 
2106 	Specific Use Permit-198, Case #94-02 
12800 Stemmons; 2/7/94; PD-31; denominational school; Lexington Acad.; demolished. 
S-199 
2107 	Specific Use Permit-199 
2420 Valwood; 2/7/94; PD-33; automotive general repair. 
S-200 
2109 	Specific Use Permit-200 
2899 Valley View; 2/22/93; LR-1; non-drive-in rest. w/outside sales window; "McDonalds"; Amended by Ord. 2419 (S-263). 
S-201 
2112 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-201 
2825 Valley View; 5/1/94; LR-2; sno cone stand; exp. 9/30/94. 
S-202 
2119 	Specific Use Permit-202, Case #94-10 
2316 Havenhurst; 5/23/94; PD-70; paint and body repair; Bergman's Paint & Body. 
S-203 
2125 	Specific Use Permit-203 
13615 Welch, #103; 6/20/94; LI; massage establishment; 
S-204 
2134 	Specific Use Permit-204 
13233 Stemmons: 8/15/94; private club; PD-25; JoJo's Rest.; Ord. 2816 (S-346) repealed. 
S-205 
2133 	Specific Use Permit-205 
13505 Branch View; 8/15/94; PD-25; cell antenna and equip. bldg; Southwestern Bell. 
S-206 
2149 	Specific Use Permit-206 
2740 Valwood; 11/21/94; LR-2; cell antenna 65' high; Calvert & Co. 
S-207 
2150 	Specific Use Permit-207 
14724 Webb Chapel; 11/21/94; LI; sale of alcoholic beverages in restaurant; Sam's BBQ. 
S-208 
2151 	Specific Use Permit-208 
12675 Josey; 11/21/94; PD-8; sale of alcoholic beverages in restaurant; Sizzler. 
S-209 
2152 	Specific Use Permit-209 
14040 Stemmons; 11/21/94; PD-70-FW; motel; 
S-210 
2158 	Specific Use Permit-210, Case #94-37 
2430 Valley View; 12/5/94; PD-70-FW; vehicle sales/installation/repair; Bikers Dream. 
S-211 
2164 	Specific Use Permit-211 
11925 Josey Lane; 1/23/95; LR-2; tune-up shop. 
S-212 
2165 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-212, Case #94-43 
12900 Stemmons; 1/23/95, PD-70-FW; motor vehicle repair; Exp. 2/1/00. 
S-213 
2166 	Specific Use Permit-213 
4455 Alpha; 1/23/95; LI; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales window; Jenn's Place; repealed 7/13/98 by Ord. 2404 (S-262). 
S-214 
2162A 	Specific Use Permit-214 Case 95-04 
11500 Luna; 3/6/1995; PD-67; church, phase 1; Mar Thoma Church. 
S-215 
2173 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-215 
1617, 1637 Keenan Bridge; 4/3/95; outdoor storage/rec. vehicles; PD-22; Exp. 5/1/05. 
S-216 
2178 	Specific Use Permit-216 
13921 Senlac; 5/22/1995; PD-22; paper storing/bailing/recycling; Balcones. 
S-217 
2179 	Specific Use Permit-217 
3650 Beltline; 5/22/95; PD-23; non-drive-in rest. w/outside sales window; repealed by Ord. 2504 (S-279), Ord. 2525 (S-282). Main Street Concepts. 
S-218 
2180 	Specific Use Permit 218 
3650 Beltline; 5/22/95; PD-23; automated gasoline ser. station; repealed by Ord. 2504 (S-279), Ord. 2525 (S-282). Main Street Concepts. 
S-219 
2185 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-219 
2825 Valley View; 6/5/95; LR-2; sno cone stand; exp. 9/30/95); Fould's 
S-220 
2187 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-220 
2430 Squire Place; 7/10/95; PD-70-GB; paintless dent repair training; Exp. 8/31/00 
S-221 
2188 	Specific Use Permit-221 
12895 Josey; #100; 7/10/95; PD-8; sale of alcoholic. bev. within rest.; Nuevo Leon. 
S-222 
2189 	Specific Use Permit-222 
3404 Beltline; 7/10/95; LI; sale of alcoholic bev. within rest.; Eddy Deen's. 
S-223 
2192 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-223 
13840 Denton; 8/7/95; PD-70-GB; auto rep/parts install; Tex Auto Tops; Exp. 12/8/02. 
S-224 
2193 	Specific Use Permit-224 
13675 Stemmons Fwy; 8/7/95; PD-25; vehicle repair; Sam Pack's Lee Jarmon Ford. 
S-225 
2194 	Specific Use Permit-225 
13313 Stemmons Fwy; 8/7/95; PD-25; motel; Days Inn. 
S-226 
2223 	Specific Use Permit-226 
3360 Beltline; 9/25/95; LI; landscape nursery; unbuilt. 
S-227 
2231 	Specific Use Permit-227 
13303 Josey; 11/6/95; LR-2; oil change/tune-up shop; Kwik Kar Oil & Lube. 
S-228 
2228 	Specific Use Permit-228 
13211 Stemmons Fwy; 10/23/95; PD-25; gasoline service station/car wash; Mobil, 
S-229 
2229 	Specific Use Permit-229 
13300 Josey Lane, #101; 10/23/95; PD-7; alcoholic bev. w/in rest.; Seafood King. 
S-230 
2230 	Specific Use Permit-230 
2435 Squire, #7; 10/23/95; PD-70-GB; general engine repairs; Metrocrest Auto & Tire. 
S-231 
2251 	Specific Use Permit-231, Case #96-22 
2430 Valley View; 2/19/96; PD-70-CH; cell antenna panel/equipment cabinet; SW Bell. 
S-232 
2252 	Specific Use Permit-232 
14032 Heartside; 2/19/96; R-6; AM radio ant. on existing pole; City of Farmers Branch, 
S-233 
2255 	Specific Use Permit-233 
11925 Josey Lane; 3/18/96; LR-2; comp. natural gas refueling system; Lone Star Energy. 
S-234 
2257 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-234 
2825 Valley View; 4/1/1996; LR-2; sno cone stand; exp. 9/30/96. 
S-235 
2267 	Specific Use Permit-235 
12411 Templeton Trail; 7/15/96, O, cell antenna/equipment building; Zone Systems. 
S-236 
2275 	Specific Use Permit-236, Case #96-04 
2430 Valley View; 8/5/96; PD-70; cell antenna/equipment building; Zone Systems. 
S-237 
2274 	Specific Use Permit-237 
4747 LBJ Fwy; 8/5/96; PD-39; cell antenna/equipment building; Zone Systems. 
S-238 
2261 	Specific Use Permit-238 
11925 Josey; 5/20/96; LR-2; sale, service and inst. of tires, batteries, and acc.; Pit Pros. 
S-239 
2292 	Specific Use Permit-239 
13505 Webb Chapel; 1/6/97; O; assisted living center; National Guest Homes. 
S-240 
2293 	Specific Use Permit-240 
2410 Valwood; 1/6/97; PD-70-GB; outdoor storage of boats on trailers; James Propeller. 
S-241 
2298 	Specific Use Permit-241 
3723 Valley View; 2/3/97, R-2; cell. antenna/equipment building; AT&T. 
S-242 
2303 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-242 
2825 Valley View; 3/17/1997; LR-2; sno cone stand; exp. 9/30/97; Fould's Inc. 
S-243 
2307 	Specific Use Permit-243 
3035 Valley View; 4/7/97; R-4; church; repealed Ord. 1311 (S-78) FB Church of Christ 
S-244 
2311 	Specific Use Permit-244 Case # 97-7 
14400 Josey Lane; 4/21/97; LR-2; cell tower/antenna/equip. cabinet; PCS Primeco. 
S-245 
2313 	Specific Use Permit-245 
13950 Distribution; 5/5/97; PD-70-GB; motor vehicle repair/parts install/sales; Advanced Wholesale Car Concepts; 
S-246 
2318 	Specific Use Permit- I 246- Case #97-22 
12731 Denton Drive; 5/19/1997; PD-70-FW; farmers market; 7½ SUP-I, exp. 12/31/97 
S-247 
2322 	Specific Use Permit-247 
14010 Stemmons Fwy; 7/7/97; PD-70-FW; motor vehicle rep.; A-1 Transmissions. 
S-248 
2332 	Specific Use Permit-248 
13500 Midway, #104; 7/7/97; LI; massage establishment; Royale Wellness Center. 
S-249 
2343 	Specific Use Permit-249 
13900 Parkside Center Blvd.; 8/18/97; PD-64; hotel; Marriot Fairfield Inn. 
S-250 
2344 	Specific Use Permit-250 
4024 Parkside Center Blvd.; 8/18/1997; PD-64; residence hotel; Studio Plus. 
S-251 
2345 	Specific Use Permit-251 
13740 Midway, #505; 9/8/1997; LI; massage establishment. 
S-252 
2347 	Specific Use Permit-252 
13835 Welch; 9/22/97; SW Bell; LI; cell antennas; repealed Ord. 1953 (S-178). 
S-253 
2354 	Specific Use Permit-253 
2904 Valley View; 10/20/97; PD-29; gasoline service station /car wash/conv. store; 
S-254 
2351 	Specific Use Permit-254 
3723 Valley View; 10/20/97; R-2; cell ant./equip. bldg.; repealed by Ord. 2381 (S- 254-A). 
S-254A 
2381 	Specific Use Permit-254A 
3723 Valley View ; 04/20/98; R-2; cell ant./ equip. bldg.; repealed Ord. 2351 (S-251). Ord. 2381 repealed by Ord. 2503 (S-274). 
S-255 
2368 	Specific Use Permit-255 
14031 North Dallas Pkwy; 12/15/97; PD-42; hotel; ND Pkwy Hotel (Wooley Hotel). 
S-256 
2369 	Specific Use Permit-256 
13303 Josey ; 12/15/97; LR-2; sale, service, and install. of brakes; Kwik Lube. 
S-257 
2372 	Specific Use Permit-257 
14200 Midway; #107; 2/2/98; LI; tattoo studio; 
S-258 
2397 	Specific Use Permit-258 Case 98-06 
11611 Luna; 6/8/98; PD-60; hotel; Doubletree Hotel; 
S-259 
2398 	Specific Use Permit-259 Case 98-10 
13717 Omega; 06/08/98; LI; massage establishment; Bodyworks. 
S-260 
2402 	Specific Use Permit-260 Case 98-15 
11611 Luna; 7/13/98; PD-60; rest. w/alc. bev. in hotel; Doubletree Hotel. 
S-261 
2407 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-261 
3404 Beltline; 8/3/98; LI; outdoor sales; Beltline Antique Mall; expired 8/3/03. 
S-262 
2404 	Specific Use Permit-262 
4455 Alpha; 7/13/98; LI; expand restaurant; repealed Ord. 2166 (S-213); Jenn's Place. 
S-263 
2419 	Specific Use Permit-263 
2899 Valley View; 8/17/98; LR-1; add play area; amend Ord. 2109 (S-200); McDonald's. 
S-264 
2426 	Specific Use Permit-264 
3036 Abbey Lane; 9/21/98; PD-69; accessory building (gazebo) exceeding 120 SF. 
S-265 
2383 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-265 Case #98-04 
2825 Valley View; 05/01/1998; LR-2; sno cone stand; 5-month SUP-I, expired 09/30/98; Fould's Inc 
S-265-A 
2389 	Specific Use Permit-265-A-Interim Use Case #98-12 
12731 Denton; 5/18/98; PD-70-FW; Farmers Market; 7½ month SUP-I, expired 12/31/98 
S-265-B 
2506 	Specific Use Permit-265-B Case #98-39 
14400 Josey; 9/20/99; LR-2; 9 antennas on existing monopole; Sprint PCS/Rob Baldwin 
S-266 
2451 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use - 266 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 1/11/99; outside storage; exp. 2/1/01 
S-267 
2465 	Specific Use Permit-267 
2425 Valley View; 4/5/99; Adult day care; building demolished; Paradise Adult Day Care.) 
S-268 
2468 	Specific Use Permit-268 
13995 Midway; 05/04/99; PD-64; gasoline service sta. w/car wash & conv. store; repeals Ord. 1344 (S-81A); repealed by Ord. 2528 (S-284); Tetco Mobil. 
S-269 
2471 	Specific Use Permit-269 
2334 Springlake; 5/4/99; PD-24; gen. auto rep.; Berlini. 
S-270 
2473 	Specific Use Permit-270 
13881 Midway, #105; 5/17/99; rest. sales of alc. bev.; Alfredo's Pizza. 
S-271 
2479 	Specific Use Permit-I 271 Case #99-17 
12731 Denton; 5/17/99; Farmer's Market; exp. 12/31/99. 
S-272 
No Ord. 	Specific Use Permit-272-delete S-272 
4101 LBJ Freeway; number issued in error for Saltgrass Restaurant. 
S-273 
2482 	Specific Use Permit-273 Case #99-19 
2740 Valwood, #124B; 6/21/99; LR-2; add. Ant. on exist. monopole; SWB Comm. 
S-274 
2503 	Specific Use Permit-274 Case #99-23 
3723 Valley View; 09/07/99; R-2; replace 12 ant. panels w/ 9 new panels on City water tower; repealed Ord. 2381 (S-254A); Nextel. 
S-275 
2505 	Specific Use Permit-275 Case #99-26 
12004 Webb Chapel; 09/20/99; LR-2; gas. ser. sta./conv. store; Exxon. 
S-276 
2511 	Specific Use Permit-276 Case #99-28 
13850 Diplomat; 11/01/99; PD-22 (LI); add. outdoor storage; T. D. Industries. 
S-277 
2494 	Specific Use Permit-277 Case #99-29 
5000 Alpha; 08/16/99; PD-80; outside sto., sales and disp.; Great Indoors. 
S-278 
2495 	Specific Use Permit-278 Case #99-30 
4951 Simonton ; 08/16/99; PD-80; light mfg., assembly/repair; Great Indoors. 
S-279 
2504 	Specific Use Permit-279 Case #99-32 
3690 Beltline; 09/07/99; PD-23; ser. sta./car wash/lube/auto rep./cafe/ret.; Car Spa. 
S-280 
2492 	Specific Use Permit-280 Case #99-33 
11611 Luna; 08/02/99; PD-60; amend hotel elevations/signs; Doubletree. 
S-281 
2513 	Specific Use Permit-281 Case #99-42 
2150 Valwood; 11/01/99; PD- 22; above ground fuel storage tank; Precision Landscape. 
S-282 
2525 	Specific Use Permit-282 Case #00-SU-02 
3690 Belt Line; 4/03/00; PD-23; gas. ser. sta./car wash/detail/lube/minor auto repair/tire balancing & rotation/cafe/retail; Insite F.B., Ltd (Car Spa). 
S-283 
2527 	Specific Use Permit-283 Case #00-SU-01 
3723 Valley View ; 4/03/00, R-2; cell ant. system & equip. build.; SW Bell. 
S-284 
2528 	Specific Use Permit-284 Case #00-SU-05 
13995 Midway; 4/03/00; PD-64; gas. ser. sta./car wash/conv. store; repealed Ords. 1344 (S-81A) & 2468(S-268);Tetco/Comet Neon Signs. 
S-285 
2533 	Specific Use Permit-285 Case #00-SU-04 
13592 Stemmons; 4/17/00; PD-70-FW; motor vehicle parts install.; Thomas Taylor, 
S-286 
2540 	Specific Use Permit-286 Case #00-SU-08 
4151 LBJ Fwy; 5/15/00; PD-68; awning & sign mod. non drive-in rest. with outside sales window; repealed Ord. 2018 (S-189). 
S-287 
2542 	Specific Use Permit-287 Case #00-SU-06 
2710 Valley View ; 5/15/00; O; funeral home; am. by Ord. 2833 (S-353). Brooks Family. 
S-288 
2546 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-288 Case #00-SU-11 
12731 Denton; 5/15/00; PD-70-FW; fmrs mkt; exp. 12/31/00; N. C. T. Farmers Market 
S-289 
2547 	Specific Use Permit-289 Case #00-SU-09 
4101 LBJ Fwy; 6/05/00; PD-71; alc. bev. within a qualifying restaurant; Saltgrass Rest. 
S-290 
2552 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-290 Case #00-SU-12 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 7/24/00; PD-77; add 9 ant. panels on pole; exp. 3/31/11; Nextel. 
S-291 
2553 	Specific Use Permit-291 Case #00-SU-13 
13850 Diplomat; 7/24/00; PD-22; 9 ant. panels on pole. Nextel, 
S-292 
2558 	Specific Use Permit-292 Case #00-SU-14 
13211 Bee; 8/21/00; PD-70-GB; auto restoration; Betty Burkhart. 
S-293 
2564 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-293 Case #00-SU-15 
13337 Bee & 2428 Havenhurst; 9/11/00; PD-70-GB; landscape nursery facility including outdoor storage; exp. 3/30/02; repealed by Ord. 2611. McDonald & Associates, 
S-294 
2571 	Specific Use Permit-294 Case #00-SU-18 
13455 Midway; 11/06/00; PD-1; non-drive-in rest. w/outside sales window; Luby's. 
S-295 
2574 	Specific Use Permit-295 Case #00-SU-17 
2360 Valwood; 11/6/00; PD-70-FW; gas. ser. sta./conv. store/car wash; repealed Ord. 2761 (S-330). Triple A Company, 
S-296 
2576 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-296 Case #00-SU-16 
I-635/Commerce Drive; 11/06/00; PD-50; 400-spc. pkg. lot; exp. 11/6/05; Travelers. 
S-297 
2581 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-297 Case #00-SU-19 
4515 LBJ Fwy; 1/08/01; PD-40; cell ant. twr/3 ant. panels; REI/SW Bell, Exp. 1/8/11. 
S-298 
2587 	Specific Use Permit-298 Case #01-SU-02 
1503 LBJ Fwy; 3/05/01; PD-78; 9 cell panels mounted on parking garage Zone Systems, 
S-299 
2586 	Specific Use Permit-299 Case #01-SU-03 
2645 LBJ Fwy; 3/19/01; PD-74; 23 cell ant. panels on building; Metricom. 
S-300 
2595 	Specific Use Permit-300 Case #01-SU-04 
13777 Midway; 3/19/01; PD-64; priv. school/athletic fac.; amended by Ord. 2747 (S-325). Mobil/Exxon - Parish Day School. 
S-301 
2613 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-301 Case #01-SU-05 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 7/16/01; PD-77; outdoor storage/pipe; exp. 2/ 1/04. 
S-302 
2598 	Specific Use Permit-302 Case #01-SU-06 
2422 Valwood ; 5/07/01; PD-70; gas. ser. sta./conv. store; Paradigm Consultants. 
S-303 
2601 	Specific Use Permit-303 Case #01-SU-08 
2350 Valley View; 5/07/01; PD-24; 6 ant. panels/S, E,W facades & equip. encl; AT&T. 
S-304 
2609 	Specific Use Permit-304 Case #01-SU-09 
13653 Inwood; 5/21/01; PD-41; 9 ant. pnls/NE, NW, SE cnrs TXU trans. twr; AT&T. 
S-305 
2607 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-305 Case #01-SU-12 
12731 Denton; 5/21/01; PD-70-FW; frmrs mrkt; exp. 12/31/01; NCT Farmers Market. 
S-306 
2643 	Specific Use Permit-306 Case #01-SU-14 
4455 LBJ Fwy; 11/19/01; PD-40; pkng primary use; Dallas TX Union. 
S-307 
2675 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-307 Case #02-SU-01 
12731 Denton; 6/03/02; PD-70; frmrs market; Exp. 12/31/02; N CT Farmers Market 
S-308 
2671 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-308 Case #02-SU-03 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 6/03/02; PD-77; 6 ant. pnls/exist. tower; expires 3/31/11; AT&T. 
S-309 
2672 	Specific Use Permit-309 Case #02-SU-04 
1607 LBJ Fwy; 06/03/02; PD-78; 3 ant. pnls/N, SE, SW facades/pkng garage; Sprint. 
S-310 
2681 	Specific Use Permit-310 Case #02-SU-06 
2740 Farmers Branch Lane; 07/22/02; R-2; accessory bldg > 120 SF; Richard Kreekon. 
S-311 
2702 	Specific Use Permit-311 Case #02-SU-08 
2915 LBJ Fwy; 12/02/02; PD-14; on-premise sign; Identity Management. 
S-312 
2707 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-312 Case #02-SU-09 
12900 Stemmons Fwy; 02/17/03; PD-70- FW; ret. tires; exp. 2/17/06; Jose Almanza. 
S-313 
2710 	Specific Use Permit-313 Case #02-SU-10 
14225 Inwood; 02/17/03; PD-27; massage estab.; Mona Aldridge. 
S-314 
2716 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-314 Case #03-SU-01 
12731 Denton; 05/19/03; PD-70-FW; farmers market; exp. 12/31/03; NCT Farmers Market. 
S-361 
2711 	Specific Use Permit-361 Case #01-SU-01 
3725 Valley View, #400; 04/07/03; R-2; 9 pnl ant. sys./FB Water Tower; T-Mobile. 
S-315 
2712 	Specific Use Permit-315 Case #03-SU-02 
2740 Valwood; 04/07/03; LR-2; 10-foot ext./3-pnl ant. sys./exist. monopole. 
S-316 
2719 	Specific Use Permit-316, Case #03-SU-03 
13465 Inwood; 05/19/03; PD-39; ballroom dance facility; The Ballroom, Inc. 
S-317 
2715 	Specific Use Permit-317 Case #03-SU-04 
13950 Senlac; 04/21/03; PD-22; auto mfg, ass. & maint. fac. in exist. bldg; AMS Group, 
S-318 
2739 	Specific Use Permit-318 Case #03-SU-05 
14000 Josey; 09/22/03; PD-3; tire rep. & bat. inst.; amd. Ord. 1224 (S-62); A. Rafizadeh. 
S-319 
2740 	Specific Use Permit-319, Case #03-SU-06 
13700 Senlac; 09/22/03; PD-22; outside stor./truck hauling & stor. co.; Duke Const. 
S-320 
2743 	Specific Use Permit-320 Case #03-SU-07 
14944 Venture; 10/13/03; LI; leg. estb. ex. mple. & ants. & colloc. 2 dish ant.; AT&T. 
S-321 
2741 	Specific Use Permit-321 Case #03-SU-08 
13850 Diplomat; 9/22/03; PD-22; colloc. 2 dish ant. on ex. mple.; AT&T. 
S-322 
2742 	Specific Use Permit-322 Case #03-SU-09 
7 Medical Pkwy; 09/22/03; PD-18; colloc. 2 dish ant. on pnthse./R.H.D. Hosp.; AT&T. 
S-323 
2745 	Specific Use Permit-323 Case #03-SU-10 
12411 Templeton; 10/27/03; colloc. 3 ant. panels on exist. mnple; O/R-6; Cingular. 
S-324 
2720 	Specific Use Permit-324 Case #03-SU-11 
12895 Josey, #128; 05/19/03; on-site sales & cnsmp./alc. bev. ; PD-8; Joe's Italian Cafe. 
S-325 
2747 	Specific Use Permit-325 Case #03-SU-12 
4101 Sigma; 12/1/03; PD-64; priv. sch.; amd. /rep. Ord. 2595; S-300; Parish Epis. Sch. 
S-326 
2753 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-326 Case #03-SU-15 
1503 LBJ Fwy; 1/5/04; PD-78; mnt. 6 ant. pnls. on 3 lgt. stds.; exp. 1/5/11; Cingular. 
S-327 
2754 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-327 Case #03-SU-16 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 1/5/04; PD-77; colloc. 2 dish ant. on exist. mnple; exp. 3/5/11; Fibertower. 
S-328 
2755 	Specific Use Permit-328 Case #03-SU-17 
3035 Valley View; 1/5/04; R-4; mnt. 3 ant. pnls. concealed behind vents on exist. steeple of FB Church of Christ; Zone Systems. 
S-329 
2757 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-329 Case #03-SU-18 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 2/2/04; PD-77; outdoor storage of pipe and other plumbing supplies; exp. 2/1/06. 
S-330 
2761 	Specific Use Permit-330 Case #04-SU-02 
2360 Valwood; 3/1/04; PD-70-FW; gas. ser. sta./conv. store, rep. Ord. 2574 (S-295) 
S-331 
2770 	Specific Use Permit-331 Case #04-SU-06 
14400 Josey; 5/25/04; LR-2; colloc. 9 ant. pnls; rep. by Ord. 2822 (S-349). T-Mobile. 
S-332 
2765 	Specific Use Permit-332 Case #04-SU-04 
12700 Stemmons; 4/5/04; PD-70-FW; indoor com. amuse.; HKS Architects. 
S-333 
2778 	Specific Use Permit-333 Case #04-SU-08 
13505 Webb Chapel; 7/12/04, O; ass. living res.; incl. memory loss unit; amend. Ordinance 2292; Emeritus Assisted Living, 
S-334 
2773 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-334 Case #04-SU-07 
12731 Denton; 5/25/04; PD-70-FW; frmrs mrkt; NCT Far. Mrkt. Corp.; exp. 10/31/04. 
S-335 
2791 	Specific Use Permit-335 Case #04-SU-10 
3660 Belt Line Road; 9/20/04; PD-23; restaurant with drive-in service; Sonic Drive-In, 
S-336 
2792 	Specific Use Permit-336 Case #04-SU-11 
14951 Marsh: 9/20/04; PD-23; non-drive-in rest. w/o outside sales win.; Waffle House. 
S-337 
2789 	Specific Use Permit-337 Case #04-SU-12 
13901 Midway, #101; 9/20/04; PD-64; sales of alc. bev. in rest.; Wings N Things. 
S-338 
2795 	Specific Use Permit-338 Case #04-SU-13 
1901 Hutton Court; 10/18/04; PD-22; outside storage; rep. by Ord. 2811 (S-342). Fischbach, USA. 
S-339 
2799 	Specific Use Permit-339 Case #04-SU-15 
12895 Josey; 11/15/04; PD-8; insta. of 19' extension and repl. exist. 9-pnl ants. w/ two 6-pnl sys. on mnple behind exist. bldg; Spectrasite. 
S-340 
2796 	Specific Use Permit-340 Case #04-SU-14 
12700 Stemmons ; 10/18/04; sale and consump. of alc. bev. within a qualifying restaurant; PD-70-FW; Dallas Stars, L.P., 
S-341 
2804 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-341 Case #04-SU-09 
13985 Dennis (Farmers Branch Park); 1/10/05; PD-3; 3 ant. pnls on 90' mnple; exp. 1/17/ 15, T-Mobile; 
S-342 
2811 	Specific Use Permit-342 Case #04-SU-17 
1901 Hutton Court; 3/07/05; PD-22; outside storage; rep. Ord. 2795 (S-338); Fischbach. 
S-343 
2810 	Specific Use Permit-343 Case #04-SU-18 
13600 Sigma; 03/07/05; PD-64; MF res.; Metropolitan Development, LLC. 
S-344 
2809 	Specific Use Permit-344 Case #04-SU-20 
13750 Diplomat; 3/7/05; PD-22; outside stor.; Kadleck &Associates for Lehigh Prop. 
S-345 
2814 	Specific Use Permit-345 Case #05-SU-02 
14468 Midway; 4/4/05; LI; massage establishment. 
S-346 
2816 	Specific Use Permit-346 Case #05-SU-03 
13233 Stemmons; 5/16/05; PD-25; alc. bev. w/in qual. rest.; rep. Ord. 2134 (S-204); Rana Dides for Michael's Diner. 
S-347 
2817 	Specific Use Permit-347 Case #05-SU-04 
13260 Josey, #109; 5/16/05; PD-6; alc. bev..; Cuquita's Rest.; Enrique Villafranca. 
S-348 
2821 	Specific Use Permit-348 Case #05-SU-05 
13545 Webb Chapel; 7/11/05; O; beauty shop & 63 SF mon.sgn; Linda Haddock. 
S-349 
2822 	Specific Use Permit-349 Case #05-SU-06 
14400 Josey; 7/11/05; LR-2; 18' exten. to 90' mnple/colloc. of 12 add. Ant. pnls; rep. Ord. 2770 (S-331); Nextel Com. 
S-350 
2815 	Specific Use Permit-Interim Use-350 Case #05-SU-07 
12731 Denton; 5/16/05; PD-70-FW; frmrs mkt; exp. 12/31/05; NCT Frmrs Mkt Corp. 
S-351 
2824 	Specific Use Permit-351 Case #05-SU-08 
13600 Stemmons; 8/15/05; PD-70-FW; motorcycle sales & repair/install; F. Bowman. 
S-352 
2825 	Specific Use Permit-352 Case #05-SU-09 
13675 Stemmons; 9/6/05; PD-25; outside sales; M. F. Twichell, LP/Decorators Reserve. 
S-353 
2833 	Specific Use Permit-353 Case #05-SU-10 
2710 Valley View; 10/3/05; O; 2-story bldg add. to funeral home; amd. Ord. 2542 (S-287); John P. Brooks Family Corp. 
S-354 
2850 	Specific Use Permit-354 Case #05-SU-12 
13260 Josey, #105; 12/5/05; PD-6; alc. bev. w/in a qual. rest.; Jose Montemayor. 
S-355 
2852 	Specific Use Permit-355 Case #05-SU-13 
4100; 2/6/06; PD-64; res. townhomes; Dowdey, Anderson and Associates. 
S-356 
2853 	Specific Use Permit-356 Case #05-SU-14 
13605 Midway; 2/6/06; PD-64; ret./rest. w/ drive-through/Concept. SP for 3.83 acres; Bryan Burger for Direct Development. 
S-357 
2858 	Specific Use Permit-357 Case #05-SU-15 
3939 Valley View; 4/3/06; PD-20; day nursery/kgrtn w/in the Brookhaven CC campus. 
S-358 
2846 	Specific Use Permit-358, Case #05-SU-16 
13601 Midway; 3/6/06; PD-64; drive-in bank; Levinson Assoc., L. P., for Capital One. 
S-359 
2857 	Specific Use Permit-359 Case #06-SU-17 
13675 Stemmons; 3/6/06; PD-25; add'l signage and ext. lighting; Randy Osinga. 
S-360 
2859 	Specific Use Permit-360 Case #06-SU-01 
14400 Josey; 5/1/06; LR-2; colloc. 3 ant. pnls on exist. mnple; B. Bauman/Metro PCS. 
S-361 
2711 	Specific Use Permit-361 Case #01-SU-01 
3725 Valley View ; #400; 4/7/03; R-2; colloc. 9-pnl. ant./FB Water Tower; T-Mobile. 
S-362 
2879 	Specific Use Permit-362 Case #06-SU-02 
4101 Sigma; 9/5/06; PD-64; priv. sch.; rep. Ord. 2595 & Ord. 2747; Camargo Copeland, LLP on behalf of The Parish Episcopal School. 
S-363 
2880 	Specific Use Permit-363 Case #06-SU-03 
3725 Valley View ; 9/18/06; R-2; add 6-pnl ant. sys.; FB Water Tower; MetroPCS; 
S-364 
2881 	Specific Use Permit-364 Case #06-SU-04 
13700 Stemmons; 9/18/06; PD-70-FW; motor veh. sales, repair or parts install. & outside disp.; Bury and Partners for SunL Group. 
S-365 
2889 	Specific Use Permit-365 Case #06-SU-05 
13900 Parkside Center Boul.; 11/13/06; PD-64; sign mod.; amend. Ord. 2343; Marriott Fairfield Inn & Suites hotel; Chandler Signs for SMC Hotels, L.P. 
S-366 
2895 	Specific Use Permit-366 Case #06-SU-07 
2222 Valwood; 12/11/06; PD-22; outside stor. ass. w/greenhouse & comm. plant nursery; O'Brien Engineering, Inc. for Precision Landscape. 
S-367 
2894 	Specific Use Permit Interim Use-367 Case #06-SU-06 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 01/08/07; PD-77; outside stor./pipes; exp. 2 /1/08; Metro Valve. 
S-367-A 
2896 	Case #06-SU-09; 2-year extension for S-312(Ordinance 2707) 
12900 Stemmons; 12/11/06; PD-86; ext. SUP-I/ret. tire sales; 2/17/08; G. Marcom; expires 02/17/08 
S-368 
2902 	Specific Use Permit-368 Case #06-SU-10 
13995 Diplomat; 1/22/07; PD-22; auto manufacturing assembly & maintenance; Motor Cars Inc 
S-369 
2910 	Specific Use Permit-369 Case #06-SU-11 
1777 Keenan Bridge; 4/2/07; PD-77; outdoor comm. amuse.; Club Soccer, Inc. 
S-370 
2920 	Specific Use Permit-370 Case #07-SU-01 
4100 Sigma; 07/16/07; PD-64; amd SUP/change facades on front-loaded townhome garages; Dowdey Anderson & Associates. 
S-371 
2939 	Specific Use Permit-371 Case #07-SU-02 
13465 Inwood, #100; 10/2/07; PD-87; restaurant serving alcohol; Hibashi 
S-372 
2941 	Specific Use Permit-372 Case #07-SU-03 
13700 Diplomat; 10/2/07; PD-22; classic auto parts sales/install/repair/modify; Jambros Partners 
S-373 
2942 	Specific Use Permit-373 Case #07-SU-05 
13505 Webb Chapel; 10/16/07; O; building addition; Chad Wiser; Village Oaks. 
S-374 
2949 	Specific Use Permit-374 Case #07-SU-06 
12637 Epps Field; 1/8/08; PD-79; cabana/accessory building greater than 120SF; Mastercraft Pools 
S-375 
2963 	Specific Use Permit-375-A Case #08-SU-01 
2900 Josey; 03/18/08; PD-8; add 6 antennas/existing monopole/50' height-existing brackets; Metro PCS 
S-376 
3003 	Specific Use Permit-I-376 Case #08-SU-03 
12895 Josey, #225; 11/4/08; PD-8; restaurant serving alcohol; Izalco Restaurant; Reina Figueroa; 3-year/expires 11/4/11 
S-377 
2976 	Specific Use Permit-377 Case #08-SU-04 
2421 Valwood; 5/20/08; PD-70-GB; remodel/upgrade DQ; RCDQ Construction 
S-378 
2980 	Specific Use Permit-378 Case #08-SU-05 
13840 Denton; 6/17/08; PD-70-FW; auto sales & repair/indoors; Robert Relyea. 
S-379 
2983 	Specific Use Permit-379 Case #08-SU-06 
12103 Webb Chapel; 8/12/08; LR-2; remodel serv. sta./conv. store; 7-11/Shell. 
S-380 
2997 	Specific Use Permit-380 Case #08-SU-07 
3604 Beltline; 9/2/08; LI; ind. comm. amuse./spec. event cent.; R. Duchouquette. 
S-381 
2974 	Specific Use Permit-381 Case #08-SU-09 
12651 Mercer Parkway; 10/21/08; PD-86; gas well drilling; Trinity East Energy. 
S-382 
3027 	Specific Use Permit-382 Case #09-SU-01 
2430 Squire; 5/19/09; PD-70-GB; ind. comm. amuse./cricket. bat. cage; Baig. Sarfraz. 
S-383 
3303 	Specific Use Permit-382 Case #09-SU-03 
14001 Distribution; 7/14/09; PD-70-GB; outdoor storage/truck trailers; Trainor Glass Company 
S-384 
3043 	Specific Use Permit-384 Case #09-SU-04 
4250 McEwen/13342 Midway; 08/11/09; LI; outdoor display/for-sale art; Parker Midway LP 
S-385 
3042 	Specific Use Permit-385 Case #09-SU-06 
4347 Sigma/13890 Midway; 8/11/09; LI; indoor comm. amuse./ballroom, beauty salon, retail, office; Lonna Herrscher. 
S-386 
3049 	Specific Use Permit-386 Case #09-SU-07 
13300 Branch View Lane; 9/15/09; PD-25; indoor commercial amusement/concerts; Music Puppies Inc/Maximedia/David Small 
S-387 
3056 	Specific Use Permit-387 Case #09-SU-08 
13605 Midway #120; 10/6/09; PD-64; alcoholic beverage service/restaurant; Yourway Burgers 
S-388 
3064 	Specific Use Permit-388 Case #09-SU-09; Amended Ord. 2910 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 10/20/09; PD-77; outdoor commercial amusement/soccer fields/off./ restrooms; Club Soccer 
S-389 
3062 	Specific Use Permit-389 Case #09-SU-10 
13450 N. Stemmons, #100; 10/20/09; PD-70-FW; indoor custom auto storage; Ralston Valley View; 8-year/expires 10/20/17 
S-390 
3068 	Specific Use Permit-I-390 Case #09-SU-12, Ord 3068 repealed S-382(Ord. 3027) 
2435 Squire Place, #600; 12/01/09; PD-70-GB; ind. comm. amusement/cricket batting 3069 cage; Baig Sarfraz, Cecil Drake; 3-year/expires 12/01/12 
S-391 
3057 	Specific Use Permit-391 Case #08-SU-10 
11500 Mathis Road; 10/06/09; PD-88; Gas well drilling; Trinity East Energy 
S-392 
3078 	Specific Use Permit-392 Case #09-SU-13, 
11988 Knightsbridge; 04/20/10; PD-88; Gas compressor site; Trinity East Energy 
S-393 
3076 	Specific Use Permit-393 Case #09-SU-14 
3725 Valley View; 03/02/10; R-2; Microwave Antennas (3)/Justice Center water tower 
Julianne McGee/Bill Bauman/Clear Wireless 
S-394 
3088 	Specific Use Permit-394 Case #10-SU-02 
13700 Stemmons; 07/06/10; PD-70; Dumpster enclosure and landscaping; Dream Machines 
S-395 
3091 	Specific Use Permit-395 Case #10-SU-04 
13985 Dennis; 09/21/10; PD-3; Telecommunications antenna; Clear Wireless 
S-396 
3111 	Specific Use Permit-396 Case #10-SU-05 
13881 Midway, Suite 105; 12/07/10; PD-64; Qualifying restaurant; Fuzzy's Taco Shop 
S-397 
3122 	Specific Use Permit-397 Case #10-SU-06 
13605 Midway, Suite 140; 02/01/11; PD-64; Qualifying restaurant; Mango's Noodle House 
S-398 
3078 	Specific Use Permit-398 Case #10-SU-07 
12651 Mercer Parkway; 02/15/11; PD-96; Gas compressor site; Trinity East Energy 
S-399 
3117 	Specific Use Permit-399 Case #10-SU-08 
1641 Keenan Bridge; 02/01/11; PD-77; Fencing; Dallas Texans 
S-400 
3128 	Specific Use Permit-400 Case #10-SU-09 
3404 Beltline; 02/15/11; LR-2; Outside storage; Surplus Building Materials 
S-401 
3133 	Specific Use Permit-401 Case #11-SU-01 
13210 Senlac; 04/19/11; PD-77; Rental office; Enterprise Truck Rental 
S-402 
3134 	Specific Use Permit-402 Case #11-SU-02 
Alpha/Sigma; 05/03/11; PD-64; Lots into zero lot line patio homes; Cambridge Crossing 
S-403 
3143 	Specific Use Permit-403 Case #11-SU-03 
3117 Garden Brook; 06/07/11; LR-2; Auto sales with outdoor display; Bill Moses 
S-404 
3144 	Specific Use Permit-404 Case #11-SU-04 
4895 LBJ; 06/07/11; PD-78; Qualifying restaurant; Angel Aguinaga 
S-405 
3146 	Specific Use Permit-405 Case #11-SU-05 
13001 Templeton; 08/02/11; R-1; Pool cabana; Laura Rivera 
S-406 
3157 	Specific Use Permit-406 Case #11-SU-06 
1870 Crown; 09/06/11; PD-22; Adult day care; Grace Adult Day Care 
S-407 
3159 	Specific Use Permit-407 Case #11-SU-07 
13330 Josey; 11/15/11; PD-6; Retail auto parts store; Roger Andres 
S-408 
3163 	Specific Use Permit-408 Case #11-SU-08 
12895 Josey, Suite 225; 12/06/11; PD-8; Qualifying restaurant; Reyna Figueroa 
S-409 
3177 	Specific Use Permit-409 Case #11-SU-10 
3607 Garden Brook; 02/07/12; LI; Screening for dumpster and oil tank; Swedish Auto 
S-410 
3171 	Specific Use Permit-410 Case #11-SU-11 
14185 N Dallas Parkway; 02/07/12; PD-75; Drive-thru teller windows in existing parking garage; Town North Bank 
S-411 
3181 	Specific Use Permit-411 Case #12-SU-01 
4630 Alpha; 03/20/12; LI; Indoor auto sales; Auto Web Expo 
S-412 
3183 	Specific Use Permit-412 Case #12-SU-02 
13435 Bee, Suite 160; 04/03/12; PD-70; Social events in addition to restaurant; The Victoria Restaurant 
S-413 
3188 	Specific Use Permit-413 Case #12-SU-04 
13435 Bee, Suite 160; 05/15/12; PD-70; Special Event Center 2 year Interim; The Victoria Restaurant 
S-414 
3187 	Specific Use Permit-414 Case #12-SU-06 
4241 Sigma; 06/19/12; LI; Event center serving alcohol; Culinary Art Catering 
S-415 
3195 	Specific Use Permit-415 Case #12-SU-08 
13110 Josey; 08/07/12; PD-7; Restaurant with drive-through; Panda Express 
S-416 
3189 	Specific Use Permit-416 Case #12-SU-05 
2435 Squire; 06/15/12; PD-7; Additional cricket practice fields; English Cricket Academy 
S-417 
3193 	Specific Use Permit-417 Case #12-SU-07 
1925 Valley View; 07/17/12; PD-88; Landscape nursery; Metroplex Garden Design 
S-418 
3219 	Specific Use Permit-418 Case #13-SU-01 
13990 Stemmons; 03/05/13; PD-70; Motorcycle sales; RPM Cycle 
S-419 
3227 	Specific Use Permit-419 Case #13-SU-02 
13725 Welch; 05/21/13; LI; Vehicle Repair; Tesla Motors 
S-420 
3228 	Specific Use Permit-420 Case #13-SU-03 
3646 Janlyn; 05/21/13; R-3; Accessory Building/Pergola; Horst Bertl 
S-421 
3242 	Specific Use Permit-421 Case #13-SU-05 
3320 Rockmartin; 10/15/13; R-1; Accessory Building/Pergola; Terry Moore 
S-422 
3242 	Specific Use Permit-422 Case #13-SU-06 
15608 Midway; 11/05/13; LI; Outside patio area; Capriotti's 
S-423 
3275 	Specific Use Permit-423 Case #14-SU-01 
2904 Valley View; 03/18/14; PD-29; Expand building to increase lease space; Ramon Aranda 
S-424 
3276 	Specific Use Permit-424 Case #14-SU-02 
12400 Ford Road; 04/01/14; PD-74; Consolidate for school use; Westwood School 
S-425 
3301 	Specific Use Permit-425 Case #14-SU-05 
13115 Stemmons; 09/16/14; PD-24; Beer and wine sales; Shell Gas Station 
S-426 
3284 	Specific Use Permit-426 Case #14-SU-04 
14832 Venture; 06/17/14; LI; Auto dealership; Lone Star Motors 
S-427 
3302 	Specific Use Permit-427 Case #14-SU-06 
13850 Diplomat; 09/16/14; PD-22; Cell tower panels; AT&T 
S-428 
3314 	Specific Use Permit-428 Case #14-SU-11 
13920 Josey Suite 102; 12/16/14; PD-22; Qualifying restaurant; Pupuseria Palacios 
S-429 
3315 	Specific Use Permit-429 Case #14-SU-12 
13435 Bee; 01/06/15; PD-70; Banquet hall; Victoria's Restaurant 
S-430 
3316 	Specific Use Permit-430 Case #14-SU-13 
14335 Inwood; 01/06/15; LI; Indoor vehicle sales; D&M Leasing 
S-431 
3317 	Specific Use Permit Interim Use-431 Case #14-SU-14 
2410 Valwood; 01/20/15; Expires 01/20/20; LI; Vehicle Repair; NTX Auto 
S-432 
3328 	Specific Use Permit -432 Case #15-SU-02 
1600 LBJ; 07/14/15; PD-88; Gasoline Service Station 
S-433 
3329 	Specific Use Permit -433 Case #15-SU-03 
13920 Josey Lane; 07/14/15; PD-3; Qualified Restaurant 
S-434 
3327 	Specific Use Permit -434 Case #15-SU-04 
13985 Dennis Lane; 07/14/15; PD-3; Cell Tower 
S-435 
3336 	Specific Use Permit -435 Case #15-SU-05 
3380 Beltline Road; 08/18/15; LR-2; Banquet Hall 
S-436 
3332 	Specific Use Permit -436 Case #15-SU-06 
3243 Brincrest Dr; 08/04/15; R-3; Accessory Structure 
S-437 
3333 	Specific Use Permit -437 Case #15-SU-07 
3453 Pine Tree Cir; 08/04/15; R-4; Accessory Structure 
S-438 
3337 	Specific Use Permit -438 Case #15-SU-08 
12895 Josey Lane; 08/18/15; PD-8; Outdoor Storage and Display 
S-439 
3338 	Specific Use Permit -439 Case #15-SU-09 
4060 Spring Valley; 09/15/15; PD-64; Townhomes 
S-440 
3346 	Specific Use Permit -440 Case #15-SU-11 
4250 McEwen; 10/20/15; LI; Self Storage 
S-441 
3351 	Specific Use Permit -441 Case #15-SU-13 
1600 LBJ; 01/05/16; PD-88; Gasoline Service Station 
S-442 
3352 	Specific Use Permit -442 Case #15-SU-14 
4250 McEwen; 01/05/16; LI; Self Storage 
S-443 
3401 	Specific Use Permit -443 Case #15-SU-16 
13500 McClintock; 11/15/16; PD-70; Outdoor Storage and Display 
S-444 
3363 	Specific Use Permit -444 Case #16-SU-02 
4887 Alpha; 04/05/16; LI; Indoor Commercial Amusement 
S-445 
3367 	Specific Use Permit -445 Case #16-SU-03 
2711 LBJ; 05/03/16; PD-74; Nursing School 
S-446 
3370 	Specific Use Permit -446 Case #16-SU-04 
4445 Sigma; 05/17/16; LI; Conference Center 
S-447 
3373 	Specific Use Permit -447 Case #16-SU-05 
2001 Academy; 06/07/16; PD-77; Church 
S-448 
3374 	Specific Use Permit -448 Case #16-SU-06 
14304 Olympic; 06/07/16; R-2; Accessory Structure 
S-449 
3386 	Specific Use Permit -449 Case #16-SU-07 
11482 Luna; 08/16/16; PD-22; Qualifying Restaurant 
S-450 
3378 	Specific Use Permit -450 Case #16-SU-08 
11500 Mathis; 07/12/16; PD-88; Gas Well 
S-451 
3379 	Specific Use Permit -451 Case #16-SU-09 
12651 Mercer Parkway; 07/12/16; PD-88; Gas Well 
S-452 
3380 	Specific Use Permit -452 Case #16-SU-10 
4515 LBJ; 07/12/16; PD-40; Cell Tower 
S-453 
3381 	Specific Use Permit -453 Case #16-SU-11 
4372 Spring Valley; 07/12/16; LI; Indoor Commercial Amusement 
S-455 
3382 	Specific Use Permit -455 Case #16-SU-13 
4101 Sigma; 07/12/16; PD-64; Gymnasium and Performance Hall 
S-456 
3387 	Specific Use Permit -456 Case #16-SU-14 
14400 Midway; 08/16/16; LI; Gun Range 
S-457 
3389 	Specific Use Permit -457 Case #16-SU-15 
1 Mira Vista; 09/06/16; PD-81; Hotel 
S-458 
3398 	Specific Use Permit -458 Case #16-SU-16 
2917 Ermine Way; 11/01/16; R-6; Accessory Structure 
S-459 
3404 	Specific Use Permit -459 Case #16-SU-17 
1801 Royal; 12/13/16; PD-22; Qualifying Restaurant 
S-460 
3437 	Specific Use Permit -460 Case #17-SU-01 
11419 Ferrell Avenue; 4/18/17; PD-22; Vehicle Parts 
S-461 
3438 	Specific Use Permit -461 Case #17-SU-02 
Freeway Subdistrict; 4/18/17; PD-70; Vehicle Sales 
S-462 
3439 	Specific Use Permit -462 Case #17-SU-03 
2435 Squire Place; 4/18/17; PD-70; Commercial Amusement 
S-463 
3443 	Specific Use Permit -463 Case #17-SU-04 
3116 Spur Trail; 5/16/17; Accessory Building 
S-464 
3444 	Specific Use Permit -464 Case #17-SU-05 
Mira Lago Addition; 7/11/17; Hotel 
S-465 
3447 	Specific Use Permit -466 Case #17-SU-06 
Mira Lago Addition; 7/11/17; Hotel 
S-466 
3448 	Specific Use Permit -467 Case #17-SU-07 
14430 Tanglewood Drive; 7/11/17; Accessory Building 
S-467 
3450 	Specific Use Permit -468 Case #17-SU-08 
13830 Stemmons Freeway; 7/11/17; Vehicle Sales 
S-468 
3451 	Specific Use Permit -469 Case #17-SU-09 
1501 LBJ Freeway; 7/11/17; Vehicle Sales 
S-469 
3452 	Specific Use Permit -470 Case #17-SU-10 
13612 Midway Road; 7/11/17; Vehicle Sales 
S-470 
3468 	Specific Use Permit -471 Case #17-SU-11 
Harrison C. March Survey; 9/26/17; PD-88; Warehouse and Distribution Facility 
S-471 
3484 	Specific Use Permit -471 Case #18-SU-01 
14465 Webb Chapel Road; 2/6/18; Business or Trade School 
S-472 
3488 	Specific Use Permit -472 Case #18-SU-01 
4501 LBJ Freeway; 2/20/18; PD-71; Commercial Indoor Amusement 
S-473 
3492 	Specific Use Permit -473 Case #18-SU-03 
12400 Ford Road; 2/20/17; PD-74; Warehouse Distribution 
S-474 
3493 	Specific Use Permit -474 Case #18-SU-04 
Mira Lago Addition; 3/20/18; PD-74; Hotel 
S-475 
3494 	Specific Use Permit -475 Case #18-SU-05 
13426 Castleton Drive; 4/3/18; Detached Garage 
S-476 
3497 	Specific Use Permit -476 Case #18-SU-06 
3117 Garden Brook Drive; 4/17/18; Vehicle Repair 
S-477 
3506 	Specific Use Permit -477 Case #18-SU-07 
13655 Janwood Lane; 6/19/18; Accessory Building 
S-478 
3508 	Specific Use Permit -478 Case #18-SU-08 
2001 Academy Lane; 6/19/18; PD-74; Church or Rectory 
S-479 
3510 	Specific Use Permit -479 Case #18-SU-09 
2425 Valley View Lane; 7/17/18; PD-86; Drive-Through Restaurant 
S-480 
3519 	Specific Use Permit -480 Case #18-SU-10 
13860 N. Stemmons Freeway; 9/11/18; PD-70; Outdoor Storage 
S-481 
3531 	Specific Use Permit -481 Case #18-SU-11 
Metro Square; 10/01/18; PD-74; Private University 
S-482 
3541 	Specific Use Permit -482 Case #18-SU-12 
4141 LBJ Freeway; 11/06/18; PD-68; Gymnastics Facility 
S-483 
3565 	Specific Use Permit -483 Case #19-SU-01 
13215 Woodhaven Drive; 04/16/19; Accessory Building 
S-484 
3566 	Specific Use Permit -484 Case #19-SU-02 
13561 Braemar Drive; 04/16/19; Bathroom Facilities 
S-485 
3573 	Specific Use Permit -485 Case #19-SU-03 
Francis Miller Survey; 06/18/19; PD-88; Warehouse Use 
S-486 
3574 	Specific Use Permit -486 Case #19-SU-04 
2020 Valley View; 06/18/19; PD-77; Outdoor Storage 
S-487 
3579 	Specific Use Permit -487 Case #19-SU-05 
2425 Valley View; 07/23/19; PD-86; Drive-Through Restaurants 
S-488 
3590 	Specific Use Permit -488 Case #19-SU-06 
13342 Midway Road; 09/03/19; Enclosed Vehicle Storage Facility 
S-489 
3614 	Specific Use Permit -489 Case #19-SU-07 
13850 Diplomat Drive; 11/12/19; PD-22; Outdoor Storage 
S-490 
3627 	Specific Use Permit -490 Case #20-SU-01 
14221 Dallas Parkway; 02/18/20; PD-53; On-Premise Sale and Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Within Qualifying Restaurant 
S-491 
3628 	Specific Use Permit -491 Case #20-SU-02 
13150 Senlac Drive, Suite 160; 02/18/20; PD-77; Massage Business (Chiropractor) 
S-492 
3635 	Specific Use Permit -492 Case #20-SU-03 
2727 LBJ Freeway; 05/05/20; PD-74; On-Premise Sale and Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Within Qualifying Restaurant 
 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017; Ord. No. 3579, 7-23-2019; Ord. No. 3590, 9-3-2019; Ord. No. 3614, 11-12-2019; Ord. No. 3627, 2-18-2020; Ord. No. 3628, 2-18-2020; Ord. No. 3635, 5-5-2020)  
APPENDIX C: - MAPS 
 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017) 
 
( Ord. No. 3415 , § 1 (Exh. A), 1-20-2017)  
APPENDIX A - FEE SCHEDULE 
Section 
this Code 	Description 	Amount 
	Chapter 2. Administration 	
	Article V. Finance 	
2-436 	Returned check processing fee 	$25.00 
2-437(b) 	Fee for background checks for handgun applicants (nonrefundable) 	25.00 
 
Section this Code 	Description 	Amount 	Deposit 
2-703 	The HUB Rental Fee 	Resident Rate 	Non-Resident Rate 	$200 
		Open Hours: $50.00 	Open Hours: $75.00 	
		Closed Hours: $75.00 	Closed Hours: $100.00 	
	City Hall Lobby Rental 	Resident Rate 	Non-Resident Rate 	$200.00 
		Open Hours: $50.00 	Open Hours: $75.00 	
		Closed Hours: $75.00 	Closed Hours: $100.00 	
	Study Session Room Rental 	Resident Rate 	Non-Resident Rate 	$100.00 
		Open Hours: $30.00 	Open Hours: $50.00 	
		Closed Hours: $75.00 	Closed Hours: $100.00 	
	Fire Administrati on Training Room 	Resident Rate 	Non-Resident Rate 	$200.00 
		Open Hours: $50.00 	Open Hours: $75.00 	
		Closed Hours: $75.00 	Closed Hours: $100.00 	
	Library Conference Room Rental 	Resident Rate 	Non-Resident Rate 	$100.00 
		Open Hours: $30.00 	Open Hours: $50.00 	
		Closed Hours: $75.00 	Closed Hours: $100.00 	
	Library Meeting Room Rental 	Resident Rate 	Non-Resident Rate 	$200.00 
		Open Hours: $50.00 	Open Hours: $75.00 	
		Closed Hours: $75.00 	Closed Hours: $100.00 	
 
	Chapter 14. Amusements and Entertainments 	
	Article II. Billiard Halls 	
14-67 	License fees for annual licenses 	
	Billiard halls, annually: 	
	  Up to 25 tables 	150.00 
	  More than 25 tables 	200.00 
14-71 	License fees for continuous annual licenses: 	
	Billiard halls: 	
	  Up to 25 tables 	150.00 
	  More than 25 tables 	200.00 
	Article III. Coin-Operated Machines 	
14-107 	Occupation tax 	7.50 
	Release of sealed machine 	5.00 
	Chapter 18. Animals 	
18-70 	Redemption fee for impounded animal: 1 st offense 	$20.00 
18-70 	Redemption fee for impounded animals: 2 nd offense 	$40.00 
18-70 	Redemption fee for impounded animals: 3 rd offense 	$60.00 
18-70 	Unsterilized Animal 	$75.00 
18-70 	Rabies Vaccination Fee 	$5.00 
18-70 	RTO Sterilization Surgical fee 	$75.00 
18-70/18-160 	Care and Handling Charges, Per Day in Shelter 	$10.00 
18-70/18-159 	Microchipping Fee 	$10.00 
18-153 	Pet Sterilization Deposit 	$100.00 
18-159 	Animal Adoption Fee 	$85.00 
18-160 	Pet owner release to shelter fee 	$20.00 
18-260(i) 	Annual Permit for Keeping Dangerous Animal 	$100.00 
18-300 	Backyard Chicken Permit (including education program) 	$50.00 
18-329(a) 	Shelter Quarantine Fee 	$100.00 
18-329(c) 	Home Quarantine Fee 	$50.00 
	Chapter 22. Buildings and Building Regulations 	
	Article II. Administration 	
22-51 	Building permit fees: 	
 
Construction Value (CV) 	Permit Fees 
$0.00—$1,000.00 	$50.00 
$1,001.00—$2,500.00 	75.00 
$2,501.00—$5,000.00 	100.00 
$5,001.00—$7,500.00 	125.00 
$7,501.00—$10,000.00 	150.00 
$10,001.00—$25,000.00 	1.5 percent of CV 
$25,001.00—$50,000.00 	375.00 or 1.3 percent of CV, whichever is greater 
$50,001.00—$100,000.00 	650.00 or 1.1 percent of CV, whichever is greater 
$100,001.00—$500,000.00 	1,100.00 or 0.9 percent of CV, whichever is greater 
$500,001.00—$1,000,000.00 	4,500.00 or 0.7 percent of CV, whichever is greater 
$1,000,001.00 and up 	7,000.00 or 0.5 percent of CV, whichever is greater 
 
Residential dwelling permit fees: 
1. New construction 	$1.20 per square foot 
2. Addition/remodel construction 	$0.60 per square foot 
3. Plumbing, mechanical, electrical for new construction 	$0.15 per square foot 
4. Plumbing, mechanical electrical for addition/remodel construction 	$0.10 per square foot 
5. Re-roofing, Foundation repair, Demolition of main structure, Solar System Array and Window replacement 	$150.00 
6. Mechanical system partial (furnace, condenser, coil or ductwork) each 	$75.00 
7. Mechanical system complete 	$150.00 
8. Mechanical system - miscellaneous 	$50.00 
9. Electrical system partial or complete 
Solar system wiring 	$150.00 
$250.00 
10. Plumbing system partial: 	
Miscellaneous 	$50.00 
Water heater (each) 	$75.00 
Gas, sewer, or water line (yard) 	$100.00 
Gas, sewer, or water line (inside structure) 	$150.00 
 
Section 
this Code 	Description 	Amount 
22-51 cont'd 	Inspection and other fees: 	
	  Inspection performed outside of normal business hours (minimum 2 hours), per hour 	$50.00 
	  Reinspection fee assessed under provisions of Building Code 	50.00 
	Exceptions from fees: 	
	1. Work performed on independent school district property 	
	2. Work performed on city property 	
22-51(b) 	Expedited third-party residential inspection fee for new single-family homes 	City current contract rate or fee with third-party provider 
22-52 	Plumbing, mechanical, electrical, and irrigation permit fees (excludes residential dwellings): 	
 
Construction Value (CV) 	Permit Fees 
$0.00—$1,000.00 	$50.00 
$1,001.00—$2,500.00 	75.00 
$2,501.00—$5,000.00 	100.00 
$5,001.00—$25,000.00 	2.0 percent of CV 
$25,001.00—$100,000.00 	$500.00 or 1.5 percent of CV, whichever is greater 
$100,001.00—$250,000.00 	$1,500.00 or 1.0 percent of CV, whichever is greater 
$250,001.00 and up 	$2,500.00 or 0.5 percent of CV, whichever is greater 
Other fees: 	
Description 	Amount 
1. Re-inspection fee assessed under provision of applicable code 	50.00 
 
Section 
this Code 	Description 	Amount 
22-58 	Technology Fee 	$3.00 (paid upon issuance of each permit) 
 
Section 
this Code 	Description 	Amount 
22-214 	License fee, including reinstatement license renewal, each dwelling unit 	15.00 
	Additional license fee for apartment complexes that score less than 95% dwelling unit inspection passing rate 	15.00 
22-708 	Annual registration and inspection fee for the first year (1 inspection) 	200.00 
	Annual registration and inspection fee for a building that is vacant for 2 years (Includes up to 2 inspections per year.) 	400.00 
	Annual registration and inspection fee for a building that is vacant for 3 years (Includes up to 3 inspections per year.) 	600.00 
	Annual registration and inspection fee for a building that is vacant for 4 or more years (Includes up to 4 inspections per year) 	1,000.00 
	Additional fee for registrations over 60 days past the noted due date 	50% of annual fee 
	Chapter 26. Businesses 	
	Article II. Newsracks 	
26-35(a)(1) 	Fee to install, place or maintain newsrack on street, right-of-way, per year, per newsrack 	5.00 
	Article III. Single-Family Rental Housing 	
26-74 	License fee including reinstatement of license renewal 	120.00 
	Replacement license, per location 	10.00 
26-77(c) 	Second reinspection fee 	50.00 
	Article IV. Apartment Complex Rental 	
26-114 	License fee including reinstatement license renewal, each dwelling unit 	10.00 
	Replacement license 	10.00 
26-117(c) 	Reinspection fee per violation in a dwelling unit within an apartment complex (maximum 40.00 per unit) 	20.00 
	Reinspection fee, each exterior item 	20.00 
	Article V. Food Service Establishments 	
26-154 	Review of food establishment plans and preoperational inspection 	45.00 
	Permit to operate a mobile food unit (determined by type of vehicle) 	
	 Catering vehicle (cold truck): 	200.00 
	 Mobile food preparation vehicle (hot truck): 	300.00 
	Permit to operate a food service establishment (determined by number of employees): 	
	 1—9 employees: 	200.00 
	 10—19 employees: 	300.00 
	 Over 19 employees: 	400.00 
	 Issuance of duplicate permit 	5.00 
	Division 2. Food Manager's Certificate 	
26-180 	Food manager's certification certificate 	
	 Issuance of original or renewal certificate: 	20.00 
	 Issuance of replacement certificate: 	5.00 
	Article VI. Sexually Oriented Businesses 	
26-238 	Annual license fee (establishment) 	1,000.00 
26-271(d) 	Processing fee (individual) 	50.00 
26-272(f) 	Fee for replacement of lost or stolen card (individual) 	10.00 
	Survey fee 	500.00 
	Article VII. Short-Term Rental Housing 	
26-503 	License fee 	120.00 
26-506(c) 	Reinspection fee 	50.00 
	Chapter 28. Courts 	
28-46(a) 	Warrant fee (maximum) 	25.00 
28-46(b) 	Special expense—Actual expense or $10.00 (whichever is less) 	
 
Section 
this Code 	Description 	Amount 
	Chapter 30. Emergency Services 	
	Article II. Emergency Medical Services 	
30-33 	Fee per ambulance trip 	Resident 	Non-Resident 
	Basic life support 	$725.00 	$950.00 
	Advanced life support, level 1 	$750.00 	$1,050.00 
	Advanced life support, level 2 	$825.00 	$1,125.00 
	Mileage charge for transport from nearest city limit to any hospital outside of the city. One mile charge for transport to any hospital within the city. 	$15.00 	$15.00 
	Basic life support supplies 	$200.00 	$200.00 
	Advanced life support supplies, level 1 & 2 	$300.00 	$300.00 
	Oxygen, any level 	$150.00 	$150.00 
 
Section 
this Code 	Description 	Amount 
	Article III. Alarm Systems 	
30-72 	Alarm permit fee residential 	30.00 
30-72 	Alarm permit fee commercial (business) 	100.00 
30-73 	False alarm fee per false alarm in excess of five during the preceding 12-month period 	50.00 
30-73 	Master apartment complex permit fee 	100.00 
30-76(a) 	False alarm fee per subsequent false alarm within 12-month period 	50.00 
30-78 	False alarm fee in excess of three but fewer than six in the preceding 12-month period 	50.00 
	False alarm fee in excess of five but fewer than eight in the preceding 12-month period 	75.00 
	False alarm fee eight or more in the preceding 12-month period 	100.00 
	Panic/distress alarm fee of three or more in the preceding 12- month period 	100.00 
	Robbery alarm fee of three or more in the preceding 12-month period 	100.00 
30-88 	False alarm fee for response to monitoring system 	100.00 
	Article IV. Emergency Telephone Service 	
30-121 	Local access line fee, residential; (per month) 	1.00 
	Local access line fee, business; (per month) 	1.95 
	Local access line fee, business trunk; (per month) 	2.50 
	Chapter 34. Environment 	
	Article IV. Junked, Wrecked, Abandoned Property 	
34-208(c) 	Fee for notification by garagekeeper to police department of abandoned vehicle 	5.00 
	Article V. Noise 	
34-252 	Permit fee for use of loudspeakers, sound trucks and drums 	5.00 
	Article VI. Nuisances 	
34-293 	Administrative fee to cover city expenses of notices; obtaining quotes for abatement, inspections, etc. 	100.00 
	Any additional work performed by city employees not covered under the administrative fee, per hour 	30.00 
	Article VIII. Swimming Pools 	
34-354 	Operational permit fee for public and semipublic swimming pools and/or spas; each pool or spa 	125.00 
34-400 	Permits for seismic testing and surveying within the city 	500.00 
34-512 	Gas well fee: 	
	  Initial gas well fee for all new gas wells and gas compressors stations within the city 	10,000.00 
34-516 	Annual gas well inspection fee: 	
	  Annual gas well inspection fee for each existing gas well site and gas compressor stations within the city, per year 	2,000.00 
	Chapter 38. Fire Prevention and Protection 	
38-38 	Construction permit fees as described in Section 105.7 of the International Fire Code (IFC) 	
 
Construction Value (CV) 	Permit Fees 
$0—5,000.00 	$100.00 
$5,001.00—25,000.00 	$120.00 or 1.5% of the CV whichever is greater 
$25,001.00—100,000.00 	$375.00 or 1.0% of the CV whichever is greater 
$100,001.00—250,000.00 	$1,000.00 or 0.6% of the CV whichever is greater 
$250,001.00 and up 	$1,500.00 or 0.3% of the CV whichever is greater 
Re-inspection fee assessed under provision of applicable code 	$100.00 
Flow testing (IFC 507.3 and 507.4) 	$50.00 
 
38-38 (cont.) 	Operational permit fee for each event as described in Section 105.6 of the International Fire Code (IFC), per event 	Permit Fee 
	Aerosols 	$100.00 
	Amusement buildings 	250.00 
	Carnivals and fairs 	250.00 
	Combustible dust-producing operations/combustible fibers 	100.00 
	Compressed gases 	100.00 
	Cryogenic fluids 	100.00 
	Cutting and welding 	50.00 
	Exhibits and trade shows 	100.00 
	Flammable and combustible liquids 	100.00 
	Floor finishing 	50.00 
	Hazardous materials 	100.00 
	HPM facilities 	100.00 
	High pile storage 	100.00 
	Hot work operations 	50.00 
	LP-gas 	100.00 
	Miscellaneous combustible storage 	50.00 
	Open burning 	250.00 
	Outdoor fireworks displays 
(See IFC Section 3301.2) 	500.00 
	Places of assembly 
(Exception: Places of worship) 	50.00 
	Pyrotechnic special effects material 	250.00 
	Repair garages and motor fuel-dispensing facilities 	50.00 
	Spraying and dipping 	100.00 
	Temporary membrane structures and tents 	50.00 
	All other operational permits described in IFC Section 105.6 not listed above 	50.00 
 
Section this Code 	Inspection Fee Purpose (Per Occupancy Type) 	Amount 
38-38 (cont.) 	Group A Occupancy (Assembly) 	
	Place of Worship 	$50.00 
	All others 	$100.00 
	Group B Occupancy (Business) 	
	Less than four (4) floors 	$50.00 
	Four (4) floors or more 	$100.00 
	High Rise less than ten (10) floors 	$250.00 
	High Rise ten (10) floors or more 	$500.00 
	Municipal, County, State and Federal Government facilities 	EXEMPT 
	Group E Occupancy (Private Educational) 	
	Less than four (4) floors 	$50.00 
	Four (4) floors or more 	$100.00 
	Public School District facilities 	EXEMPT 
	Group F Occupancy (Factory/Industrial) 	
	Less than 20,000 square feet 	$100.00 
	20,000 square feet or greater 	$200.00 
	Municipal, County, State and Federal Government facilities 	EXEMPT 
	Group H Occupancy (Hazardous) 	
	Hazardous 	$250.00 
	Group I Occupancy (Institutional) 	
	Institutional 	$100.00 
	Municipal, County, State and Federal Government facilities 	EXEMPT 
	Group M Occupancy (Mercantile) 	
	Less than 20,000 square feet 	$50.00 
	20,000 square feet or greater 	$150.00 
	Group R1 Occupancy (Residential Hotel/Motels) 	
	Less than four (4) floors 	$100.00 
	Four (4) floors or more 	$150.00 
	High Rises 	$250.00 
	Group R2 Occupancy (Residential Apartments) 	
	One (1) and two (2) stories (entire complex) 	$100.00 
	Three (3) or more stories (entire complex) 	$150.00 
	Group S Occupancy (Storage) 	
	Less than 20,000 square feet 	$100.00 
	20,000 square feet or greater 	$200.00 
	Municipal, County, State and Federal Government facilities 	EXEMPT 
	Group U Occupancy, Group Homes, and Foster Homes 	
	Group Homes and Foster Homes 	EXEMPT 
 
Section 
this Code 	Description 	Amount 
	Chapter 44. Library 	
44-33, 44-35 	Library card fees: 	
	  City residents 	No charge 
	  Addison resident (paid by the Town of Addison) 	$200.00/year/per card 
	  Non-resident of city that do not charge Farmers Branch residents for library card 	No charge 
	  Non-resident of city that charges Farmers Branch residents for library cards 	$200.00 library card fee or a TexShare Card obtained from the public library of the non-resident's city 
	  Internet guest card (Internet access on library computers) 	$25.00 per year/per card 
	  Lost card replacement (residents and non-residents) 	1.00 
44-36 	Fines for overdue materials: 	
	  Per day for videos/DVDs 	1.00* 
	  Per day for books and all other materials 	0.10* 
	  * Total fine not to exceed original purchase price of material 	
44-41 	Damaged materials charges: 	
	  Barcode label, pocket, or book jacket; per item 	1.00 
	  Media cases, per item 	2.00 
	Lost library materials: 	
	  Single item from an audio or CD book set 	Cost of replacement part or cost of original material if replacement part is unavailable 
	  Processing fee 	5.00 
	  Books and media (except magazines) 	Original cost of material 
	  Magazines 	5.00 
	Other charges: 	
	  Photocopier (per page) 	0.15 
	  Computer printing (per page) 	0.10 
	  3D print fees (per item) 	0.15 per gram of plastic ($1.50 minimum) 
	Chapter 50. Parks and Recreation 	
	Article II. Rules and Regulations 	
50-41 	Parks and Recreation User Fees (fees apply to both city residents and non-residents unless otherwise noted) 
	Athletic fees: 
	Athletic field rental fee, (per field per day) 	Game field - $250.00/field/day - resident; 
$300.00/field/day - non-resident; $200.00 deposit 
		Practice area - $40.00/hr/area - resident; 
$50.00/hr/area - non-resident; $100.00 deposit 
	Adult athletic user fee (per team per season) 	$50.00 
	Youth athletic league player fee 	$0.00 
	Assigned space at Farmers Branch Park for select soccer 	$7,000.00 per year 
	Local tournament fee/complex 	$250.00/field/day - resident 
$300.00/field/day non-resident 
$500.00 deposit 
	Field lighting - Local tournaments/rentals 	$25.00/hour/field/area 
	Concession stand usage - Local tournaments/rentals 	$0.00 
	Private catering/food truck fee - Tournaments/rentals 	$50.00/event; 
$200.00 deposit 
	Food truck/outside concessionaire commission - Tournaments/rentals 	12% of net revenue for concession sales 
	Vendor fee 	$25.00/day 
	Aquatic Center Use and rental fees—Outdoor facility (Frog Pond) 
	Daily entry fees: 
	Spectator fee 	$3.00/person 
	Outside food/beverage 	$5.00/person 
	If two years old or younger (resident or non-resident) 	Free 
	Resident older than two years 	$5.00 
	Non-resident older than two years 	$8.00 
	Swim lessons 	$45.00/session 
	Day camp rate: 
	Rate per swimmer 	$5.00 
	Resident season passes: 
	Individual residents 	$50.00 
	Family residents (up to 4 members) 	$130.00 
Add'l members: $10.00 
	Individual non-resident 	$80.00 
	Family non-resident * (up to 4 members) 	$210.00 
Add'l members: $15.00 
	Punch cards: 
	Non-residents—Valid for 10 swims 	$65.00 
	Rental fees—Resident and non-resident: 
	Deposit for picnic tables 	$0.00 
	Table rental 	$15.00/hr/table 
	Cabana rental 	$25.00/hour/cabana 
	Patio 	$0.00 
	Shelter rental—In season 	$50.00/hour; $50.00 deposit 
	Shelter rental (pavilion)—Off season 	$25.00/hr - resident; $40.00/hr - non-resident; $100.00 deposit (4-hr min.) 
	Froggy Spot 	$50.00/hr - resident; $60.00/hr - non-resident; $100 deposit 
	After hours pool rental: 
	Pool area (Frog Pond) 	$300.00/hr - resident; 
$350.00/hr - non-resident; 
$200.00 deposit (2-hr min.) 
	Activity pool area 	$125.00/hour; 
$100.00 deposit 
	Aquatic Center Use and rental fees—Indoor facility 
	Daily entry fees: 
	If two years old or younger (residents or non-residents) 	Free 
	Resident older than two years 	$3.00 
	Non-resident older than two years 	$5.00 
	Day camp rate: 
	Rate per swimmer 	$3.00 
	Resident annual indoor membership: 
	Individual 	$90.00 
	Family 	$180.00 
	Senior resident individual (50 years or older) 	$75.00 
	FB Colleges (Brookhaven, DCC) annual 	Same as resident 
	Non-resident annual indoor membership: 
	Individual 	$120.00 
	Family * 	$240.00 
	Punch cards: 
	Non-residents—Valid for 10 swims 	$40.00/card 
	Room rentals 	$30.00/hr: resident; 
$50.00/hr - non-resident; 
$100.00 deposit 
	After hours pool rental (includes room) 	$150.00/hr - resident 
$200.00/hr non-resident; 
$100.00 deposit 
(2-hr min.) 
	Therapy pool rental 	$10.00/hr/area 
	Aquatics Center use and rental fees—Resident membership combinations: 
	Resident disabled veterans 	Residents who are veterans of any branch of the United States Armed Forces and provide documentation evidencing the person has received a total service related disability rating of 50% or greater from the Department of Veterans Affairs shall be exempt from the payment of recreation and aquatic centers individual membership fees. 
	Carrollton-Farmers Branch ISD employees and private schools located in Farmers Branch 	Non-resident employees of the Carrollton-Farmers Branch ISD and non-resident employees of private schools located in Farmers Branch are eligible to receive resident rates. 
	Senior Center 
	Membership fee - Resident 	$25.00/yr; $2.50.00/mo 
	Membership fee - Non-resident 	$50.00/yr; $5.00/mo 
	Historical Park 
	School facility tour(s) 	$3.00 per person 
All schools 
	Guided tours 	$3.00 
	Christmas tea ticket 	$40.00 
($30.00 for Friends of Historical Park members) 
	Dodson House, gazebo or specified areas (non-wedding) 	$50.00/hr. resident 
$75.00/hr. non-res. 
After hours: 
$75.00/hr. resident 
$100.00/hr. non-res. 
$200.00 dep/2 hr. min 
	Old Church (non-wedding) 	$100.00/hr. resident 
$125.00/hr. non-res. 
After hours: 
$125.00/hr. resident 
$150.00/hr. non-res. 
$200.00 dep/2 hr. min 
	Additional 
	Resident and non-resident 	$150.00 
	Pavilion deposit and rental fees—Gussie Field Watterworth Park: 
	Resident 	
	Deposit (refundable only if pavilion is left in good condition) 	$100.00 
	Rental fee (per hour with a four-hour minimum) 	$40.00 
	Non-resident 	
	Deposit (refundable only if pavilion is left in good condition) 	$100.00 
	Rental fee (per hour with a four-hour minimum) 	$50.00 
	Rose Garden deposit and rental fees—Gussie Field Watterworth Park: 
		
	Resident: 	
	Garden only, deposit 	$200.00 
	Rental, per hour with a two-hour minimum 	$100.00 - resident; 
$150.00 - non-resident 
	Garden and pavilion, deposit 	$200.00 
	Rental, per hour with a four-hour minimum 	$140.00 - resident 
$190.00 - non-resident 
	Non-resident (hotel/motel): 
	Garden only, deposit 	$200.00 
	Rental, per hour with a two-hour minimum 	$50.00 
	Garden and pavilion, deposit 	$200.00 
	Rental, per hour with a four-hour minimum 	$62.50 
	Farmers Branch-based non-profit: 
	Garden, deposit 	$200.00 
	Garden and pavilion, deposit 	$200.00 
		No rental fee 
	Pavilion deposit and rental fees—Farmers Branch Park: 
	Resident: 
	Deposit (refundable if pavilion is left in good condition) 	$100.00 
	Rental fee (per hour with a two-hour minimum) 	$30.00/hr. 
(4-hour min.) 
	Non-resident: 
	Deposit (refundable if pavilion is left in good condition) 	$100.00 
	Rental fee (per hour with a two-hour minimum) 	$40.00/hr. 
(4-min.) 
	Park deposit and rental fees—The Grove: 
	Deposit 	$100.00 
	Resident 	$40.00/hr. 
(4-hr min.) 
	Non-resident 	$50.00/hr. 
(4-hr min) 
	Park deposit and rental fees—Community Garden: 
	Plot rental 	$30.00/yr; 
Late fee $10.00 
	Recreation center memberships—Annual basic fee: 
	City resident—Individual membership 	$25.00 
	City resident—Family membership 	$50.00 
	Corporate—Individual membership (available to individual non-resident who works in city) 	$25.00 
	Corporate—Family membership (available to person that qualifies for corporate individual membership and person's immediate family * ) 	$50.00 
	Non-resident—Individual membership 	$50.00 
	Non-resident—Family membership (available to individual non-resident and immediate family * ) 	$100.00 
	Recreation center memberships—Annual basic fee + fitness (must be 15 years of age or older) 
	City resident—Individual membership 	$180.00 
	City resident—Family membership 	$360.00 
	Corporate—Individual membership (available to individual non-residents who work in city) 	$180.00 
	Corporate—Family membership (available to person that qualifies for corporate individual membership and person's immediate family * ) 	$360.00 
	Non-resident—Individual membership 	$270.00 
	Non-resident—Family membership (available to individual non-resident and immediate family) 	$455.00 
	College/seasonal (available to resident college students, 18 to 22 years of age for the months of June, July, August) 	$55.00/season 
	Summer Funshine: 
	Financial aid 	$55.00/wk 
	Resident 	$95.00/wk 
	Non-resident 	$150.00/wk 
	Youth program late pick up fee 	$1.00/min. after 10 min. grace period 
	Halloween in the park 	$0.00 park admission 
$5.00 haunted hedge 
 
Recreation Center Room Rentals 
Room * 	Deposit Operating Hours 	Resident/Non-Residential Hourly Rent * Operating Hours 	Deposit After Hours 	Resident/Non-Residential Hourly Rent * After Hours 
Oak, Pecan, Mesquite 	$100.00 	$30.00/$50.00 	$200.00 	$75.00/$100.00 
Magnolia 	$200.00 	$50.00/$75.00 	$200.00 	$75.00/$100.00 
Conference 	$100.00 	$30.00/$50.00 	$20.00 	$75.00/$100.00 
Dance studio 	$100.00 	$30.00/$50.00 	$200.00 	$75.00/$100.00 
Full Gym 1 
Full Gym 2 	$100.00 	$50.00/$75.00 	$200.00 	$75.00/$100.00 
Half Court Gym 1 and 2 	$100.00 	$30.00/$50.00 	$0.00 (full court only) 	$0.00 (full court only) 
Treehouse 	$100.00 	$30.00/$50.00 	$200.00 	$75.00/$100.00 
 
* The following rooms are considered standard rooms under the city facility rental policy: Oak, Pecan, Mesquite, Conference, Dance Studio, Half Court Gym 1, Half Court Gym 2, and Treehouse. The Magnolia Room, Gym 1 (full gym), and Gym 2 (full gym) are considered large/specialty rooms under the city facility rental policy. 
Senior Center Rental Rates 
Conference room; craft room; bridge room; or mirrored room 	$75.00/hr. - resident 
$100.00/hr. - non-resident 
$100.00 deposit 
Ballroom 	$200.00/hr. - resident 
$250.00/hr. - non-resident 
$200.00 deposit 
 
Section 
this Code 	Description 	Amount 
	Chapter 54. Peddlers and Solicitors 	
	Article II. License 	
54-33 	Solicitor's license 	$50.00 
	Agent and employee, each 	10.00 
	Replacement license—solicitor, agent or employee 	10.00 
	Chapter 56. Property Maintenance 	
	Article II. Administration and Enforcement 	
56-44(c) 	Filing fee for appeals of enforcement authority determinations 	10.00 
56-47 	Administrative fee for abatement of nuisance involving high grass, weeds or brush 	50.00 
	Chapter 62. Signs 	
62-3 	Sign permit fees 	
	Signs with a construction value of $4,000.00 or less 	50.00 
	Signs with a construction value greater than $4,000.00 	Equal to the amount of a building permit fee required by section 22-51 
	Late fee paid in addition to the permit fee when a sign is erected, placed, or maintained prior to issuance or work started prior to obtaining a sign permit 	100% of the permit fee 
	Chapter 70. Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places 	
70-3(c)(2) 	Application fee for permit to paint address numbers on curbs 	50.00 
70-164(c) 	Annual fee to be charged for use of city rights-of-way by agreement authorized pursuant to section 70-164(a) 	1,500.00 
70-192 	Network provider fees: 	
	  Small cell application fee (This fee shall not exceed and is capped by statutory limits) 	$500.00 (1-5 network nodes); 
$250.00 (each additional network node); 
$1,000.00 per pole 
	  Small cell user fees (this fee shall not exceed and is capped by statutory limits) 	$250.00 annually for each network node; 
$20.00 per year for city pole attachment 
	  Transport facility monthly user fee (This fee shall not exceed and is capped by statutory limits) 	$28.00 multiplied by the number of the network provider's network nodes located in the public right-of-way for which the installed transport facilities provide backhaul, until the time the network provider's payment to the city exceeds its monthly aggregate per node compensation to the city 
 
Section 
this Code 	Description 	Amount 
	Chapter 74. Subdivisions 
Ord. No. 1430, as amended 
(Subdivision Ordinance) 	Fee for Preliminary Plat, Final Plat, Replat, Amended Plat and Minor Plat Applications 
	Single-family residential 	$500.00 + $10.00/lot, which shall be inclusive of each residential lot, common area lots, and parcels to be dedicated for public use, but not including public easements or rights-of-way. 
	Multi-family residential and non-residential 	$500.00 + $35.00/acre, based on the acreage contained within the boundary of the property that is the subject of the application. 
	Mixed uses 	If an application is made with respect to the subdivision of land that will be used and developed for single-family residential, multi-family residential, and/or non-residential purposes, the fee shall be $500.00 plus the additional per lot or per acre multiplier, respectively calculated with respect to the portions of the land to be developed for the respective purposes. If more than one use is to be developed on a lot (e.g., multifamily residential located on the upper floors with retail on the ground floor), the multiplier shall be calculated based on each type of use, with the higher amount to be assessed as part of the fee. 
 
Section 
this Code 	Description 	Amount 
	Chapter 78. Taxation 	
	Article II. Ad Valorem Tax 	
78-32 	Fee for issuance of property tax certificate 	10.00 
	Article III. Hotel Occupancy Tax 	
78-84 	Fee for certificate of paid hotel/motel occupancy tax 	10.00 
	Chapter 82. Traffic and Vehicles 	
	Article III. Oversized Vehicles 	
	Permit fees for oversized and overweight vehicle: 	
	  For single trip permits 	5.00 
	  For periods not exceeding 30 days 	10.00 
	  For periods not exceeding 60 days 	15.00 
	  For periods not exceeding 90 days 	20.00 
	  For periods not exceeding one year 	50.00 
	Chapter 86. Utilities 	
86-1 	Public Improvement Inspection Fee 	
	3.0% of the cost for construction of the public improvement to be constructed based on the higher of a cost estimate prepared by a Texas Professional Engineer and approved by the Director of Public Works or actual cost based on the price set forth in the contract between the owner/developer and the contractor constructing the improvement. 	
	Article II. Water System 	
86-34(1) 	Tapping fees: 	
	  Temporary construction water meter (fire hydrant meter) 	50.00 
	  Refundable security deposit 	1,200.00 
	  Install/relocate construction meter 	50.00 
86-34(2) 	  Water main taps with meters: 	
	    ¾-inch service and meter 	579.00 
	    1-inch service and meter 	646.00 
	    1½-inch service and meter 	965.00 
86-34(4) 	  Street cut or boring required for tap to one-family or two-family residences, per lineal foot 	100.00 
86-67(b) 	Backflow prevention assembly registration fees: 	
	  Residential (for new installation and replacement) 	35.00 
	  Non-residential (for installation and replacement) 	35.00 
	  Non-residential (annually, following installation) 	35.00 
86-67(c) 	Fee for registration of certified backflow prevention assembly testers 	50.00 
	Article III. Sanitary Sewer System 	
86-77 	Sewer tap fees: 	
	  Taps serving residential one- and two-family dwellings: 	
	    4-inch tap and service 	250.00 
	    6-inch tap and service 	500.00 
	  Fee for estimate of water/sewer meter/tap charges 	50.00 
	  Fee for pavement cut or boring for sewer tap per linear foot 	100.00 
86-154 	  Permit application fee (nonrefundable) for discharge of industrial waste into public sewer 	100.00 
86-161 	5-year Permit application fee for discharge of industrial waste into public sewer 	$2,000.00 
	Article IV. Service Rates and Billing Procedure 	
86-276(a) 	Water service rates (monthly rate): 	
	  First 2,000 gallons or less: 	
	   Minimum (all meter sizes), and meters connected solely to fire protection systems, per unit 	21.99 
	   Meters connected solely to fire protection systems charged for ¾-inch meter, regardless of size. 
	   Plus the following oversize meter charge: 	
	      5/8 - or ¾-inch meter 	No additional charge 
	     1-inch meter, per meter 	8.79 
	     1½-inch meter, per meter 	17.59 
	     2-inch meter, per meter 	41.68 
	     3-inch meter, per meter 	219.48 
	     4-inch meter, per meter 	285.32 
	     6-inch meter, per meter 	438.91 
	     8-inch meter, per meter 	614.49 
	     2,001—10,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 	6.01 
	     10,001—20,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 	6.73 
	     20,001 gallons and over, per 1,000 gallons 	7.01 
86-276(b) 	Duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes and apartment houses or multifamily dwellings, per unit (minimum) 	21.99 
86-277 	Sewer rates (monthly rate): 	
	  One-family, private residence: 	
	     Gallons of Water Used: 	
	      0—2,000 (minimum) 	22.99 
	      2,001—10,000, per 1,000 gallons 	3.12 
	      All over 10,000—No additional charge 	0.00 
	  Duplexes, apartment houses or multifamily dwelling: 	
	     Gallons of Water Used, per unit: 	
	      0—2,000, (minimum) 	22.99 
	      2,001—10,000, per 1,000 gallons 	3.12 
	      All over 10,000, per 1,000 gallons 	4.23 
	  Business, commercial and industrial establishments 	
	     Gallons of Water Used: 	
	      0—2,000 (minimum) 	22.99 
	      2,001—10,000, per 1,000 gallons 	3.12 
	      All over 10,000, per 1,000 gallons 	4.23 
	  Business, commercial and industrial establishment account or accounts used primarily for servicing air conditioning cooling towers. To qualify for rate on this type of account, the establishment must have a prior 12-month annual water consumption of 75 million gallons or more from all of their water account or accounts. 
	     Gallons of Water Used: 	
	      0—2,000 (minimum) 	22.99 as they would have been considered a regular business account 
	      2,001—10,000, per 1,000 gallons 	3.12 as they would have been considered a regular business account 
	      All over 10,000, per 1,000 gallons 	4.23 
86-302 	Service charge for disconnection due to nonpayment of water and sewer charges 	50.00 
	    After business hours turn-on fee 	100.00 
	    Damaged/broken lock fee 	50.00 
	    Meter tampering fee, plus parts 	75.00 
	Penalty charge for late payment 	10% of 
total bill 
86-303 	Deposit for water and sewer service* 	50.00 residential 
	*Deposit for apartments—Greater of 100.00 of 1/12 annual average bill at location. New service location based on average consumption for meter of equivalent size and use within city. No deposit shall be required for new residential service for a teacher. 	
	**Deposit for two weeks or less of service, up to 5,000 gallons consumption. 	Remove in entirety 
	**Usage exceeding 5,000 gallons during the two-week period billed at the rates set forth in section 86-276 of this article. 	Remove in entirety 
	Article V. Water and Sewer Main Extensions 	
86-347 	Pro rata charges for existing mains: 	
	  Water, per front foot 	100.00 
	  Sewer, per front foot 	100.00 
	*Deposit for apartments—Greater of $100.00 or 1/12 annual average bill at location. New service location based on average consumption for meter of equivalent size and use within city. No deposit shall be required for new residential service for a teacher. 
	**Usage exceeding 5,000 gallons during the two-week period billed at the rates set forth in section 86-276. 
 
Section 
this Code 	Description 	Amount 
	Article VII. Municipal Drainage Utility System 	
86-521(b) 	Property Type 	Impervious Area 
(sq. ft.) 	Monthly Drainage 
Utility Fee 
	Single-Family Residential 		
	 Tier 1 	<3100 	$3.71 
	 Tier 2 	3100 to <5100 	$5.50 
	 Tier 3 	=5100 	$8.80 
	All Other Non-Exempt Property 		$5.50 per ERU* 
	*ERU (Equivalent Residential Unit) = 4,000 square feet impervious area 
86-521(c) 	A minimum charge of one ERU shall be applied to each non-exempt non-single family residential developed property, regardless of classification. 
 
Section 
this Code 	Description 	Amount 
	Chapter 90. Vehicles for Hire 	
	Article III. General Public Transportation and Special Service Transportation 	
90-146(a) 	Annual leasing permit fee, per vehicle 	5.00 
	Annual special permit fee, per vehicle 	5.00 
90-146(b) 	Amending permit to increase number of vehicles, per vehicle 	5.00 
90-146(c) 	Franchise fee per gross receipts from service 	2% 
	Chapter 94. Zoning 	
	(a)  Application for zoning amendment: 	
	  (1)  Less than five acres 	750.00 
	  (2)  Five to ten acres 	1,000.00 
	  (3)  Greater than ten acres 	1,500.00 
	(b)  Application for specific use permit: 	
	  (1)  Less than five acres 	350.00 
	  (2)  Five to ten acres 	400.00 
	  (3)  Greater than ten acres 	500.00 
	(c)  Public notification signs 	25.00 
	(d)  Application for review and approval of a site plan by the planning and zoning commission and city council: 	
	  (1)  Less than five acres 	250.00 
	  (2)  Five to ten acres 	400.00 
	  (3)  Greater than ten acres 	500.00 
	(e)  Application for an appeal to the building code board of appeals: 	
	  (1)  Non-residential 	50.00 
	  (2)  Residential 	25.00 
	(f)  Applications for an appeal to the zoning board of adjustment: 	
	  (1)  Non-residential 	100.00 
	  (2)  Residential 	60.00 
	    a.  Existing fence in required front yard 	10.00 [1] 
	(g)  Application for certificate of occupancy for any group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, and S or R-1 occupancy, where a building permit is not issued for equal or greater fee 	50.00 
	(h)  Application for temporary certificate of occupancy 	50.00 
	(i)  Certification of city records and/or for issuance of a letter of compliance with building and zoning regulations 	30.00 
 
(Res. No. 93-194, §§ 1—5, 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 2342, § 1, 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 2359, § 1(22.1-6), (22.1-12.3), 11-17-1997; Ord. No. 2411, § 1, 12-21-1998; Ord. No. 2447, § 10, 12-21-1998; Res. No. 99-165, §§ 1, 3, 10-18-1999; Ord. No. 2522, § 9, 3-6-2000; Ord. No. 2610, § 2, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 2622, § 2, 9-10-2001; Ord. No. 2628, § 2, 9-10-2001; Ord. No. 2629, § 1, 9-10-2001; Ord. No. 2630, §§ 1, 2, 9-10-2001; Ord. No. 2689, § 2, 9-23-2002; Ord. No. 2678, § 1, 7-22-2002; Ord. No. 2731, § 1, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 2734, §§ 1, 2, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 2780, § 2, 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 2785, § 1, 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 2787, § 2, 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 2788, § 1, 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 2793, § 5, 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 2828, § 1, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 2883, §§ 1, 2, 9-18-2006; Ord. No. 2919, §§ 2—4, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 2947, § 1, 12-4-2007; Ord. No. 2962, §§ 2—4, 3-18-2008; Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 2994, § 1, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 2999, § 3, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 3001, § 3, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 3005, § 2, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 3006, § 1, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 3061, §§ 1, 2, 2-2-2010; Ord. No. 3103, § 3, 9-21-2010; Ord. No. 3153, § 1, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 3164, § 1, 11-1-2011; Ord. No. 3170, § 2, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 3201, §§ 1, 2, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 3202, § 2, 11-6-2012; Ord. No. 3212, § 2, 12-4-2012; Ord. No. 3233, §§ 1, 2, 9-17-2013 ; Ord. No. 3247, § 2, 11-19-2013 ; Ord. No. 3264, § 2, 3-3-2014 ; Ord. No. 3297, §§ 1(A), 1(B), 9-16-2014 ; Ord. No. 3299, § 1, 9-16-2014 ; Ord. No. 3341, §§ 1(A)—1(C), 9-15-2015 ; Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 3-29-2016 ; Ord. No. 3364, § 2, 4-5-2016 ; Ord. No. 3392 , §§ 1A, 1B, 9-20-2016; Ord. No. 3457 , § 1, 8-15-2017; Ord. No. 3459 , § 3, 8-15-2017; Ord. No. 3463 , § 1, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 3469 , § 2, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 3471 , § 1, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 3472 , § 1(A), (B) (Attach. 1), 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 3486 , § 3, 1-23-2018; Ord. No. 3299, § 1, 9-16-2014 ; Ord. No. 3522, § 1, 9-11-2018 ; Ord. No. 3532, § 1, 10-1-2018 ; Ord. No. 3538, § 1, 10-16-2018 ; Ord. No. 3568, § 2, 4-16-2019 ; Ord. No. 3577, § 1 (Exh. A), 6-18-2019 ; Ord. No. 3584, § 1, 7-23-2019; Ord. No. 3593, § 1, 10-8-2019; Ord. No. 3594, §§ 1, 2, 9-17-2019) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— The fee for an application under Chapter 94, subsection (f)(2)a, Existing fence in required front yard, shall be applicable from July 22, 2002 to July 31, 2003. On August 1, 2003 the fee for applications for a fence in the required front yard shall be the same as Chapter 94, subsection (f)(2). 
 
APPENDIX B - THOROUGHFARE PLAN 
The following is a list of ordinances adopting and amending thoroughfare plans: 
Ordinance 
Number 	Description 	Date Adopted 
2031 	Adopting a City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan 	4/19/93 
2186 	Amending City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan by proposed extension of Valley Branch Circle 	7/10/95 
2227 	Amending City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan by deleting the proposed extension of Valley Branch Lane, deleting Marketplace, Centreplace Drive and Lakeside Drive and revising Lakeway Boulevard, from a six-lane divided thoroughfare to a four lane undivided thoroughfare 	10/23/95 
2284 	Amending the City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan by revising Arborview Road from 750 feet west of Inwood Road to 100 feet east of Inwood Road, from a four-lane divided thoroughfare to a four-lane undivided thoroughfare 	10/21/96 
2326 	Amending the City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan by deleting an unnamed and undeveloped street currently designated as a four-lane undivided thoroughfare 	7/21/97 
2379 	Amending the City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan by extending the expiration date by one year to April 19, 1999 	4/6/98 
2467 	Amending the City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan by changing Lakeway Boulevard's designation from a four-lane undivided thoroughfare to a six-lane divided thoroughfare; extending Lakeway Boulevard West of Luna Road to Valley View Lane and the future George Bush Turnpike interchange; changing the name of Parkway Boulevard to Westside Parkway; and extending the expiration date of the City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan until April 19, 2000 	4/5/99 
2483 	Amending the City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan by changing Cambridge Concourse to a four-lane undivided thoroughfare between Simonton Road and Alpha Road and realigning Cambridge Concourse 	7/6/99 
2532 	Adopting a City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan 	4/17/00 
2686 	Amending the City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan to delete Manhattan Drive; change Crown Drive and Mathis Avenue from four lanes divided to four lanes undivided; change Lake Drive from four lanes undivided to four lanes divided; change the alignments of Lake Drive and Mathis Avenue 	8/19/02 
2764 	Amending the City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan to delete an HOV Access Ramp 	4/5/04 
2851 	Amending the City-Wide Master Thoroughfare Plan by providing general guidelines, conditions and policies regarding the alignment of streets 	2/20/06 
  
APPENDIX C - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 
Ordinance 
Number 	Description 	Date 
Adopted 
1983 	Designating Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number One (Pace)—Expired 4-19-1997. 	4/20/92 
2046 	Designating Reinvestment Zone Number Two (P.I.D.)—Expired 12-31-99. 	4/19/93 
2047 	Designating Enterprise Zone and Reinvestment Zone— Expired 9-1-00. 	5/3-93 
2161 	Designating Reinvestment Zone Number Three, Valwood Park, Farmers Branch Phase Two (The Container Store)—Expired 1-9-00. 	1/9/95 
2328 	Designating Reinvestment Zone Number Four (Buchanan Printing)—Expires 7-6-02. 	7/7/97 
2355 	Designating Reinvestment Zone Number Five (S.W. Bell Wireless)—Expires 10-19-02. 	10/20/97 
2450 	Designating Tax Increment Finance Reinvestment Zone Number One, (Mercer Crossing) and establishing a Board of Directors. 	12/21/98 
2452 	Designating Reinvestment Zone Number Six (Great Indoors/Sears.)—Expires 1-10-04. 	1/11/99 
2453 	Designating Tax Abatement Zone Number Seven (Glazer's)—Expires 1-10-04. 	1/11/99 
2484 	Designating Old Farmers Branch Area as Tax Increment Financing District Number Two. 	6/21/99 
2487 	Adopting a Tax Increment Project Plan and Financing Plan for Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number 1—Mercer Crossing. 	8/2/99 
2489 	Adopting a Project Plan and Financing Plan for Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number Two—Old Farmers Branch. 	7/21/99 
2510 	Designation of Reinvestment Zone Number 2A (Chase—Phase I)—Expires 11-2-04. 	11/4/99 
2551 	Amending Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number One, to Reflect Consistency with Exhibit "B," a Map Describing the Territory Included in the Zone. 	
2582 	Designation of Enterprise Zone and Reinvestment Zone (Number assigned by the Texas Department of Economic Development—EZ313-0529-01-FB). 	2/5/01 
2775 	Designating Enterprise Zone Project (Sports Supply Group, Inc.)—Term: five years from date of designation by EDT. 	6/14/04 
3089 	Designating Enterprise Zone Project (Maxim Integrated Products, Inc.)—Terminates September 1, 2015. 	8/10/10 
3423 	Amending Ord. No. 3400, section 5, amending the termination date of the tax increment financing reinvestment zone number three. 	1/24/17 
3499 	Approving amendments to the project and financing plan for tax increment reinvestment zone no. 1. 	4/17/18 
3530 	Approving annual update of service and assessment plan and assessment roll for Mercer Crossing public improvement district. 	10/1/18 
  
APPENDIX D - FRANCHISES, AGREEMENTS AND RATE REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - FRANCHISES AND MUNICIPAL CONSENT AGREEMENTS AND LICENSES 
The following lists the franchises and municipal consent agreements in the City of Farmers Branch. 
Ordinance Number 	Dated Adopted 	Description 	Term/Years 	Expiration Date 
3 	5/28/46 	Texas Power and Light Franchise 	25 years 	5/1/71 
4 	5/28/46 	Lone Star Gas 	50 years 	5/27/96 
83 	2/14/56 	Texas Power and Light Extension 	20 years 	5/1/91 
1289 	1/21/80 	Cable Television w/Warner Cable 	15 years 	1/21/95 
1601 	11/8/85 	Cable television transfer from Warner to Heritage 	15 years 	11/8/00 
1611 	12/16/85 	Southwestern Bell (repealed by 1988) 	20 years 	12/16/05 
1846 	10/23/89 	Cable television transfer from Heritage to TCI Cablevision 	Cont. from Ord. 1601 	11/8/00 
1911 	10/1/90 	Taxicab franchise w/Midway Taxi Service 	N/A 	None 
1928 	5/31/91 	TU Electric franchise 	25 years 	2016 
1935 	4/15/91 	TU Electric extension 	1 month 	5/31/91 
1988 	6/1/92 	Southwestern Bell 	5 years 	6/1/97 
2056 	6/22/93 	License agreement to MFS Fiber 	10 years 	* 
2101 	12/6/93 	License agreement to TCG Fiber 	10 years 	* 
2148 	9/9/96 	Lone Star Gas 	20 years 	10/1/16 
2260 	5/20/96 	Lone Star Gas 	20 years 	12/16/05 
2309 	4/7/97 	Extend Southwestern Bell Franchise extended in Ordinance 1988 	6 months 	1/1/98 
2365 	12/15/97 	Extend Southwestern Bell Franchise extended in Ordinance 2309 	6 months 	7/1/98 
2401 	6/8/98 	Extend Southwestern Bell Franchise extended in Ordinance 2365 	6 months 	1/1/99 
2431 	10/5/98 	License to CSDI 	NA 	* 
2442 	12/21/98 	Extend Ordinance 2401 	6 months 	7/1/99 
2444 	5/1/99 	Municipal Consent to Southwestern Bell 	3 years 	* 
2446 	4/16/99 	Municipal Consent to Nextlink 	3 years 	* 
2463 	5/17/99 	Municipal Consent to Time Warner 	3 years 	* 
2476 	5/17/99 	Municipal Consent to Level(3) Communications 	3 years 	* 
2477 	5/17/99 	Licensing Agreement to Metricom Communications 	5 years 	5/16/04 
2573 	10/16/00 	Extending TCI Cablevision of Dallas Franchise 	3 months 	2/1/01 
2580 	11/20/00 	License Agreement to Networks Associates, Inc. Development, Inc. 	10 years 	11/20/10 
2583 	1/22/01 	Extending TCI Cablevision Franchise extended in Ordinance 2573 	2 months 	4/1/01 
2591 	3/19/01 	Extending Franchise granted to TCI Cablevision of Dallas, Inc. 	2 months 	6/1/01 
2605 	5/21/01 	Granting Franchise to TCI Cablevision of Dallas, Inc. 	10 years 	5/21/11 
2606 	6/4/01 	License to Carrollton-Farmers Branch Independent School District 	10 years 	6/4/11 
2651 	12/17/01 	Granting License to JPMorgan Chase Bank 	10 years 	12/17/11 
2744 	10/27/03 	Amending electric franchise of Oncor Electric Delivery Company to provide different payment factor 	N/A 	N/A 
2749 	12/1/03 	Amending electric franchise of Oncor Electric Delivery to provide different payment factor 	N/A 	N/A 
2844 	12/5/05 	Providing conditional approval of consent of transfer of a cable franchise agreement from Comcast Cable of Texas II, Inc. to C-Native Exchange II, L.P. 	N/A 	10/1/06 
2869 	7/17/06 	Amending the franchise ordinance with TXU Electric Delivery Company to provide for a different payment schedule and an extension of the term. 	N/A 	4/30/2021 
 
*Companies allowed to cancel franchises under Texas State Law effective June 1, 2000, under HB 177.  
ARTICLE II. - LIST OF ORDINANCES REGARDING FRANCHISES, AGREEMENTS AND RATE REGULATIONS 
The following is a list of the ordinances regarding franchises, agreements and rate regulations: 
Ordinance Number 	Dated Adopted 	Description 	Term/Years 	Expiration Date 
2544 	5/15/00 	Establishing Equipment and Installation Rates 	N/A 	N/A 
2545 	5/15/00 	Establishing Maximum Permitted Basic Service Tier Rates 	N/A 	N/A 
2590 	3/19/01 	Suspending the proposed Tariff and Schedule of Rates of TXU Electric and Gas Company 	N/A 	6/21/01 
2603 	7/16/01 	Establishing the maximum permitted Basic Service Tier Rates Charged by TCI Cablevision of Dallas, Inc. 	N/A 	N/A 
2604 	6/4/01 	Establishing the Equipment and Installation Rates Charged by TCI Cablevision of Dallas, Inc. 	N/A 	N/A 
2615 	8/20/01 	Establishing TXU Gas Distribution's Rates and Charges 	N/A 	N/A 
2722 	5/19/03 	Establishing the maximum permitted Basic Service Tier Rates charged by Comcast Cable 	N/A 	N/A 
2723 	6/16/03 	Suspending the effective date of tariff changes by TXU Gas Distribution 	N/A 	N/A 
2727 	7/14/03 	Denying rate changes for TXU Gas Company 	N/A 	N/A 
2748 	11/17/03 	Establishing equipment and installation rates charged by Comcast Cable Communications 	N/A 	N/A 
2776 	11/15/04 	Establishing Maximum Permitted Basic Service Tier Rates charged by Comcast Cable 	1 year 	6/1/05 
2797 	11/15/04 	Establishing the Equipment and Installation Rates charged by Comcast Cable Communications, Inc. 	N/A 	None 
2807 	1/24/05 	Suspending proposal by Atmos Energy Corp. to implement interim grip rate adjustments for gas utility investment in 2003 	N/A 	N/A 
2819 	5/16/05 	Authorizing city manager to execute an electrical power purchase contract with a retail electric provider to provide electric power 	N/A 	N/A 
2823 	8/1/05 	Denying Atmos Energy Corp. request for annual gas reliability infrastructure program rate increase 	N/A 	N/A 
2845 	11/7/05 	Denying Atmos Energy Corp. request for annual gas reliability infrastructure program rate increase 	N/A 	N/A 
2847 	11/7/05 	Ordering Atmos Energy Corp. to show cause regarding the reasonableness of its existing natural gas distribution rates 	N/A 	N/A 
2863 	5/16/06 	Suspending GRIP rate increases proposed by Atmos Energy Corp., Mid Tex Division 	N/A 	N/A 
2870 	7/17/06 	Denying Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division's statement of intent to increase gas utility rates; and ordering Atmos Mid-Tex to reimburse the city for costs incurred in ratemaking proceeding or appeals of said proceedings 	N/A 	N/A 
2871 	7/17/06 	Denying Atmos Energy Corp. request for annual gas reliability infrastructure program rate increases 	N/A 	N/A 
2923 	7/16/07 	Suspending Atmos Energy Corp. July 30, 2007, effective date of implementation of intertim grip rate adjustments for gas utility investment in 2006 	N/A 	N/A 
2929 	9/4/07 	Denying Atmos Energy Corp request for annual gas reliability infrastructure program rate increases 	N/A 	N/A 
2943 	10/16/07 	Suspending Atmos Energy Corp. October 25, 2007, effective date requested rate change 	N/A 	N/A 
2953 	2/5/08 	Approving settlement agreement between the city and Atmos Energy Corp. 	N/A 	N/A 
2978 	7/15/08 	Suspending effective date of rate request by Oncor Electric Delivery Company 	N/A 	N/A 
2989 	9/16/08 	Amending gas franchise agreement between the city and Atmos Energy Corp. 	N/A 	N/A 
2996 	9/16/08 	Approving negotiated resolution between Atmos Cities Steering Committee and Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division regarding the company's rate review mechanism 	N/A 	N/A 
3037 	8/11/09 	Approving a negotiated resolution between the Atmos Cities Steering Committee and Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division regarding the company's rate review mechanism 	N/A 	N/A 
3229 
6/18/13 	Approving the rate schedule "RRM—Rate Review Mechanism" for Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division 	N/A 	N/A 
3245 
10/2/13 	Approving negotiated resolution between Atmos Cities Steering Committee and Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division regarding the company's rate review mechanism 	N/A 	N/A 
3418 	1/24/17 	Granting to Atmos Energy Corporation, Mid-Tex Division, a Texas and Virginia Corporation, its successors and assigns, a franchise to furnish, transport and supply gas to the general public 	N/A 	N/A 
3445 	5/16/17 	Approving negotiated settlement between Atmos Cities Steering Committee and Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division, regarding the company's 2017 rate review mechanism filings 	N/A 	N/A 
3490 	3/6/18 	Approving a tariff authorizing an annual rate review mechanism (RRM) 	N/A 	N/A 
3544 	12/11/18 	Modifying corporate boundaries in accordance with a certain boundary adjustment agreement 	N/A 	N/A 
  
APPENDIX E - ANNEXATIONS AND DISANNEXATIONS 
The following is a list of ordinances annexing and disannexing property in the city: 
Ordinance 1115, Oct. 1976 
FB ANNEXING FROM CARROLLTON: Being an area generally bounded on the east by the east curbline of Webb Chapel Road; on the west by the west right-of-way line of Webb Chapel Road; on the south by the easterly prolongation of the north right-of-way line of Fyke Road; and on the north by the easterly prolongation of the south right-of-way line of Gateway Drive. 
Ordinance 1227, Dec. 1978 
FB DISANNEXING TO CARROLLTON: Being a triangular sliver of land located approximately 250 feet west of Senlac Drive from approximately 1,500 feet south of Valwood Parkway and extending approximately 1,500 feet south, and containing approximately 23,000 square feet of land. 
Ordinance 1236, Feb. 1977 
FB ANNEXING FROM CARROLLTON: Being a triangular sliver of land located approximately 250 feet west of Senlac Drive and extending approximately 1,500 feet south from Valwood Parkway and containing approximately 23,000 square feet of land. 
Ordinance 1347, July 1981 
FB ANNEXATION OF THE SOUTH HALF OF FYKE ROAD: Being the south ½ of Fyke Road right-of-way from Josey Lane to Webb Chapel Road, containing approximately 166,662 square feet of land. 
Ordinance 1778, June 1988 
FB DISANNEXATION TO THE CITY OF DALLAS OF TWO TRACTS WEST OF IH35E AND NORTH OF IH635: Being approximately 10,117 square feet of land within the right-of-way of proposed Northern Parkway south of the proposed Westside Parkway and approximately 362 square feet of land at the southwest corner of the proposed Westside Parkway and IH35E. 
Ordinance 1790, Aug. 1988 
FB ANNEXATION FROM THE CITY OF DALLAS OF TWO TRACTS WEST OF I35E AND NORTH OF IH635: Being approximately 46,000 square feet of land within the proposed right-of-way of Westside Parkway west of IH35E and approximately 6,888 square feet of land on the west right-of-way of proposed Northern Parkway south of the proposed Westside Parkway right-of-way.  
APPENDIX F - STREET, ALLEY AND SUBDIVISION ABANDONMENT 
2960 	3/4/08 	Abandoning and closing certain street rights of way (Sable Street, Havenhurst Street, Fruitland Avenue, Richland Avenue, and Spring Valley Lane) 
2985 	8/12/08 	Providing for abandonment of interests in a portion of Rossford Street right-of-way from Pike Street to 300 feet south 
3555 	1/22/19 	Abandoning and quitclaiming all right, title and interest in a portion of Lot 1, Block A, Trinity East addition 
 
